THE CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Vol . 5, No . 4 FEBRUARY , 1913 Whole No. 28 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y Why You Should Purchase 
You r Jewelr y from Us 
Three blocks from our office is Maiden Lane—the world's greatest jewelry 
market. Lowe r Broadway, with its massive buildings, and Wal l Street three 
blocks beyond, with a golden arm enbosoms it in the financial distric t and 
protects it from the worl d beyond. Into this worl d there runs a steady stream 
of salesmen bearing a precious burden to jobber, wholesale r and retailer, for in 
Maiden Lane are the largest diamond merchants, jewelry manufacturers and 
watch factories. 
Whe n yo u purchase jewelry from you r loca l dealer yo u must pay tribute 
to these middleme n all alon g the line, makin g a final price to yo u from 50% to 
100% beyond the origina l cost. 
By our fortunate location we are enabled to secure goods direct from manu ­
facturer and importe r and sell them to yo u at prices whic h your loca l dealer 
cannot duplicate. With us there are no middlemen. 
W e do not require expensive showrooms and salespeople. Th e pages of 
TH E CRISIS and our catalogue (soon to be issued) will be our salesmen and 
showroom, so by dealing wit h us yo u not onl y get the benefit of these savings, 
but the manufacturer's guarantee goes wit h each piece of jewelr y shipped from 
this office. 
Space wil l not permit us to describe the many splendid bargains in store 
for you. Therefore, what you don't see, please ask for. Diamonds, rings, mesh bags, 
lockets, bracelets, lavallieres, etc., representing the most value for you r money, 
await your orders. 
20-YEA R CAS E 
Guaranteed 
10-YEA R CAS E 
Guaranteed 
A-24. 16-size Huntin g case, Elgi n 
or Waltham, 7-jeweled move ­
ment, $13.50. 
17-jeweled movement, $18.75 
O f course, we have the DOLLA R WATCH , guaranteed for one year 
A-25 . 16-size Huntin g case, Elgi n 
or Waltham , 7-jeweled move ­
ment, $8.00. 
TH E DUNBAR CO., 26 Vesey St., New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D "B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMENT! . O F COLORE D 
PEOPLE . A T 26 VESE Y STREET . NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Edited by W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS , with the co-operation of Oswald Garrison Villard , 
W . S. Braithwaite, M . W . Ovington, Charles Edwar d Russell and others. 
Contents for February, 1913 
CENTE R PICTURE : Emancipation. The Third Generation. 
ARTICLE S 
PAGE 
ABOLITIO N AN D FIFT Y YEAR S AFTER . By Rabbi Stephen S. Wise 188 
TH E REPRESENTATIVE . A Story. By Virgil Cooke 187 
TH E ALPH A PH I ALPH A FRATERNITY . By Charles H . Garvin 196 
FATHER , FATHE R ABRAHAM . A Poem. By James Weldon Johnson.. 172 
DEPARTMENT S 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 163 
OPINION 173 
EDITORIA L 180 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 190 
TH E BURDE N 194 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Whe n a subscriptio n blan k is attache d to this page a renewa l o f you r 
subscriptio n is desired . Th e dat e of the expiratio n o f you r subscriptio n wil l be foun d o n the 
wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address o f a subscribe r ca n be change d as ofte n as desired . 
I n orderin g a chang e o f address, bot h the ol d an d the ne w address must be given . Tw o weeks' 
notic e is required . 
MANUSCRIPT S an d drawing s relatin g to colore d peopl e ar e desired . The y must be accompanie d b y retur n postage . I f foun d unavailabl e the y wil l be returned . 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 160 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SON OFF T O Wilberforce University 
Th e only school in the country for Negro 
Yout h which has a Militar y Department 
equipped by the National Government, and 
commanded b y a detailed Unite d States Arm y 
Officer. 
DEPARTMENT S 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L TECHNICA L 
COMMERCIA L THEOLOGICA L 
CLASSICA L MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Banking- taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank . Twelv e Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, Te n 
Buildings. Healthful surroundings, exceptional community. Maintaine d in par t by the 
State of Ohio which supplies facilities for the 
thorough training of teachers. 
Fal l term began September, 1912. Writ e 
for Catalog. 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH , President 
WM . A . JOINER , Superintendent, C . N . I. 
Department. 
Address all communications to 
BO X 36 WILBERFORCE , OHI O 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School, Nor ­
ma l School and College, with, manua l training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. * Forty-two year s of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universall y successful. 
Fo r furthe r informatio n address 
Presiden t EDWAR D T . WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, Hig h School, Gramma r School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expense s ver y reasonable. 
Opportunit y for Self-help. 
Fall Term Began September, 1912. 
Fo r information address 
Presiden t R . W . McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological seminaries. 
A n Academy , wit h manua l training , giving a 
preparation for life or for college. 
Th e positive mora l and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of class 
work, its fine new buildings and well-equipped 
laboratories and librar y prepar e a faithful student 
for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY , Presiden t 
Dayton a Educationa l an d Industria l 
Schoo l fo r Negr o Girls 
DAYTONA , FLORID A 
It reaches, by reason of its location, a large 
territory of Negro children deprived of educational privileges. , 
Its comfortable home life and Christian influences insure a certain individual attention 
and superior training impossible in larger institutions of its kind. 
Mrs. Frances R. Keyser, formerly in charge 
of the White Rose Home for Working Girls, 
in New York City, has been elected Principal 
of the Academic Department. Writ e for catalog 
and detailed information. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUN E 
Founder and Principal 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 161 
SCHOOL OF BEAUTY CULTURE AND HAIR DRESSING 
Manicuring , Shampooing, Hai r Dressing, Marce l Wav -
ing, Facia l and Bod y Massage, Hai r Making , Chiropody , 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimite d practice i n parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summe r Course, $7.50 up. Send (or 
booklet. Mm» . A . Carte r Kelsey , Gen' l Intr.; Dr . Samuel 
A . Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen' l Manager . 
KELSEY S 
328 Leno x Avenue 
Telephone Harle m 1896 
126th Street, NE W YORK . 
Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
Ope n all . year 'round. Fo r Male s 
only. Facilities unsurpassed. Strong 
Faculty . Practica l Courses. 
Board , Lodgin g and Tuitio n $ 7 
per month. 
Winter Term Began December 2, 
1912. 
Writ e to-day for catalog or free 
tuition. 
JAS . B . DUDLEY , President 
GREENSBORO. N. C. 
Souther n Busines s Colleg e 
BIRMINGHAM , ALA . 
Da y and night school, teaching Shorthand, Type ­
writing , Business English , Business Arithmetic , 
Bookkeeping and preparin g for Civi l Service. A 
high-grade commercial school with competent instructors and healthy surroundings. Th e only Negro 
school of its kin d in the world. Fo r catalogue and 
furthe r information address 
Souther n Busines s Colleg e 
4th Avenu e and 15th Street 
W . J . ECHOLS , Principa l 
J . P . BON D Secretary-Manage r 
Send you r boy South—the land of Opportunity . 
Th e Prairi e Vie w State Norma l and Industria l 
College of Texas. E . L . Blackshear , Principal . W . 
C . Rollins, Treasurer . Largest State institution for 
colored youth in the Unite d States. Excellent 
literary, scientific and industrial advantages. Ex ­
penses low—idea l climate—new buildings. 
Fo r particular s address: 
H . J . MASON , Secretary 
Prairi e View, Walle r County, Texas 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
16 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A . G . DIL L 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
F 
o 
R i 
B 
i 
R 
t 
H 
d 
A 
y s 
A NARRATIVE of 
THE NEGRO 
By Mrs. Leila Amos Pendleton 
A comprehensive history of the 
Negr o race from the earliest period 
to the present time ; told in pleasin g narrative style ; ma y be read 
and understood by children. Boun d 
i n cloth and illustrated. 
Address: Price $1.50 
MRS . L . A . PENDLETO N 
1824 11th Street, N. W. , 
Washington, D. C. 
F 
o 
R 
E 
Y 
E 
R 
Y 
D 
A 
Y 
Fisk Universit y 
NASHVILLE . TENN . 
Founded 1866 H . H . Wright, Dean 
Thoroug h Literary , Scientific, Educa ­
tiona l and Socia l Science Courses. Pionee r 
in Negr o music. Special study, in Negr o 
history. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equippe d Science building. 
Christia n home life. 
Hig h standards of independent manhood 
and womanhood . 
Telephone 1943 Flushin g 
D. H . VA N D E WATE R 
FIN E GROCERIE S 
111 Mai n Street Flushing , N . Y . 
Established 1858 
"TH E BUR K CIGA R STORE " 
HAVAN A AN D DOMESTI C CIGAR S 
5 Mai n Street Flushing , N . Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 162 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
G O T O COLLEG E 
Th e World To-day Is Calling for 
College - trained Me n and Women. 
It has been found that out of every one hundred 
pupils in the graded schools only seven reach the 
high school and less than two pe r cent, go to 
college. Lac k of means is found to be the primar y 
cause. Bu t a way has been opened by the World's 
Cyclopedi a Company to overcome the handicap of 
money. A little energy on your par t and the goal 
is won ! 
W e want high-class student canvassers, and a 
Little work on thei r par t will insur e a college career 
at Harvard , Yale, Brown , Dartmouth, Smith, Wellesley, Radcliffe, etc. 
Th e tuition fee at any of the colleges named 
averages $150.00, and to any high school student 
who secures one hundred and fifty bona fide subscriptions to Murray's Historica l and Biographica l 
Encyclopedi a of the Colored Rac e Throughout the 
World , the World's Cyclopedi a Company will pay one 
hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) as a bonus in 
addition to a regular commission of 10 per cent. 
Eve n if yo u fail to reach the mark yo u will have 
your 10 per cent. 
If you are now i n college you are also eligible 
to enter this contest. Note that it is not limited 
to the first student, but open to every student. 
If you are ambitious, and wish to take advantage 
of this splendid offer, write the Scholarship Department of the WORLD' S CYCLOPEDI A COMPAN Y at 
Washington, D . C . —P . O. Bo x 2379—for full information and literary outfit. 
Reddick's World's Greatest 
Polishing Mitt 
(Wit h a Protected Tip ) 
FO E POLISHIN G AL L METALS , SIGNS , PIANOS , 
FURNITURE , GUNS , HARNESS , AUTOMO ­
BIL E BODIES , LAMPS , HARDWOO D 
FLOORS , ETC . 
Full y Protects the Han d Saves Tim e and Labo r 
A n incomparable duster for the household. A 
combination shoe polisher second to none. 
. Ca n be used 
with or without 
oil or polish. 
Mad e of special 
tanne d lamb's 
wool on the hide, 
thoroughly cleaned and combed of 
all grit. Wil l not scratch the finest surface. A 
household wonder that simplifies housekeeping. Fits 
either hand and will last a long time of hard usage. 
Adopted by the Pullma n Company for porters' 
use on the best trains and used in the best hotels, 
office buildings, theatres, garages, furnitur e houses; 
on dining cars, ocean liners, yachts and thousands 
of households because it's the best practical polishing device on earth. 
B y mail postpaid 25c. each (stamps or currency). 
Special prices to large users. 
A splendid proposition for agents. Writ e to-day 
for particulars. 
J . E. REDDICK 
1028 South 17th Street Philadelphia, Pa. 
OF INTERES T TO 
VOCAL STUDENTS 
Tone Placing and 
Voice Development 
Practica l method of singing for 
daily practice, based upon artistic 
principles, together with a carefully prepared numbe r of exercises. 
Fro m "Musica l Courier, " N . Y. : 
A ver y practica l little book is 
"Ton e Placin g and Voic e Development * by Pedr o T. Tinsley . It 
contains some very excellent material and vocal 
exercises, and should be i n the hands of all vocal 
students. 
WORD S O F APPRECIATIO N 
I offer yo u the heartiest possible endorsement 
of your work, which I believe to be the most complete course of the kin d that has ever come 
unde r m y notice.— Glen n Dillar d Gunn , Chicago 
' 'Tribune-' ' 
Fro m ''Musi c News,'' Chicago* Ill.: Accordingl y 
his "Practica l Metho d of Singing " is a most concise and practica l little manual, containing many 
valuable vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be 
helpful to all ambitious vocal students. 
CANNO T FAI L O F GOO D RESULT S 
Th e work is especially commendabl e because it 
treats in a clear and systematic manne r all the vital 
points so essential to the student, makin g it easy 
for hi m to advance to the highest point of 
development.— Geo. I. Holt, De s Moines, Iowa. 
PRIC E $1.00 
Address the publisher : 
PEDRO T. TINSLEY 
6448 Drexe l Avenu e CHICAGO , ILL. 
Books on Socialism 
If yo u are not quite sure whethe r you 
want to be classed as a Socialist or not, you 
need to study Socialism and find out. You 
must take sides either for or against it 
some day. 
"O f Eugen e V . Debs, the Socialist candidate-, we can only say this frankly : if it lay 
in our powe r to make him President of 
the Unite d States we woul d do so, for of the 
four men mentioned he alone, by wor d and 
deed, stands squarely on a platform of 
human rights regardless of race or class." 
—TH E CRISIS, August, 1912. 
Woman and Socialism, 
August Bebe l $1.50 
Common Sense of Socialism, 
Joh n Spargo Cloth, . 1.00 
Paper, .25 
The Class Struggle, 
Kar l Kautsk y Paper, .25 
Socialism for Students, 
Joseph E . Cohe n .50 
Theoretical System of Kar l Marx, 
Louis B. Boudin. : 1.00 
Thes e and other books on Socialism sent 
prepaid on receipt of price. 
The DUNBA R COMPAN Y 
26 Vesey Street New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S 
Vol. 5, No. 4 FEBRUARY , 1913 Whole No. 28 
ALONG 
E COLO R LINE 
SOCIAL UPLIFT. 
THE Woman's League of Kansa s City , 
Mo. , has established a workin g girls' 
home. 
Two colored women and one white woman 
took the semi-annual examination fo r 
physicians before the State board of medical 
examiners of Virginia . 
•J Sixteen new five-room houses were 
recently built by a real-estate agent i n 
Savannah, Ga . They were all sold to colored 
people withi n a period of ninety days. 
The Germantown Site and Reli c Society 
is markin g the grave of the colored woman, 
Diana , who saved the town of Staunton, Pa. , 
from destruction by the Britis h soldiers. 
9 The Excelsio r Library , of Guthrie , Okla., 
founded by a colored woman, reports 8,000 
visitors fo r the year, 3,296 books loaned, 
520 books added. The librar y now has 2,380 
volumes and subscribes to 22 periodicals. 
Mrs. J . C. Horto n is librarian . 
«I The new colored Y . M . C. A . at Louisville, representing an outlay of $30,000, has 
been dedicated. It contains forty-six dormitories, baths, reading rooms, committee rooms, 
an assembly room and a gymnasium. 
Mr . W . P . Dabney, of Cincinnati, has been 
developing a 34-acre tract near Cincinnati 
as a fresh-air farm. 
The football scores of the two leading 
colored teams fo r the year were as follows: 
ATLANT A BAPTIST COLLEGE . 
A. B. C. 87, Morris Brown 0. 
A. B. C. 48, Atlanta 0. 
A. B. C. 45, Clark 0. 
A. B. C. 12, Tuskegee 3. 
A. B. C. 13, Fisk 6. 
HOWAR D UNIVERSITY. 
Howard 6, Annapolis Grays 0. 
Howard 13, Hampton 7. 
Howard 20, Shaw 0. 
Howard 25, Livingston 0. 
Howard 13, Lincoln 0. 
q The Monda y Nigh t Current Events Clu b 
of Washingto n is devoting the year to the 
study of socialism. 
^ The Provident Hospita l and Trainin g 
School of Chicago reports an income for the 
year ending June 1, 1912, of $25,373. It 
has treated i n the hospital i n the last twentyone years 13,878 patients and 80,872 
patients i n the dispensary. The endowment 
fund now amounts to $47,000, and it is the 
earnest wish of the institution to raise this 
to $100,000. 
<I The West En d Workers' Association i n 
the Sa n Jua n Hil l district of Ne w Yor k 
reports the followin g institutions mainl y or 
entirely for the benefit of colored people : 
Fiv e institutions fo r the care of the sick at 
home; four churches; • two institutions for 
cripples; ten schools; three day nurseries; 
three dispensaries; three employmen t 
bureaus; three hospitals; eight industria l 
schools; five kindergartens; three institu-164 TH E CRISIS 
tions fo r legal and charitable advice ; two 
mil k stations; ten missions; three night 
schools; six recreation centers and thirteen 
social clubs. 
* i Boley , one of the several colored towns of 
Oklahoma , is often written of. The latest 
report claims a populatio n of 4,000; a bank 
wit h a capita l and surplus of $11,500 and 
deposits o f $75,804.44; twenty-five grocery 
stores; five hotels; seven restaurants; waterworks wort h $35,000; electric plant wort h 
$20,000; four drug stores; four cotton 
gins rangin g from $8,000 to $12,000 i n 
value ; one bottling works; one steam laun ­
dry ; two newspapers; two ice-cream parlors; 
two hardware stores; one jewelry store, four 
department stores; a $40,000 Masoni c Temple ; two colleges; one hig h school; one 
graded school; two city school buildings; 
one telephone exchange costing $3,000; 842 
school children; ten teachers; six churches; 
two liver y stables; two insurance agencies; 
one second-hand store; two undertaking 
establishments; one lumber yard ; two 
photographers; one bakery and one of the 
best city parks i n the State. The postoffice here is the only third-class postoffice. 
controlled by Negroes. Its postmaster is the 
highest-paid Negro postmaster i n the Unite d 
States. The sidewalks throughout the city 
are constructed wit h the best cement and 
the streets are well lighted by the electric 
plant. 
ECONOMICS. 
THE Mississipp i Gran d Lodge of Masons 
collected last year $100,000 and pai d 
out to beneficiaries $90,000. It has 10,000 
enrolled i n 462 lodges. A t its recent annual 
meeting 700 delegates were present. 
*I The Unite d States Court of Appeals i n 
Chicago recently decided that the heirs of 
twenty-eight Negro stevedores who were 
kille d i n a naphtha explosion on the steamer 
"Tioga " i n the Chicago Rive r twenty-three 
years ago are entitled to $110,000 damages. 
Ever y direct heir of the identified dead either 
has died or disappeared. The steamship 
company woun d up its affairs years ago. 
The attorney that defended the case and the 
lawye r that prosecuted it are dead. 
. The case was one of the oldest pending 
Federa l cases i n Chicago i n which there had 
been only one appeal. Charles Furthmann , 
son of the origina l plaintiff's attorney, won 
the case. There wil l be an opportunit y for 
heirs of the dead to collect damages, i f any 
heirs can be located. The company deposited 
a $200,000 cash bond before it went out o f 
business. 
*I The Alabam a Penn y Savings Ban k celebrated the new year by movin g into its new 
six-story buildin g of reinforced concrete. 
This is a colored institution located at 
Birmingham, Ala . 
<I The America n 'Beneficial Insurance Com ­
pan y is about to erect a $20,000 office build ­
in g i n Richmond , Va . 
^ It is reported that the Negroes o f Val -
dosta, Ga. , pa y tax on nearly $500,000 wort h 
of property. One colored stock company 
owns a $20,000 office buildin g i n whic h are 
Negro professional men and other business 
enterprises. There are two schools, fifteen 
churches and twenty-one business enterprises, includin g dru g an d grocer y stores. 
There are about 7,000 colored people i n the 
town. 
<I The timber workers are strikin g at Merry -
ville , La . The strikers i n a circula r say: 
"It is a glorious sight to see, this miracle 
that has happened here i n Dixie . This coming 
true of the 'impossible'— this unio n of the 
workers regardless of color, creed or nationality. To hear the American s sayin g 'Yo u 
can starve us, but yo u cannot whi p us;' the 
Negroes cryin g 'Yo u can fence us in , but 
yo u cannot make us scab;' the Italians singin g the 'Marseillaise ' and the Mexican s 
shouting vivas fo r the brotherhood. Never 
di d the Sant a F e Railroad , the Southern 
Lumbe r Operators' Associatio n and the 
America n Lumbe r Compan y expect to see 
such complete and defiant solidarity, else they 
would have thought lon g and har d before 
the infamous order penalizin g men fo r 
obeying the summons of a court was issued." 
*II The colored people of Tennessee conducted 
33,895 farms i n 1900 and 38,308 i n 1910. 
These farms were divided as follows: 
Farms 
Under 10 acres 2,398 
10-19 acres 6,883 
20-49 acres - 19,063 
50-99 acres 6,866 
100 or more acres 3,098 
The farm lan d i n their control has 
increased from 1,500,096 acres i n 1900 to 
1,606,078 i n 1910, whil e the value of all farm 
propert y owned and rented by colored 
farmers has risen 102.3 pe r cent, i n the 
decade and now stands at $54,086,230. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 165 
*J T. S. Inborden makes the followin g statement concerning three Nort h Carolin a counties where his school is situated. I n Edge -
comb Count y Negroes own : Valued at 
14,665 acres of land $144,444 
768 town lots 187,727 
1,257 mules and horses 98,633 
5,137 goats, sheep, hogs and dogs 24,653 
Implements and tools 14,315 
House and kitchen furniture.... 17,324 
The total of their personal and 
real property amounts to 562,511 
I n Nas h Count y the Negroes own : 
Valued at 
20,349 acres of land $211,701 
549 town lots 131,510 
1,030 mules and horses 104,035 
6,350 goats, sheep, hogs and dogs 37,929 
Implements and tools 6,772 
Household and kitchen furniture 45,430 
Other possessions 54,552 
The total real and personal 
property amounts to 596,552 
I n Halifa x County the Negroes own : 
Valued at 
53,937 aeres of land $377,236 
353 town lots 161,275 
2,382 horses and mules 183,714 
3,119 cattle 50,465 
6,802 goats, sheep, hogs and dogs 20,620 
The total real and personal 
property amounts to 748,310 
This excellent showing is due largely to the 
influence of the Bric k School. 
*I The largest blacksmith and repair shop i n 
the State of Kansa s is kept by a colored man 
i n Atchison . Hi s income is over $8,000 a 
year. 
1 The colored people of Rochester, N . Y. , 
pla n to erect a buildin g for commercial and 
fraterna l purposes. 
<J The State of Marylan d is tryin g to buy 
old Fort Frederic k which is owned by Natha n 
Williams, a thrifty colored man, who pai d 
$7,500 fo r the property several years ago. 
H e has been offered $8,500 for his possession. 
I f he persists i n his refusal to accept this 
pric e no more efforts can be made until a 
later legislature increases the appropriation . 
<I The recent Unite d States bulletin on agriculture has some astonishing revelations of 
the increase of farm ownership among 
colored people. Colored people form 6 per 
cent, of all the farm owners, and of all 
colored farmers 26.2 per cent., or 241,221, 
own their farms. This includes a few Indian 
and Asiati c farmers, but not more than 
20,000. Specia l figures are given for Negroes 
of the South ; there we find the colored 
farmers owned 186,676 farms in 1900 and 
218,467 i n 1910. They have added over 
2,000,000 acres to their farms and the value 
of the lan d and buildings has increased durin g the. decade from $106,500,000 to $273,-
000,000, an increase of 156 per cent. The 
value of their land per acre is greater than 
the value of white farmers' land. Some of 
the increases in land ownership are indicated 
by the followin g figures: 
No. of Farms Value 
1900 1910 1910 
Virginia 26,566 32,228 $28,059,534 
North Carolina. . .17,520 21,443 22,810,089 
South Carolina. . .18,970 20,372 22,112,291 
Georgia 11,375 15,698 20,540,910 
Alabama 14,110 17,082 17,285,502 
Mississippi 20,973 25,026 34,317,764 
Oklahoma 10,191 11,150 32,325,348 
Texas 21,139 21,232 30,687,272 
EDUCATION. 
JULIU S ROSENWAL D offered Fis k Uni ­
versity a year ago to be one of four 
persons to raise $10,000 a year for five 
years toward the current expenses. The 
conditions of Mr . Rosenwald's offer have 
been met so that the $10,000 is assured for 
the next five years; $181,000 has been 
pledged toward the $300,000 endowment 
which the institution is strivin g to raise. 
<I A course of lectures on the race problem 
is being given at the Universit y of 
Virginia . 
<I The superintendent of schools of Atlanta , 
Ga.. says: 
"W e have schools wit h earth closets, both 
white and black, which are a. dail y menace 
to the health, i f not the lives, of the children. W e have dark, dismal and musty basement rooms which adjoin toilets and which 
are bound to injur e the health of the 
teachers and children. The darkness and 
absence of fresh air is injurious to eyesight 
as well as to general health. Some of these 
schools are a disgrace to civilization and 
unfit for cattle to be herded in . W e have 
school yards which are mu d banks and when 
the children go out to pla y they get their 
feet wet and muddy and that is sure to 
cause sickness. Fo r lack of a sufficient 
janitor service the schools are not kept clean 
and that is not conducive to health. W e are 
tryin g to put 900 Negro children i n schools 
that have a seating capacity of only 450. 
It is true that we have sixty and seventy 
children in rooms that were meant to accommodate only about forty. " 
•J The board of trustees of the Jeanes Fun d 
has met at the Whit e House, Washington . 
Those present were President Taft, Andre w 166 TH E CRISIS 
Carnegie, Booke r T. Washington , H . B . 
Frissell, Dr . C. S. Mitchell , president of 
South Carolin a Institute, George Foste r 
Peabody, treasurer, R . R . Moten , secretary, 
H . T. Kealing , J . C. Napier, R . L . Smith , of 
Texas, Dr . James H . Dillard . There was 
appropriate d $38,000 to pa y the salaries of 
117 supervising teachers i n the Southern 
States, who wil l wor k wit h the superintendents chiefly to introduce industria l training . 
•J J . N . Carpenter, of Natchez, Miss., a white 
philanthropist, has given $80,000 fo r the 
white publi c schools and $5,000 fo r a Negro 
school. 
q I n Philadelphi a teachers i n the publi c 
schools have organized to tell folklor e 
stories to children i n order to overcome race 
prejudice. Negro folk songs and folklor e 
have been introduced. 
Q Colored people of the C. M . E . Church 
have raised $8,000 for Lane College, 
Tennessee, this year. 
^ The annual report of the county superintendent of education of Richlan d County, 
S. C , shows more colored children than 
white children i n school i n spite of the fact 
that the colored children have wretched 
accommodations. 
^ Mrs. Ell a Flag g Young , superintendent of 
schools of Chicago, recently visited the 
colored schools of Washington . Whe n asked 
what she thought of the system of segregatin g the races, Mrs. Youn g said : 
" I am opposed to segregation of races i n 
public schools. Ho w could I be otherwise 
and be consistent? I cannot align myself i n 
opposition to segregation of the sexes and 
favor separate schools fo r the whites and 
blacks." 
<I The twentieth annual report of Calhoun 
Colored School, Lowndes County, Ala. , shows 
a total income for the year of $34,000. The 
endowment amounts to $93,000. 
TH E CHURCH. 
THE Baptist Sunday School Congress of 
* 1913 wil l meet i n Muskogee, Okla., i n 
June . This wil l be the eighth annual session. 
<J The America n Society of Churc h Histor y 
has been discussing among other subjects the 
religious history among Negroes i n the 
South. 
<I St John's Congregationa l Church , of 
Springfield, Mass., has issued a manua l and 
directory. 
MEETINGS . 
LOCA L emancipation celebrations were 
held throughout the Unite d States on 
Januar y 1 and 5. 
<I I n Bosto n a large celebration was held 
at Par k Street Church , which was addressed 
by the Honorabl e Samue l W . McCal l and 
Mr . Fran k B . Sanborn . 
q I n Mechanics' Building , Boston , another 
meeting was held and addressed by ex-president C. W . Eliot . 
q The Whittie r Hom e Associatio n held a 
meeting at the Friends' Meetin g Hous e i n 
Amesbury , Mass., and lai d a wreath on 
Whittier's pew. 
*I I n Ne w Orleans the mayo r of the city 
addressed the chief emancipation meeting at 
the fair grounds. 
q The colored people of Iowa are plannin g 
an exposition fo r next September. 
q The America n Negr o Academy held its 
sixteenth annua l meeting i n Washington . 
Papers were read by R . R . Wright , Jr., 
Kell y Miller, Archibal d H . Grimk e and 
Ernest E . Just. 
q The twenty-second annua l Negr o Farmers' 
Conference was held at Tuskegee Institute, 
Januar y 22 and 23. 
q Mrs. Henr y Villar d and Dr . Booke r T . 
Washington , of Tuskegee Institute, spoke at 
an emancipation meeting i n the Churc h of 
the Messiah, Ne w York , December 5. 
q Dr . Stephen S. Wise , Dr . Feli x Adle r and 
Dr . Henr y Newma n delivered addresses on 
emancipation i n their respective pulpits i n 
New York . The address of Dr . Wis e is 
published i n this issue of TH E CRISIS. 
q Dr. M . W . Gilbert gave an address on 
emancipation at the State Norma l School i n 
Montgomery , Ala . 
POLITICAL. 
A BIL L has been introduced into the 
Unite d States Senate to promote 
instruction i n agriculture , trades and the 
like. It purposes to appropriat e $3,000,000 
a year, beginning i n 1916, to the various 
States. It also appropriate s further moneys 
fo r branch experiment institutions and provides that i n States where there are separate 
white and colored institutions $10,000 shall 
be appropriate d to each fo r a college 
teachers' trainin g fund . Provisio n is also 
made fo r agricultura l high schools fo r both 
races. To offset this bill another one has ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 167 
passed the Hous e makin g no provision whatsoever for the colored people, but leaving the 
whole matter to the States. 
<I Durin g the visit of President-elect Wilso n 
to Staunton, Va. , Fran k T . Ware , a former 
colored slave of his parents, greeted him. 
•1 The Honorabl e James W . Johnson, formerly consul at Corinto, Nicaragua , has been 
appointed as consul to St. Michaels, Azore s 
Islands. The Honorabl e Willia m J . Yerb y 
has been transferred from Sierr a Leone, 
West Africa , to Turkey . 
PERSONAL. 
THE Plasterer, organ of the Plasterers' 
International Association, carries a 
picture of George Doyle , a prominent colored 
union member. 
^ Robert Pinkers, of Philadelphia , has 
patented an automatic dril l for woodworking. 
H e has worked i n a woodworkers' shop for 
seven years. 
*I Dr. J . P . Turner, a colored physician, has 
made a creditable record as one of the 
medical directors of the public schools of 
Philadelphia . 
<! Jefferson Davis, Unite d States Senator 
from Arkansas, and a man of the Tillman -
Vardama n type, is, fortunately, dead. 
^ It is reported that a youn g colored student 
of the Greensboro A . & M . College has 
inherited $101,000 from a Frenchma n whom 
he used to serve. 
f$ Natha n Williams, a Negro bellboy at the 
Roya l Palms Hotel , Jacksonville , Fla. , 
rescued a white woman, Mrs. Gertrude 
Diffenbacher, from a burglar, and was killed 
in the encounter. 
<I Miss Josephine Pinyo n (Cornell, 1910) has 
succeeded Miss Hollowa y as student secretary to the Nationa l Boar d of the Y . W . 
C. A.'s, and Miss Ev a Bowles, for two 
years secretary of the 53d Street branch, 
New Yor k City , and fo r four years with 
the Associated Charities, Columbus, O., is 
now secretary for city work among colored 
women. 
<I Walte r Daniels, a colored porter of Kansa s 
City , saved the valuable contents of an 
express car by shooting and killin g a robber 
who was tryin g to open the safe. "That, 
porter was the only one of us not scared to 
death," said George Peterson, of Tulsa , a 
passenger i n the chair car. "The porter 
sneaked into the next car and got a revolver 
while the rest of us were under the seats. 
A s he came back, followin g the hold-up man 
to the express car, he asked somebody with a 
revolver to come and help him. N o one i n 
my car seemed to have one. The bandit paid 
no attention to passengers." 
<I Joseph Hazel, a colored boy 14 years 
of age, has his picture i n the Open Door 
because of his kindness i n rescuing animals. 
1 Joh n Williams, a colored detective of 
Charleston, S. C , is makin g a wide reputation i n trailin g criminals. 
<J Augustus Stanfield, a graduate of Howard , 
passed the highest examinations, i n a class of 
forty-five applicants, for license to practice 
medicine i n New Jersey. 
^ Mr . Joh n A . Agee, one of the first agents 
of TH E CRISIS, and a clerk i n the city civil 
service of St. Louis, is dead. 
*3 Howar d P . Drew, the wonderful colored 
sprinter of Springfield, Mass., has twice 
equaled the world's indoor record for the 
seventy-yard dash. 
<i Mrs. Lillia n Starks, widow of the late 
S. W . Starks, died suddenly at the home of 
her brother-in-law, at Athens, O., December 24, and was buried i n Charleston, W . 
Va. , December 28. Mr . Starks was State 
libraria n of West Virgini a and supreme 
chancellor of the Knights of Pythia s at the 
time of his death about five years ago. 
<I Willia m Seymour Edwards, of Charleston, 
W . Va. , delivered the address of the emancipation celebration held at the West Virgini a 
Colored Institute. Mr . Edward s is a grandson of Arthu r Tappan , president of the first 
anti-slavery society organized i n New York . 
MUSIC AN D ART. 
MR. HAMILTO N HODGES , the distinguished baritone from Boston, 
Mass., who makes his home i n New Zealand, 
gave, i n the early season, two song recitals 
i n the town hall concert chamber at Welling ­
ton. The hall was crowded, even standing 
room being taken. 
The New Zealand Free Lance says of the 
recital: 
"Mr . Hodges is helping to raise the standar d of musical taste i n this community, for 
he includes nothing tawdry i n his program. 
H e has a cultured, artistic judgment, and as 
he is always on the alert for new music of a 
high standard we are indebted to him for a 
knowledge of many fine songs. 168 TH E CRISIS 
"Th e program was ful l of interest. * * * 
Mr . Hodge s can take credit to himself fo r 
being the first to introduce to New Zealanders 
an olio of songs by New Zealand composers." 
Mr . Hodges' program included songs from 
Muratori , Vo n Fieltiz , Schubert, Quitter, 
Horrocks, Mallinson , Buckley , Hunt , Wrigh t 
and Queerie. The America n numbers were 
from Arthu r Foot e and Charles Wakefield 
Cadman . 
One of the most admirable features of 
Mr . Hodges' artistic wor k is his uncompromisin g standard fo r the development of 
the colored musician along the line of absolute 
music, irrespective of any racia l limitations. 
Mr . Hodge s was engaged to sing i n the 
"Messiah " which was produced by the 
Fieldin g Chora l Society on December 11, 
and wil l also be heard i n Coleridge-Taylor's 
" A Tale of Ol d Japan, " whic h is to be sung 
by the Roya l Chora l Society of Wellington . 
q The all-America n program prepared by 
Frederic k Stock fo r the Theodore Thomas 
Orchestra of Chicago, Ill., fo r the concerts of 
December 13 and 14, opened wit h "Comed y 
Overture on Negr o Airs, " by Henr y F . 
Gilbert, of Cambridge , Mass. The event, a 
program of all-America n music, was the 
first of its kin d i n the history of the Chicago 
orchestra and one of importance and sig ­
nificance. 
q Mr . Arthu r Abell , the well-known criti c 
of Berlin , Germany, writin g i n Musical 
America of the remarkable voices possessed 
by . the two America n Chippewa Indians, 
Carlisl e Bawbangam and Carlisl e Kawbow -
gam, comments on the beautiful voices found 
particularl y among Negroes. 
q It is related of the composer Massenet, 
who died last August, that he was once 
glancing through a score of one of ColeridgeTaylor's works, and without knowin g at that 
time the name of the composer, he declared 
the musician must be of Negro extraction, 
owin g to the character of his music. 
q The Colored Socia l Settlement of Wash ­
ington, D . C , gave a musica l program i n 
December at the Metropolita n Church , by 
Joseph H . Douglass, violinist, Ro y W . Tibbs, 
pianist, and Howar d Universit y Glee Club . 
Addresses were delivered by Professor Alai n 
L e Ro y Locke , formerly Oxfor d Rhodes 
scholar, and Dr . Stephen Morrel l Newman , 
president of Howar d University . 
q Joh n Phili p Sousa and his band are presenting a novelty on this season's concert 
program, whic h is a suite—three character 
studies—called "Dwellers i n the Wester n 
World"—th e re d man, the white man, the 
black man . 
q The incidenta l music to "Juliu s Caesar, " 
whic h Willia m Faversham is revivin g i n 
this country, was composed by Christophe r 
Wilso n an d S. Coleridge-Taylor. 
q A t the celebration o f the fiftieth anniversary of the emancipation proclamation i n 
Boston, Mass., o n Januar y 1, by the Wendell 
Phillip s Memoria l Association , a chorus of 
fifty voices from the Hande l an d Hayd n 
Society, Emi l Mollenhauer, conductor, sang 
the "Hym n of Praise " an d choruses from 
"Elijah " an d the "Messiah. " 
q Francis Jackso n Garriso n has written a 
graphi c account of the concert given i n Boston on Januar y 1, 1863, whil e everybody 
waited i n suspense fo r Lincoln's second 
proclamation whic h made actual the emancipation o f the slaves. "Never, " writes Mr . 
Garrison , "was a concert more ful l of inspira ­
tion, an d I wis h that Bosto n might have 
signalized this semi-centennial anniversary of 
the great proclamation by repeating it, with 
the same choice program. " 
q I n Ne w Yor k the Philharmoni c Orchestra 
repeated two numbers on that program and 
also Dvorak's "Ne w Worl d Symphony, " 
based i n part on Southern echoes, and the 
rhapsodic dance, "Ramboula, " by the late 
Coleridge-Taylor. 
q Signo r Pasqual e Amat o sang at one of 
the Sunda y concerts of the Metropolita n 
Oper a Hous e one of J . Rosamon d Johnson's 
dialect songs, "Sinc e Yo u Wen t Away. " 
The words are by J . W . Johnson. 
q Mr . Rosamon d Johnso n and his partner, 
Mr . Hart , have sailed fo r England , where 
they have several engagements. 
q Twelve America n composers were represented at a matinee of new music sung by 
the Schola Cantorum, a branch of the Mac -
Dowel l Club , at Aeolia n Hall , Ne w Yor k 
City . Amon g the composers represented were 
Rosamon d Johnson and Wil l Mario n Cook. 
Mr . Kur t Schindle r was conductor. 
q A n interesting exhibit of origina l paintings and drawings by colored artists was 
held at the Carlto n Avenu e branch of the 
Y . M . C. A. , Brooklyn . The Evening Post 
says: 
" A number of the pictures shown are 
good enough to go i n the average exhibi-ALON G TH E 
tion. Severa l by Ernest Braxto n show force 
an d imaginative ability enough to compel 
more than casual attention. 
The exhibition comprises wor k of several 
grades and different styles, the color work, 
on the whole, being more interesting than 
the black and white, although i n this latter 
field Braxto n has some strikin g military 
heads. The water colors of some of the 
students, it is pointed out, have been done 
at night and under necessarily difficult light 
conditions. Al l o f the wor k by students 
shows at least painstaking care. 
"Braxto n is represented by seven pictures 
i n oils and a series of studies i n black and 
white. Three of his pictures are 'Afte r the 
Shower,' showing a vague, wind-swept street, 
wit h a suggestion of the after effects of a 
heavy rain ; 'The Umbrell a Mender' and 'I n 
the Cove,' a Negro's head. Richar d L . 
Brow n is represented by four pictures of a 
smaller size. One of them is called ' A 
Marshlan d Evening; ' others are ' A Clearing ' 
and 'Stud y of Clouds.' R . H . Lewis, another 
professional, shows the only portraits i n the 
exhibition. O f the amateurs, A . Comithe r 
shows five small paintings, not altogether 
without merit, all depicting various moods 
of nature. Besides these are two pictures 
by the late J . C . de Villis, who was one of 
the best-known Negro artists i n the city. 
"Othe r exhibitors are Louis e R . Latimer, 
Joh n Bailey , J . S. Wilson , Jr. , Gladys Doug ­
lass, I. S. Conway , Walte r T . Brown , 
Anthon y Queman and G . E . Livingston , all 
of whom are students. It is a significant 
fact that none of these students is workin g 
fo r pleasure, but rather to fit himself or herself to earn a livelihood as an artist." 
*I Mr . Willia m Stanley Braithwaite , a contributin g editor of TH E CRISIS, has launched 
a new periodical, The Poetry Journal. It is 
published i n Boston, and is a tasteful little 
magazine. 
Q W . P . Saunders, o f Nashville , Tenn., has 
produced his second play . Bot h his plays 
have been well mentioned by the leading 
papers of the city. 
TH E GHETTO. 
ST. LUKE' S Protestant Episcopa l Church, 
Ne w York , is tryin g to get ri d of its 
colored Sunday-school children. 
^ Discriminatio n i n Indianapolis has gone 
to the length of a proposition for separate 
playgrounds for children and separate street 
COLO R LIN E 169 
cars. Alread y there is discrimination i n 
amusement parks and colored people are not 
able to get seats i n first-class theatres. 
1 A proposed bill segregating colored 
and white people i n residence districts of 
St. Louis has been declared unconstitutional 
by the lawyers of the organization which is 
pushing it. 
Cfl Colored men workin g i n the sawmills of 
Ellisville , Miss. , have been warned to leave. 
*I Undergroun d influences have succeeded i n 
having the question of Negroes i n the army 
discussed at the conference o f army officers. 
Nothing , of course, is expected as an immediate result o f the discussion, but Negr o 
haters are hoping that this wil l be an opening 
wedge. 
*I A colored pastor i n Chicago alleges that 
hundreds of colored men and women have 
been discharged from their wor k on account 
of the Jac k Johnson episode. Meantime 
Mr . Johnson has bought himself a $35,000 
house i n a fashionable district and there are 
rumors of trouble there. 
^ The unexplained movement which led to 
the killin g of seven or eight Negroes i n Nort h 
Georgi a several months ago has resulted i n 
an attempt to drive out Negroes entirely. 
One prominent white citizen, appealing to 
the governor, says: 
"I f something is not done to check this 
movement the labor situation i n Jackson 
County wil l become quite acute, for the 
Negroes, includin g some of the most trustworthy and law-abiding, are becoming terrorstricken and are leaving there i n large numbers. Ou r wives and daughters wil l soon be 
put to the necessity of doing the cooking, 
washing and performing other menial labor. 
I n addition, the farmers wil l suffer greatly, 
for they wil l be deprived of field hands." 
<I Twenty-eight carpenters struck at Lexing ­
ton, Ky. , because a Negro carpenter was 
added to the force. 
<I Propert y holders i n Minneapolis are tryin g to buy out a colored man who moved 
into a house on 18th Avenue . 
1 Congressman Roberts, of Massachusetts, 
denies that his bill concerning secret organizations is aimed at colored people. 
<B R. W . Milner, of Monroe , La. , a plantation 
manager, committed suicide and left a letter 
to his daughter. The daughter is a colored 
girl . 170 TH E CRISIS 
<J A deed selling propert y to a white church 
i n West Virgini a contains a passage declarin g that the property is "fo r the use only 
fo r religious purposes of the Baptist 
Churc h of Kanawh a County, W . Va . Mean ­
in g the Caucasian members of the State 
Baptist denomination, " etc. 
Dr. George Brow n was candidate fo r 
mayor i n Atlanta , and made speeches 
throughout the city. I n talkin g to white 
workingmen he said : 
"Concernin g the Negro problem nothing 
has been done to solve it. I f my suggestion 
is followed out yo u wil l have absolute control of the servants i n this town, and many 
a poor woman who is at present doing her 
own wor k would have the prope r servant 
to do it had she the prope r protection. " 
<I The followin g note comes to us from 
Mississippi : 
"Ep h Williams presented a fine show 
(minstrel of course, but clean and good) i n 
Cleveland, Miss. It was reported that some 
mean white boys struck one of their ponies 
i n the head and it bled until it fell. A 
little four-year-old girl who was one of the 
dancers was also struck wit h a stone; the 
show was packed wit h white people, but they 
refused to pay for several seats, but simpl y 
took them, and they also refused to pa y fo r 
the side show, but remained i n their seats. 
The women had to be guarded to keep the 
white men out of their dressing room and 
they were afraid to leave their cars for fear 
of assault and insult. " 
CRIME. 
ATLANTA , Ga. , had a small race riot to 
celebrate Christmas. There were only 
one or two kille d and they were white. A 
report on crime i n Atlant a says: 
"I n his wor k of examining the records i n 
cases where pardon recommendations are 
passed on to Governor Brow n by the prison 
commission, secretary Hard y Ulm, i n 
makin g the briefs fo r the executive, has 
come to the conclusion that there is often 
great inequality, not to say injustice done, 
i n sentencing convicted persons, and particularly Negroes. 
"To-day he cited several cases bearing out 
his contention. One was that of a Negro 
who had imbibed to an extent to make himself foolish and irresponsible. Whil e i n this 
condition he shoved a rusty old revolver i n 
his wife's face. It di d not even appea r that 
the weapon was loaded. 
"The Negro was tried i n police court and 
sentenced to ninety days fo r disorderly conduct. H e served it an d when he came out 
was. yanke d up, tried i n the city court and 
sent up fo r twelve months. H e finished that 
sentence, was arrested again and tried i n 
superior court and this time drew a fouryear sentence. H e has served most of that 
sentence. 
"Her e is a case of a Negr o tried, convicted and sentenced i n three separate courts, 
all on the identical charge. Eac h time, when 
questioned, the ignorant Africa n only said : 
" 'I guess I'm guilty . I was so drun k I 
don't remember what I did. ' 
"Anothe r half-witted Negr o boy swiped 
a pair of shoes, was caught i n half an hour 
and the shoes recovered. The value of the 
stolen propert y di d not exeed $3 or $4, 
and no one suffered any loss. Ye t he got 
four years, most of which he has served. 
"Anothe r Negr o boy had a few drink s and 
imagined himself a bad man. H e went home, 
got into a word y dispute wit h his stepfather 
and a general fight followed, i n whic h the 
drunken boy slapped practicall y every member of the family . 
"Nobod y was hurt, according to the evidence, yet this Negro was sent up fo r a long 
pen sentence. 
"These cases are selected at random from 
scores. Ho w many fail to be brought to 
attention at all no one knows. " 
*I The governors of Arkansas, South Caro ­
lin a and Mississipp i have released numbers 
of Negroes from pena l institutions on the 
grounds of injustice i n their sentences. 
TH E COURTS. 
THE right of 560 Negroes to participat e 
i n the distribution of lands and funds 
belonging to the Cherokee Indians has been 
confirmed by the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia . It involves property 
variously estimated as wort h from $5,000,000 
to $50,000,000. 
*& The Mississipp i Supreme Court has 
declared that the "Ji m Crow " car law calls 
for separate sleeping-car accommodations 
for white and colored people. The case has 
been appealed to the Supreme Court of the 
Unite d States. 
*I The Oklahoma Court of Appeals has declared that the Negroes cannot be excluded 
from the jur y on account of color, but that 
those who are disfranchised cannot serve. MEN OF TH E 
MONT H 
A FRIEND. 
FOR twenty-three years Nelli e B . Adams, 
a white daughter of the State of Maine , 
has live d at Atlant a Universit y as the wif e of 
the dean. She was a keen, capable New 
Englan d worker, quick i n wor d and deed, 
and devoted to the colored people not by 
TH E LAT E MRS . N . B . ADAMS . 
theory, but by a lif e ful l of friendships. A s 
she herself wrote on her last journey i n the 
worl d concerning pessimists: 
"N o matter what local conditions have produced you r own particula r brand of this 
microbe, a sure and permanent cure has been 
found. The remedy is so agreeable that you 
wil l wish to continue it indefinitely. This is 
the prescription : go and visit Atlant a Uni ­
versity graduates and former students and 
you r cure wil l be so thorough that yo u wil l 
cease to believe the disease ever existed. 
"W e at the university know that those 
who studied here i n past years are doing good 
work and still love their school, but there 
is a difference between knowing and seeing. 
Afte r twenty-three years of knowin g from 
report it has been my privilege to come personally into contact wit h some of the Atlant a 
Universit y people i n their own homes and 
work. 
"Al l over the South there are just such 
groups of Atlant a Universit y people; there 
are also the places where one or two are 
workin g bravely and carryin g heavy burdens. 
I have always known this, but now I have 
seen and felt it. Le t anybody who ever gets 
discouraged about Atlant a University , or 
about the ultimate outcome of the bi g problem that we are tryin g to help solve, drop 
everything and take a tri p to visit former 
students of the school. H e wil l return home, 
so inspired by their cheerfulness and courage, 
their devotion to their work, their love fo r 
alma mater and loyalty to the principle s 
fo r which she stands, that he wil l surely 
never be discouraged again. " 
Mrs. Adams was born i n 1860, married 
i n 1884 and died at Atlant a Universit y June 
27, 1912. 
A WRITER. 
JAME S W . JOHNSON , Unite d States 
consul i n Nicaragua , and recently transferred to the Azores, is one of the most 
promising figures i n Negro-America n literature. His poem on emancipation i n the New 
Yor k Times is only the latest of a series of 
writings which show true poetic feeling and 
grasp of the Englis h language. Mr . Johnson 
has had a varied career. H e was born i n 
Florid a forty-two years ago, and graduated 172 TH E CRISI S 
at Atlant a University . Together wit h his 
gifted brother, the musician, he came to New 
Yor k and wrote the words to many a liltin g 
song that set the worl d a-dancing. H e then 
turned to more serious writing , studied at 
Columbia , and his wor k began to appea r i n 
the Independent and the Century. H e 
accepted politica l office i n order to have more 
leisure to write , and has i n recent years prepared two volumes fo r publication, one of 
which might almost be called epoch making . 
Mr . Johnson married Miss Grace Nail , of 
New Yor k City . 
A SCHOOL TEACHER . 
THE recent appointment of Garnet Crum -
mel Wilkinso n as principa l of the 
Armstron g Manua l Trainin g School, i n the 
Distric t of Columbia , brings another colored 
educator to the front. Mr . Wilkinso n is a 
native of South Carolina , where he was born 
i n 1879. H e received his education i n Wash ­
ington and at Oberlin, where he took his 
bachelor's degree i n 1902. H e has been a 
teacher i n the Washingto n schools since that 
year and has been prominent i n activities 
TH E HON . JAME S WELDO N JOHNSON . 
outside the schoolroom. H e represents a 
type of young, clean Negro, well trained and 
well bred, and ready to help i n all good work. 
FATHER , FATHE R ABRAHA M 
By JAMES WELDO N JOHNSON 
Father, Fathe r Abraham, 
To-day look on us from above; 
On us, the offspring of thy faith, 
The children of thy Christlike love. 
Father, Fathe r Abraham, 
To-day we lift our hearts to thee, 
Fille d wit h the thought of what great price 
Wa s paid , that we might ransomed be. 
Fo r that which we have humbly wrought, 
Give us to-day thy kindl y smile ; 
Wherei n we've failed or fallen short, 
Bea r wit h us, Father, yet a while. 
To-day we consecrate ourselves 
Ane w i n hand and heart an d brain , 
To send this judgment down the years 
The ransom was not pai d i n vain . 
Father, Fathe r Abraham, 
To-day send on us from above 
A blessing of thy gentle strength, 
O f thy large faith, o f thy deep love. James W . Johnson had a 
EMANCIPATION . , , . . . . 
long and interesting poem 
in the New York Times of January 2, which 
ends wit h these words: 
No! Stand erect and without fear, 
And for our foes let this suffice— 
We'v e bought a rightful sonship here, 
And we have more than paid the price. 
And yet, my brothers, well 1 know 
The tethered feet, the pinioned wings, 
The spirit bowed beneath the blow, 
The heart grown faint from wounds and 
stings; 
The staggering force of brutish might, 
That strikes and leaves us stunned and 
dazed; 
The long, vain waiting through the night 
To hear some voice, for justice raised. 
Full well I know the hour when hope 
Sinks dead, and 'round us everywhere 
Hangs stifling darkness, and we grope 
With hands uplifted in despair. 
Courage! Look out, beyond and see 
The far horizon's beckoning span! 
Faith in your God-known destiny! 
We are a part of some great plan. 
Because the tongues of Garrison 
And Phillips now are cold in death, 
Think you their work can be undone? 
Or quenched the fires lit by their breath? 
Think you that John Brown's spirit stops? 
That Lovejoy was but idly slain? 
Or do you think those precious drops 
From Lincoln's heart were shed in vain? 
That for which millions prayed and sighed, 
That for which tens of thousands fought, 
For which so many freely died, 
God cannot let it come to naught. 
Perhaps the most notable utterance on the 
jubilee of emancipation comes from the 
Congregationalist. Whe n we remember that 
a few years ago the Congregalionalist was 
edited by one of the most contemptible dough 
faces that the Nort h has bred i n modern 
days, it is all the more reassuring to have 
from the new editors this splendid editorial. 
"O n the Negr o and the Nation, " which we 
quote i n full : 
"Fift y years ago President Lincol n proclaimed emancipation for the Southern slaves. 
Upo n that New Year's Day four million black 
folk saw the golden gates of opportunity 
swin g to their hand. The nation placed the 
Negro and the white man upon the same 
plane of citizenship, pledged equal protection for equal rights of life, liberty, property 
and the pursuit of happiness. That was the 
white man's pledge. The Negro, upon enterin g the compact, assumed all the obligations 
of citizenship, swore fealty to our common 
country, pledged obedience to its laws and 
shouldered his share of taxation and of civic 
and militar y service. Tha t was the Negro's 
pledge. 
"Ho w have the pledges been kept ? 
"Ignorant, debased and defiled as a race by 
slavery, the Negr o made his start. Her e and 
there a helping hand has grasped his own, 
but where one has helped a thousand have discouraged and hindered his progress. Wit h 
marvelous courage, optimism and faith i n 
Go d he has pressed on, and never i n all 
history has a race made such progress i n a 
half century. The worthy things that his 
detractors said the, Negro could not do he 
has done. An d the unworthy things predicted of him he has avoided as successfully 
as the white man. It has been well said by 
Judge Wendell P . Stafford, of the Distric t of 
Columbi a Supreme Court, that 'the black 
race i n less than fifty years of freedom has 
justified every claim of the Abolitionists. It 
has shown itself brave i n battle, faithful i n 
business, eager to learn, capable of acquiring 
and controlling wealth and able to produce 
noble, far-seeing leaders of its own blood.' 
"Durin g the past fifty years the Negro 
race i n Americ a has increased from four 
millio n to ten millio n souls. Negroes have 
established great schools, have become the 
chief agricultura l producers of the South, 
have acquired millions of property and have 
achieved success i n every profession and calling . Statistics show that a larger proportion 
of Negroes i n Virgini a own their homes than 
of white people i n Massachusetts. I n Mississipp i and Louisian a are more Negro farm 174 TH E CRISIS 
owners than white. Throughout the country 
there are over a thir d more white paupers 
per thousand of population than Negro, and 
the largest percentage of crime is committed 
by white men. 
"The most bitter hatred and the most 
devilish retribution are meted out to the black 
man whose bruta l lust leads him to attack 
white women. Bu t the bruta l lust of the white 
man invades the Negro's home, ruins colored 
girls by the thousands, and there is hardl y 
a protest from the race that esteems itself 
superior. I n his childhood of freedom and 
citizenship the Negro has made the mistakes 
of childhood. Bu t against this are the 
splendid successes of the risin g race as it 
gains education and finds opportunity. 
"I n casting u p accounts on this semi-centennial we behold to the shame of our nation 
that fifteen Southern States where the Negro 
is most numerous have resorted to contemptible subterfuges to exclude the colored 
citizen from the polls, even the most cultured, 
able and virtuous, while admitting to full 
rights of citizenship the most ignorant, 
inferior and vicious white men. The 
Negro is taxed for the support of a 
government i n which he is refused a voice, 
to pa y fo r schools i n which he does not 
receive his fair opportunity, for the main ­
tenance of publi c parks from which he is 
excluded. An d railroa d companies, fo r the 
same fare that the white man pays, force the 
black man into a 'Ji m Crow' car, dirt y and 
cheap, while the white man rides in wholesome comfort. A simila r injustice is found in 
the waitin g rooms.- I n the Nort h the field 
of industria l opportunity fo r the Negro is 
being steadily restricted. N o words can 
express the inhumanity which has condoned 
the lynchin g without tria l of sixty to one 
hundred colored men each year durin g the 
past generation. 
"Al l this injustice has not been because 
the Negro was ignorant or poor or vicious, 
but because he was a Negro, because of the 
race prejudice which has outlived the institution of slavery under which it began. Wha t 
becomes of the pledges made by our great 
nation and who has broken faith—the Negro 
or the white man ? A s citizens of this 
Republic , as members of the Christian church, 
we are face to face with a serious problem i n 
which we have a personal responsibility. I f 
democracy is to be an enduring form of 
government, i f any man is to be secure i n the 
inherent rights of manhood and i n the 
politica l rights of free government, there 
must be security for all men unde r that 
government. I f the Constitution continues to 
be defied an d made a mockery i n South 
Carolina , it wil l one day crumble i n Massa ­
chusetts and Illinois. 
"I f justice fo r an oppressed race were the 
only issue, every Christia n white man i n 
Americ a should sprin g forwar d to right the 
wrong. Bu t all that is best i n America n 
institutions is at stake. The church i n 
Americ a is on trial. There is less danger 
from the Bleases and Vardaman s and Till -
mans, whose verba l violence and brutality 
defeat their own ends, than from indifference 
of the men of influence, culture, scholarship 
and Christia n profession, Nort h and South, 
who do not help to remove this blight upon 
our nationa l life . 
"W e have faith i n the white man ; we have 
faith i n the Negro ; we have fait h i n the 
future of democracy and of America . Bu t we 
cannot safely remain indifferent. The Negro 
problem is our problem and, whil e demanding 
of the black man industry, virtue and good 
citizenship, we must give him justice and 
opportunity . W e must have just laws and 
enforce them impartially . I f suffrage be restricted—and it should be restricted—we 
must ba r all who are unfit and them only. 
W e must educate all and give prope r place 
to the ablest and best. 
"Durin g the observance of this anniversary 
season we need a new vision of the fatherhood of God , a new consecration to human 
brotherhood the worl d around, a new 
recognition of the inherent rights of man for 
his manhood, regardless of color or race 
history, a new appraisa l of every man on his 
merits; we need a new birt h of Christian 
love, which shall put an end to cant about 
superior and inferio r races and overlordship, 
and square all human relations by the Golden 
Rul e of the Master. " 
The Philadelphi a North American, in a 
lon g leading editorial, says: 
"Tha t giant of intellect, Frederick 
Douglass, foreshadowed the progress of his 
race before its shackles had been struck off. 
The list of its eminent men i n our own day 
tells something of the story. An d yet we 
would not rest its claims on its painters, 
such as Tanner, or its poets, such as Dun ­
bar, or even on its great teachers, such as 
Booke r Washington . Bu t rather on the solid, 
steady, substantial achievements of its 
humbler men and women i n agricultur e and OPINIO N 175 
industry and the useful arts. The increase 
i n the materia l wealth of the colored man 
is one o f the marvels of the age. An d he 
has the honorable distinction of the fact 
that the wealth he has is the wealth he has 
created by his own labor, skill and 
intelligence. 
"It is this race that is now entering a 
second and a large r freedom. A s half a 
century ago it ceased to be an industria l 
chattel, so now under a new and wise leadership it shows that it intends to be no longer a 
politica l chattel. 
"It is a happ y sign that the fiftieth anniversary of Lincoln's proclamation finds the race 
reaching out fo r that genuine politica l freedom which Lincol n would have given it, 
' not only fo r the sake of the race itself, but 
because he recognized that the politica l and 
industria l liberties of the white race must 
inevitably be influenced by the degree of 
industria l and politica l liberty shared by the 
black man who dwells withi n our gates." 
Out of the West comes Archbisho p 
Ireland's protest against color prejudice : 
"Colo r is a mere incident. Childre n of 
Go d have as much right to be pleased with 
one color as another, and to think i n this 
case that we are better only shows our silliness and our ignorance. Against this 
ridiculous prejudice Catholics are banded to 
protest most strongly and continuously. 
"Whe n that prejudice enters into a min d 
there is no true Catholicity, and I am 
anxious that the white Catholics wil l agree 
with me i n this matter. 
"This prejudice exists only i n America , 
and it is the only country where there should 
be no prejudice, because it is the country 
for the equality of men, the prime doctrine 
of the Constitution, but one class di d not 
live up to it and made one class servants of 
another. Fortunatel y this di d not last, and 
all were put on the same level. Ye t many 
whites remain non-American , but wherever 
the Catholi c Churc h has sway this prejudice 
has been wipe d away. " 
Eve n from the South there comes i n the 
Alabama Baptist some heart searching: 
"Wh o are they? The Negroes. Is any 
class of persons nearer to the Southern Bap ­
tists? Next-door neighbors? Why , they are 
indoor neighbors! They not only til l our 
lands and man our factories and publi c 
works, but they live i n our homes. They 
have fed us, by what they produce and by 
what they cook, as they did our fathers 
before us. They are intimately implicated i n 
the very texture of our social fabric . They 
nurse our children and create i n no inconsiderable measure the very atmosphere that 
they breathe i n the plastic period of life . 
The Negro race constitutes the rough foundation upon which our economic structure 
rests. I f taken away suddenly and completely, the South would be improverished 
and brought into a desolation more appallin g 
than that which came to us after the besom 
of a civil wa r had swept away our fortunes. 
This race of laborers is the trellis upon which 
our commercial prosperity is growin g 
luxuriant and fruitful. Tear it down, and 
the vine wil l riot and rot on our neglected 
fields." 
m 
The Saturday Evening Post has 
EDUCATION . j • , _ . , ,.rp , 
a n editoria l o n "Th e 
Foreclosed" : 
"Illiterac y as measured by the census— 
meaning inabilit y to write—has fallen below 
eight per cent, of inhabitants ten years of 
age and upward , the whole number of illiterates being only 5,500,000, as against over 
6,000,000 i n 1900. O f white native-born 
children between ten and fourteen years of 
age less than two per cent, are illiterate. 
Amon g all white children, native and 
foreign born, the percentage of illiteracy 
decreased almost one-half i n ten years. 
"S o fa r that looks very well ; but the 
further figures from which optimism derives 
comfort seem to us rather dubious. Abou t 
forty per cent, of all illiterates are colored, 
and among Negro children from ten to fourteen years of age eighteen per cent, are unable to write. True, there was a great gain i n 
the census period, the whole number of 
colored illiterates fallin g by more than 
600,000 and ' the proportion of illiterate 
children declining from almost a thir d to 
below one-fifth; but that it is still almost a 
fifth is a great reproach to the country and a 
very material handicap. 
"Th e child who is unable to write at 
fourteen is virtually foreclosed. Between 
him and opportunity stands a dead wall that 
only very extraordinary luck or ability wil l 
enable him to scale. Probabl y his children 
wil l start at a heavy disadvantage. Two 
millio n illiterate Negroes make as bad an 
item on the national balance sheet as twentyfive bushels of corn to the acre on land 
capable of producing fifty." 176 TH E CRISIS 
The Ne w Yor k Evening Post shows the 
reason fo r Negro illiteracy : 
"Whe n yo u are told that a thing cost $1.98 
yo u inevitably think of the bargain-counter; 
but when that is the sum named as the 
average amount expended i n the State of 
South Carolina , durin g the yea r 1912, fo r 
the education of each of the Negro children i n 
the publi c schools, yo u are not inclined to 
smile. There is a trace of comfort i n the 
circumstance that, small as this amount is, 
it is greater by 27 cents—sixteen pe r cent.!— 
than the corresponding amount fo r 1911. It 
is easy to imagine both the quality and the 
quantity of the education provided through 
the layin g out of this pittance. The expenditure i n each of the separate counties is specified i n the report of the State superintendent, 
and from this it appears that two counties— 
Berkeley and Pickens— are neck and neck 
i n the race to brin g the figure down as near 
to zero as possible, Berkeley standing at 25 
cents and Pickin s at 24. W e find the table, 
and accompanying statements, i n a Columbi a 
dispatch to the August a Chronicle; apparently, these infinitesimal amounts represent 
the total outlay, though possibly there is some 
subvention by the State which is not taken 
into account. I f so, it is certainly very 
small; and the showing is most discreditable 
to South Carolina . The average expenditure 
for the white school children is $13.02, and 
the lowest i n any one county is $6.93." 
The Pittsburgh Dispatch comments on the 
attitude of the South toward ignorance : 
"It is interesting and instructive to learn 
that the hope of Louisian a that it could get 
ri d of the 'grandfather clause,' or hereditary 
privilege of illiterate suffrage, after a lapse 
of time has proved unfounded. Therefore 
Louisian a has amended its constitution so as 
to extend that questionable privilege fo r 
another term of years. 
"Th e Louisianians were not prou d of their 
'grandfather clause' when they adopted it. 
Bu t they conceived it a politica l necessity to 
enfranchise white illiteracy whil e disfranchisin g Negro illiteracy. So, adopting the still 
more unrepublican subterfuge of establishing 
a hereditary politica l right, they gave it 
lif e for but fourteen years. 'It was believed,' 
says the Ne w Orleans Times-Democrat, 'that 
this provisio n woul d give a stimulus to the 
cause of education and that every white boy 
woul d insist upo n such schooling as woul d 
enable him to sign his name and ultimately 
to vote. It is generally to be regretted i n 
the cause of education that this warnin g was 
unheeded, and that the bars had to be let 
down again last month fo r the new army of 
white illiterates who have grow n u p i n the 
last fourteen years i n spite of what has been 
done to give them a schooling.' 
"Bu t the fourteen years are past, and the 
powe r of white ignorance is so great that 
it must be extended; whic h was done. Comment on the fact woul d be paintin g the lily. " 
Fro m Virginia , too, comes protest. W e 
learn that at a recent meeting of colored 
people Judge Joh n A . Buchanan , of the 
Supreme Court o f Appeals of Virginia , condemned the disfranchisement of the Negr o i n 
Virginia . • H e attacked the conduct of the 
officers i n executing the provisio n of the 
new constitution an d not the law. "The 
black man of Virgini a had better be worthy 
to vote and still be disfranchised than to be 
as the white ma n who was given the vote and 
sold it, " said Judg e Buchanan . 
No w an d then we hear an excuse for the 
fact that Negr o schools are so poor, but on 
the whole the most curious excuse is that 
given by the Housto n (Tex.) Post i n a long 
editorial: 
"Th e State of Texas gives to the Negro 
child the same allotment per capit a of 
scholastic populatio n that it does the whites, 
but of the $1,250,000 or more that is allotted 
fo r the trainin g of Negr o children, a large 
sum is diverted to the white schools. 
"Why ? Because so man y Negr o parents 
are indifferent to the trainin g of their children. I n the counties havin g a large Negro 
population there are thousands of Negro 
children who never attend school, and this 
very fact retards the progress of such schools 
as have been established." 
W e confess to great sympathy 
OPPRESSION. wit h Congressma n Tribbl e of 
Georgia . Tribbl e sees the shadow of an 
awfu l shape i n President Taft's attempt to 
put fourth-class postmasters under civilservice rules. Says Tribbl e wit h thrilling 
accents: 
" I desire to joi n my colleague from 
Georgia , Mr . Bartlett, i n his protest against 
civil-service examination for fourth-class 
postmasters. I feel that I am especially justified i n raisin g m y voice against this executive 
order, because i f there ever was an officially 
Negro-ridden town it is the city of Athens, 
Ga. , where I live . I have seriously considered the civil-service proposition as ap-OPINIO N 177 
plie d to postoffices, and I see danger i n the 
proposition. I f yo u wil l analyze this order 
an d its requirements yo u wil l find that the 
examination under the civil-service order wil l 
place i n the fourth-class postoffices i n the 
South, as well as i n other parts o f the Unite d 
States, man y Negroes. They wil l stand the 
examinations and take their places at win ­
dows o f small country and village postoffices. 
I want to say to yo u here to-day that the 
people of this country wil l not stand for it. " 
Thin k of it, prou d Southerners compelled 
actually to go into examinations with 
Negroes, and not only going into the examinations, but being incontinently beaten. It is 
more than human patience can bear! Tribbl e 
proceeds: 
''This order becomes odious to my people 
the very moment that Negroes stand examinations fo r postoffice positions. Ever y man i n 
this house woul d joi n i n this fight to defeat 
this order i f it placed yo u i n the situation it 
places me. I know from experience the 
humiliation of Negr o officeholders, and I 
war n yo u here to-day of danger i n the enforcement of that order. Fo r sixteen years, 
since my sojourn i n Athens, there have been 
Negroes i n the postoffice of that classic city, 
and durin g twelve years of that time there 
was a Negro postmaster. I n this city the 
State university is located, and there are 
over 1,000 students. To-day nearly every 
carrie r i n that city is a Negro. Whit e people 
wil l not stand the examinations and compete 
wit h the Negr o carriers. " 
Evidentl y something must be done. W e 
might, fo r instance, let the Texans take 
hold. Governo r Colquitt has just been lookin g into some of their methods and the 
Housto n Chronicle reports: 
"It is impossible to secure an efficient and 
sensible administration of justice where the 
fee system offers a reward for the conviction 
of persons charged wit h crime. It has happened that innocent persons have been 
convicted because a string of fees stretches 
from the moment of arrest until the defendant is punished. 
"Negroes have returned from the cotton 
fields with their hard-earned money only to 
be charged wit h crime and subjected to the 
fee-system drag. There are communities 
i n Texas where a Negr o imperils his liberty 
i f it gets out that he has as much as $50 or 
$100." 
This is the civil service for which Tribble's 
heart yearns. 
Fro m the program of the Phil -
MUSIC
- harmonic Society of New Yor k we 
cli p the followin g concerning Dvorak's symphony, "Fro m the New World" : 
"There has been much discussion as to the 
origin of the themes of this symphony ; some, 
takin g their cue from the composer's wellknown attitude toward Negro folk music, 
asserted that all the thematic material was 
derived from Negro plantation songs; others 
took exactly the opposite view of the matter 
and said that the music was entirely Bo ­
hemian i n character and that none of the 
music remotely resembled either the Negro 
melodies themselves or the Foste r minstrel 
melodies. Mr . Krehbiel, who has made a 
special study of the subject, justl y remarks: 
'A s a matter of fact, that which is most 
characteristic, most beautiful and most vita l 
i n our folk song has come from the Negro 
slaves of the South, partl y because those 
slaves lived i n the period of emotional, 
intellectual and social development which produces folk songs, partly because they lived 
a lif e that prompted utterance i n song, and 
partl y because as a race the Negroes are 
musical by nature. Bein g musical and livin g 
a lif e that had i n it romanti c elements of 
pleasure as well as suffering, they give expression to those elements i n songs, which reflect 
their origina l nature as modified by their 
America n environment. Dr. Dvorak , to whom 
music is a language, was able quickl y to discern the characteristics of the new idiom 
and to recognize its availability and value. 
H e recognized, too, what his critics forgot, 
that that music is entitled to be called 
characteristic of a people which gives the 
greatest pleasure to the largest fraction of 
a people. It was therefore a matter of in ­
difference to him whether the melodies which 
make the successful appeal were cause or 
effect; i n either case they were worthy of 
his attention.' " 
TH E LAT E 
The Columbia State has this 
interesting psychological study 
DR. CRUM . in the shape of an editorial on 
the late collector of the port of Charleston: 
"W . D . Crum, lately minister of the Unite d 
States i n Liberi a and sometime collector of 
the port of Charleston, was a Negro of uncommon character. President Roosevelt appointed him collector against the protest of 
the white people of Charleston, an act for 
which there was no excuse, and i n the doing 178 TH E CRISIS 
of which the President was held by the 
principa l spokesmen of the city to have 
broken fait h wit h them. Strenuous efforts 
were made to prevent Crum's confirmation, 
but they failed, and one of the reasons was 
that Crum's reputation as a man of good 
deportment was unimpeachable. N o charges 
of any weight could be brought against him. 
"I n the conduct of the office of collector, 
Dr . Cru m exhibited remarkable discretion, 
tact and common sense. Fo r example, when 
a foreign warship was i n port and it was the 
duty of its commander or other officer to call 
at the custom house, the collector was usually 
absent, leaving a white deputy to represent 
him. W e have heard various incidents related illustrating his good sense and delicacy, 
and it is certain that while he was collector 
he was careful to avoid anything that would 
cause embarrassment to white people. B y 
profession he was a physician and had a considerable practice among the people of his 
race. 
"Hi s acceptance of the office of collector 
was, of course, of no benefit to his race, as it 
aroused race prejudice. Ha d he declined it 
when the white people raised their protest, 
the declination woul d have brought him distinction and would have been a higher testimonia l to the capacity of a Negro to solve a 
delicate situation than any sort of conduct of 
the office could have been, but it is only just 
to say that i n the office he bore himself i n a 
manner that commended him highly to the 
community, however objectionable to it was 
the occupancy of the office by a Negro. " 
W e append three quotations 
TH E NEGRO withou t comment. First an 
AT WORK. editorial from the New Yor k 
Evening Post: 
"One of the strange inconsistencies i n 
the South's treatment of the Negro is revealed 
by the appearance before Governor Brown , 
of Georgia, of white men to protest against 
the drivin g of the Negroes out of six counties 
i n that State. It seems that there is a sort of 
K u Klu x at work, posting notices at night 
which war n all the colored people to leave or 
suffer terrible punishments. A s a result many 
of them are going, and one of the men who 
called on the governor—but dared not give 
his name—thus described the terrible consequences of the flight: 'I f something is not 
done to check this exodus * * * our wives and 
daughters wil l soon be put to the necessity of 
doing the cooking, washing and performin g 
other menia l labor. In addition, the farmers 
wil l suffer greatly, fo r they wil l be deprived 
of field hands.' No t one word, of course, 
about the victims of the outrage, of their loss 
and suffering i n havin g to abandon homes 
and propert y and flee fo r safety. The sole 
consideration of importanc e is that the wives 
and daughters of prosperous whites may be 
without servants and the farmers without 
farm hands. Now, we all know that the Negro 
is the worst possible servant and farm-hand, 
that he is the curse of the South because of 
his crimina l nature and general worthlessness. 
Ought he, then, not to be driven out at 
once, i n order that Georgi a ma y surely be a 
white man's country and the way be cleared 
for foreign immigration ? Again , we are 
always told that the South woul d know 
exactly how to settle the Negro problem if 
it were only let alone. Bu t here it is in two 
hostile camps, one saying that the Negr o must 
go and the other that he must stay. An d 
Governor Brow n actually suggests as a 
remedy a law forbiddin g Georgians to terrify 
into leaving their homes people whose color • 
or methods of living they do not like. " 
To this we add a clippin g from the Charlotte Observer: 
"Just what a colored man can do on 
the farm i f he is diligent and painstaking 
was strikingl y attested yesterday when Sam 
Powell, one of the most" highl y respected 
colored citizens of Pa w Creek, sold on the 
Charlotte market thirteen bales of cotton for 
which he received a check fo r $1,086. H e 
likewise disposed of 400 bushels of seed 
fo r $1.50 a bushel, or $600. Eigh t bales 
brought 18 cents a poun d an d five bales 
17 cents. The cotton was that of the Lewis 
long staple variety, the staple approximatin g 
one and three-eighth inches i n length. These 
thirteen bales were grown on a field of 
thirteen acres, Powel l averaging a bale to 
the acre on this tract. Hi s sale yesterday 
aggregated $1,686, or an average of $130 
to the acre. 
"Powel l is one of the leading colored 
farmers of the county. H e is well read, 
subscribes to several papers, includin g the 
Daily Observer, and is a great believer i n 
intensive farming . His success in other lines 
of agricultur e i n addition to cotton growin g 
has been i n keepin g wit h his success there. 
Powell raises his own supplie s at home and 
sells enough every yea r to more than pa y for 
his expenses. Seed selection, careful tillage OPINIO N 179 
of the soil and a diligent attention to the 
growin g crop are among his strong points. " 
The last clippin g is from a letter i n the 
Charleston Post. The write r is complainin g 
of the Negr o tenant i n South Carolin a and 
says: 
"No w on the adjacent mainland things 
are i n somewhat better shape. New men came 
i n and grasped the situation; they moved the 
Negro bodily out—that is, they took away 
all the plantin g land, selling him just a 
piece of non-arable land to build a house on, 
made him a fixture thereby, and eliminated 
him as a competitor altogether. The consequence is that the Negro has accepted the 
situation, gets his money every Saturday 
night, is better clothed and better fed than 
his sea island neighbor, just across the 
river, who goes into the farce of farming, of 
which he has no scientific knowledge, makes 
way with half he makes, that is under lien 
to some factor, and erstwhile listens to the 
agitators of his race, who advise him 'Noffer 
wuk fer Buckra. ' 
"Th e question comes i n then: Wh y do you 
all not do the same on the island as the white 
men on the mainland did? 
"N o doubt this action woul d help greatly, 
but it woul d be harder to accomplish here, 
as so much lan d is owned by them, or by 
aliens, who have not the interest of the 
community at heart. 
"Therefore to brin g about the needed 
change: 
"The factor must cease to advance the 
Negro. 
"Th e white man of the country must deprive him of plantin g land, as much for 
the Negro's good as fo r his own. " 
"Afte r a • good deal of 
FROM TH E effor t w e ar e gradually getting 
COLORED PRESS. to the point where 
the most dignified and responsible publica ­
tions i n the Unite d States are beginning to 
capitalize the wor d 'Negro ' just the same as 
they do the words 'Jew' and 'Irish. ' Both 
the Outlook and the Century Magazine have 
recently decided hereafter to spell the word 
'Negro ' wit h a capita l 'N. ' This we think is 
a distinct victory. W e hope that publica ­
tions like the Independent and the New Yor k 
Evening Post wil l soon follow the Outlook 
and Century."—New Yor k Age. 
"Th e optimisti c Negr o boasts continually 
of seeing the bright side of the picture of 
life . I f a Negr o is burned alive i n the 
South, 'Oh , well,' he says, 'such outrages will 
only urge the Negro to make more rapi d 
progress.' This optimistic fellow makes no 
estimate of (ho extent to which such brutality 
wil l depress and discourage the Negro. H e 
agrees with Booke r Washingto n that slavery 
was a blessing. So is hell a blessing. So 
is the devil a blessing. But, nevertheless, we 
ask for none of it for ourselves. Yo u are 
called a pessimist i f yo u predict that a house 
that is all aflame wil l burn down. The 
optimist leans altogether on God . H e expects 
Go d to build his houses, chop his wood and 
fr y his steak. Go d helps those who help 
themselves, and no man can reasonably 
expect assistance i n doing a wor k when he 
himself is endowed with the capacity necessary to do that work himself. 'Hop e deferred 
maketh the heart sick,' but hope deferred and 
crushed a thousand times, instead of makin g 
the heart sick awakens i n some new hopes 
looking toward impossible realization. It is 
this elastic, redundant and overboiling human 
nature that too easily contents the Negro 
and barely sustains the dog-trot pace of our 
existence. W e must learn to cry out, to 
make complaints, like the revolutionary 
fathers did, to send in our remonstrance to 
the throne—the throne of our human government as well as the throne of Grace. 'Hereditary bondmen, know ye not who would be 
free himself must strike the blow? ' 
"Yo u must demand you r rights. Yo u 
must strike for your rights. Yo u must insist 
or yo u wil l be stripped and rendered powerless."—St. Louis Advance. 
" 'Jim. Crow' laws are for the purpose of 
herding Negroes together in any and every 
public place and conveyance; and i n certain 
residential localities. 
"Bu t here is a thing which seems so weak 
and childish i n the Negro i n all segregated 
localities: H e is compelled by law to live 
within certain restricted limits; but when 
yo u pass through these 'Ji m Crow' sections 
inhabited by Negroes, i n any Southern town 
or city, you wil l find upon nearly every 
corner a white man or a white woman keepin g some sort of store, or scattered thickly 
throughout the entire Negro residential 
section. 
"Wh y do we continue to support these 
white stores i n these segregated districts? 
Since we are forced by law, whether legal or 
illegal, to live herded together, why do we still 
enrich the very folks who pen us u p like 
cattle i n a pen?"—St. Luke's Herald. EDITORIA L 
INTERMARRIAGE . 
FEW groups of people are 
forced by their situation 
into such cruel dilemmas as America n Negroes. Nevertheless they 
must not allow anger or 
personal resentment to dim their clear 
vision. 
Take, for instance, the question of the 
intermarrying of white and black folk; 
it is a question that colored people seldom discuss. It is about the last of the 
social problems over which they are disturbed, because they so seldom face it 
i n fact or i n theory. Their problems are 
problems of work and wages, of the right 
to vote, of the right to travel decently, 
of the right to frequent places of public amusement, of the right to public 
security. 
Whit e people, on the other hand, for 
the most part profess to see but one problem : ' ' Do yo u want your sister to 
marry a Nigger? " Sometimes we are 
led to wonder if they are lyin g about 
their solicitude on this point; and if 
they are not, we are led to ask wh y 
under present laws anybody should be 
compelled to marr y any person whom 
she does not wish to marry ? 
This brings us to the crucia l question: 
so far as the present advisability of 
intermarryin g between white and colored 
people i n the Unite d States is concerned, 
both races are practically i n complete 
agreement. Colored folk marr y colored 
folk and white marr y white, and the 
exceptions are very few. 
Wh y not then stop the exceptions? Fo r 
three reasons: physical, social and 
moral. 
1. Fo r the physical reason that to 
prohibit such intermarriage woul d be 
publicl y to acknowledge that black blood 
is a physica l taint—a thin g that no 
decent, self-respecting black man can be 
asked to admit. 
2. Fo r the social reason that i f two 
full-grown responsible human beings of 
any race and color propose to live together as man and wife, it is only social 
decency not simpl y to allow, but to compel them to marry. Le t those people 
who have yelled themselves purpl e i n 
the face over Jac k Johnson just sit down 
and ask themselves this questio n : 
Granted that Johnson and Miss Cameron 
proposed to live together, was it better 
for them to be legally marrie d or not? 
We know what the answer of the Bourbon South is. W e know that they would 
rather uproot the foundations of decent 
society than to call the consorts of their 
brothers, sons and fathers their legal 
wives. W e infinitely prefer the methods 
of Jack Johnson to those of the brother 
of Governor Man n of Virginia . 
3. The moral reason for opposing 
laws against intermarriage is the greatest 
of all : such laws leave the colored girl 
absolutely helpless before the lust of 
white men. It reduces colored women i n 
the eyes of the law to the position of 
dogs. Lo w as the white girl falls, she 
can compel her seducer to marr y her. If 
it were proposed to take this last defense 
from poor white workin g girls, can you 
not hear the screams of the "whit e 
slave " defenders? Wha t have these 
people to say to laws that propose to 
create i n the Unite d States 5,000,000 
women, the ownership of whose bodies no 
white man is bound to respect? EDITORIA L 181 
Note these arguments, my brothers and 
sisters, an d watch your State legislatures. This winter wil l see a determined 
attempt to insult and degrade us by such 
non-intermarriage laws. W e must kil l 
them, not because we are anxious to 
marr y white men's sisters, but because 
we are determined that white men shall 
let our sisters alone. 
"CUTS " AN D "WRITE-UPS. " 
KINDL Y inform me what 
wil l be your price to publish my cut and a brief 
write-up. " TH E CRISI S 
receives so many requests 
like this that we are 
going to answer all wit h these emphatic 
statements: 
1. The news columns of TH E CRISI S 
are not for sale. 
2. The news columns of no honest, 
reputable periodical are for sale. 
3. N o honest ma n who realizes what 
he is doing wil l ask a reputable periodical to sell him space anywhere except i n 
the plainl y marked advertising section. 
4. The dishonesty of foisting paid 
matter on readers as news lies i n the 
fact that the reader can never know 
whether a person or deed is commended 
because of its real worth or because 
somebody had money enough to pay for 
flattery. 
5. So far as TH E CRISI S is concerned, 
the public may be absolutely certain that 
whenever a person is commended i n our 
columns, the reason therefor is that i n 
the editor's judgment (poor and fallible 
as it may be) the person deserves commendation. I n no single case has any 
article appeared i n TH E CRISI S because 
of any consideration, monetary or otherwise, expressed or implied ; and this will 
continue to be the case as long as TH E 
CRISI S is under the present management. 
6. The publi c is not wholly to be 
blamed for not understanding clearly 
this code of ethics. Periodicals of all 
kinds are continually selling their 
influence and columns for direct or 
indirect bribery; among colored papers 
two widely circulated weeklies are 
openly and notoriously for sale; 
there is no person or project which . 
cannot at any time, for money, buy 
i n their columns prominent mention 
or editorial support. Unde r such circumstances it is natura l that some men 
should assume that all periodicals devoted to the colored race have a simila r 
code of morals. This is not true of TH E 
CRISIS and it is not true of scores of 
other colored papers. W e may be poor 
and struggling, but we have not yet lost 
our self-respect. 
7. There are, of course, many practices that approach the border line of 
debatable action i n the matter of news 
and editorials. Suppose a man wishes 
a hundred copies of the number i n which 
his cut appears? Suppose an advertiser 
is worth mention as a man? Suppose 
that the periodical wil l undoubtedly be 
helped by giving timely notice to some 
man or measure? Her e is dangerous 
borderland, but the narrow way is clear 
and straight. The editor must ask: 
(a) Is the matter news ? 
(6 ) Is the man commendable outside 
all considerations? 
If the answers are "yes, " then the 
article should go in ; i f not it should 
stay out. This is our code of editorial 
ethics. W e commend it to our brother 
editors. W e especially commend it to 
those who pester our souls wit h requests 
like the above. It is a good policy. I n 
the end it pays. 
CONTRIBUTIONS. 
WE want every reader of 
TH E CRISIS to send us 
news of the darker 
races. W e do not want 
social notes, or essays, or 
biographies, or general 
description. W e do want facts, directly 
and simply told, showing: 
1. Wha t colored folk are actually 
doing. 
2. Just what discriminations they 
suffer. 1863—EMANCIPATION—TH E THIR D GENERATION—191 3 184 TH E CRISIS 
If yo u look i n our ' ' Color Line' ' notes 
and "Opinion " yo u wil l see the kin d 
of facts we want. Such facts are difficult to gather. The regular news associations do not publish them, the colored 
papers miss half of them, and despite the fact that we spend over $500 
a year, we do not get as complete 
a picture of colored life i n Americ a as 
we wish. Wil l yo u help us ? Search your 
local papers for notes and editorials; 
note occurrences; let nothing slip. W e 
may not be able to write yo u a letter of 
thanks and we may not always use your 
matter, but we shall appreciate the service just the same. This leads us to say 
a word i n answer to hundreds of 
inquiries: 
Yes, TH E CRISI S wants contributions; 
it wants news notes, it wants articles, it 
wants stories, it wants poems. 
Bu t TH E CRISIS has a standard. News 
notes must be news notes and not thinly 
concealed "puffs. " Article s must be 
written i n the king's Englis h and must 
say something. W e do not want rambling thoughts and opinions; we want 
information—good solid information, 
illustrated by facts and pictures. W e 
write our own editorials. They might 
be improved, we admit. Bu t we insist 
on writin g them. Again , articles must 
be timely. A good Washington woman 
sent us a note for the Januar y CRISIS on 
December 27. On that day the Janu ­
ary CRISIS , printed and bound, was being 
mailed to subscribers. 
Yes, we want stories; but do you know 
what a story is, and can you write one? 
Believe us, it is no easy job. Most 
people who tr y it fail. This is natural. 
Yo u would not start out to make your 
first dress to-day and sell it to Joh n 
Wanamake r to-morrow? No. Well , we 
have reason to know that story writin g 
is more difficult than dressmaking and 
less liable to success. W e are willin g to 
read your first attempts, but be sure and 
send postage for return mailing. 
An d poetry. Honestly, unti l we sat i n 
this chair, we never dreamed that there 
were so many people who imagined they 
could write poetry. Of al l forms 
of writing , poetry is the most subtle and 
difficult. Ye t we receive day after day, 
and month after month, reams of the 
most amazing drive l whic h we are asked 
to publish. W e are getting so that the 
sight of lines of uneven length on a 
written page calls for strong self-control. 
The attempt to writ e poetry, like 
measles, is a disease we all must have ; 
but the attempt to publish such stuff— 
to inflict it on an innocent an d unsuspecting public—that is the unforgivable 
sin. Wherefore send you r poetry i f you 
must, but we shall remain firm, planted 
wit h our back to the wall, and our grim 
visage front forward to defend our 
readers, and at the same time discern the 
occasional—oh, very occasional—gem. 
So, i n fine, we want contributions, but 
we want them good. 
BLESSE D DISCRIMINATION. 
A GOO D friend sends us this 
word : 
A s an optimist of TH E 
CRISIS persuasion, I find 
myself more or less frequently engaged i n arguments on the eternal race 
question. Here is an argument I am often called upon to meet: "Ji m 
Crow " laws make us save money; discrimination makes us appreciate and patronize our 
own; segregation gives our business men a 
chance; separate schools give our girls and 
boys something to work for. Possibly there 
are many doubtful minds who would be benefited by a word from you on this subject 
through the columns of TH E CRISIS. 
There is no doubt that colored people 
travel less than they otherwise would, 
on account of "Ji m Crow " cars, and 
thus have this money to spend otherwise. 
There is no doubt that thousands of 
Negro business enterprises have been 
built up on account of discrimination 
against colored folks i n dru g stores, 
grocery stores, insurance societies and 
daily papers. I n a sense TH E CRISI S is 
capitalized race prejudice.. 
There is not the slightest doubt but 
that separate school systems, by giving 
colored children their own teachers and 
a sense of racia l pride, are enabled to 
keep more colored children i n school and EDITORIA L 185 
take them through longer courses than 
mixed systems. The 100,000 Negroes of 
Baltimor e have 600 pupils i n the 
separate high school; New York , wit h a 
larger colored population, has less than 
200 i n its mixed high schools. 
Therefore discrimination is a veiled 
blessing? It is not, save i n a few exceptional cases. 
Take the "Ji m Crow " car; is the 
money saved or merely diverted? Is it 
diverted to better things than travel or 
to worse? A s a matter of fact separate 
cars and parks and publi c insult have 
driven Negro amusements indoors, and 
the result is tuberculosis and pneumonia ; 
they have deprived colored people of the 
civilization of publi c contact, and that is 
an almost irreparable loss. 
Take our business enterprises; they 
are creditable and promising, but they 
are compelled to set a lower standard of 
efficiency than that recognized i n the 
white business world. Ou r business men 
must grope i n the dark after methods; 
our buyers do not know how to bu y and 
our clerks do not know how to sell; our 
banks do not know how to invest, and 
our insurance societies, wit h few exceptions, do not know what modern insurance means. 
W e al l know this, but whom do we 
blame? W e blame ourselves. W e carp 
and sneer and criticise among ourselves 
at "colored " enterprises and declare 
that we can always tell a "colored " 
store or a "colored " paper by its very 
appearance. This is not fair. It is cruel 
and senseless injustice. Negro enterprises conform to a lower standard not 
because they want to, but because they 
must. Color prejudice prevents us from 
trainin g our children and our men to the 
same standards as those set for the surroundin g white world. 
The colored boy can learn servility, but 
he is not allowed to learn business 
methods; colored men learn how to sweep 
the floor of a bank, but cannot learn the 
A B C of modern investments; the 
colored industria l school does not teach 
modern machine methods, but old and 
outworn handwork or decadent trades 
and medieval conditions. 
The result is that our business men are 
not the travelers of a broad and beaten 
path, but wanderers i n a wilderness. 
Considering their opportunity, their 
fifty banks and tens of thousands of 
business enterprises and hundreds of 
thousands of dollars i n industria l insurance are little short of marvelous. Bu t 
to call the cruel discrimination that has 
misdirected effort, discouraged ability, 
murdered men and sent women to graves 
of sorrow—to call this an advantage is 
to misuse language. The open door of 
opportunity to colored persons, regardless of the accident of color, would have 
given us to-day $10 of invested capital 
where we have $1 ; and ten business men 
trained to the high and exact standard 
of modern efficiency where now we have 
one grim and battered survivor clinging 
to the ragged edge. Thank Go d for the 
dollar and the survivor, but do not thank 
Hi m for the discrimination. Thank the 
devil for that. W e black people today are succeeding not because of discrimination, but i n spite of it. Withou t 
it we would succeed better and faster, 
and they that deny this are either fools 
or hypocrites. 
The same thing is evident i n education. 
Separate school systems give us more 
pupils but poorer schools. The 200 black 
high-school pupils i n New Yor k have the 
best high-school equipment i n the land— 
beautiful buildings, costly laboratories, 
scores of the best teachers, books and 
materials, everything that money and 
efficiency can furnish; the Baltimor e 
high school has to struggle i n a buildin g 
about half large enough for its work, 
wit h too few teachers and those at low 
salaries, and wit h a jealous public that 
grudges every cent the school has and 
wants to tur n the whole machine into a 
factory for making servants for smart 
Baltimore . Al l honor to their teachers 
for the splendid work they do i n spite 
of discrimination, but do not credit discrimination wit h the triumph ; credit 
Mason Hawkins. 186 TH E 
Tur n to our newspapers. They are a 
sad lot, we grant you. Bu t whose is the 
fault? Ho w can they get trained men 
for their work? Ho w can they get 
capita l for their enterprise? Ho w can 
they maintain for themselves and their 
readers a standard even as high as their 
white contemporaries, not to say higher ? 
Their workers are shut out from the 
staffs of white magazines and newspapers ; their readers are deprived of the 
education of social contact and their very 
writers are, through no fault of their 
own, illiterate. There lies on our desk 
this pitifu l letter: 
Dear Editor of the Crisis 
New York. 
It would confure a great favor upon me. if 
the nessacery arrangment can be secured that 
i may constribet to your magazine Some of my 
origanal MS.S. and Poem, as i have joust 
Begain to Rite Short M.S.S i awaiteing you 
Reply 
Your truly. 
Shall we laugh at this or weep ? Wh o 
knows what this man might have done or 
said if the State of Florid a had let him 
learn to read and write ? Shall we thank 
the Go d of Discrimination for planting 
literature i n such soil or shall we hate it 
with perfect hatred ? 
No. Race discrimination is evil. It 
forces those discriminated against to a 
lower standard and then judges them by 
a higher. It demands that we do more 
wit h less opportunity than others do. 
It denies to present workers the accumulated experience of the past and compels 
them at fearful cost to make again the 
mistakes of the past. Out of this cruel 
grillin g may and do come strong characters, but out of it also come- the 
crimina l and the stunted, the bitter and 
the insane. One is just as much the 
fruit of the tree as the other. If i n any 
place and time race hatred is so unreasoning and bitter that separate 
schools, cars and churches are inevitable, we must accept it. make the best of 
it and tur n even its disadvantages to _ 
our advantage. Bu t we must never forget that none of its possible advantages 
CRISI S 
i 
can offset its miserable evils, or replace 
the opportunity, the broad education, the 
free competition and the generous emulation of free men i n a free world . 
A LETTE R TO A SOUTHER N WOMAN . 
(Who asked that her remarks on the Negro 
question be regarded as confidential.) 
MY DEA R MRS . X. : 
Of course I understood 
that all yo u said last 
week was said wit h the 
sense of security that 
comes from privac y and 
confidence; and, of course, I have 
respected this confidence, although I 
could not resist telling a few friends, i n 
a general way, that I was much encouraged by the libera l outlook of many 
people whom I met while I was visiting 
the South. Bu t I am really disappointed 
that I cannot say more. Is this not the 
South's most intimate tragedy—that its 
Bleases and Vardaman s are permitted to 
utter their thoughts freely, while those 
who really represent the best thought of 
the South are forced to be silent ? Ho w 
is the worl d to know that every one of 
you is not a Blease at heart, when your 
noblest hopes and thoughts never find a 
voice ? I know that the Abolitionists are 
anathema south of Maso n and Dixon's 
line, but I wish that there were men like 
them there, who would dare to marshal 
the conscience of their fellows i n utter 
disregard of their own careers and fortunes. A few fanatics, a few madmen 
"o n the side of the angels, " might give 
freedom to your twenty-five million 
people, and overshadow those fanatics 
who brin g to yo u 
"N o light, but rather darkness 
visible.' ' 
I know yo u wil l understand the spirit 
i n which I writ e these things. It is the 
thought of your own work, and that of 
you r husband, that gives me the courage 
to say these things to you. 
Sincerely yours, 
J . E . SPINGARN . 
New York . Januar y 2. 1913. TH E REPRESENTATIV E 
A STORY—By VIRGIL COOKE 
JOHN R . TRAVI S was very 
much disturbed when his 
office boy informed him 
that Mr . Jones, the junio r 
partner, was about to leave 
fo r the Charlto n Clu b to 
pla y a game of golf. 
"Golf! " he thundered; "that is all he thinks 
about here o f late, it's golf, golf, golf! Send 
him to me and tell him it is something 
of immediate importance. " 
"Yes, sir, " answered the boy as he hurried 
away upon his errand. 
Mr . Jones, when informed that he was 
wanted, made no effort to conceal his displeasure. H e walked into the private office 
of his partner wit h a "'Well, what is it? " 
Travis pulled a chair. "Si t down a minute. 
I want to discuss that Brazilia n proposition 
with you. " 
"S o you still have that i n mind? " 
"Yes. " 
"Bette r forget it, " laughed the other. 
"Isn't there enough business nearer home we 
can get? South Americans have very few 
business relations wit h this country. " 
" I know that, but wh y don't we Americans 
come i n fo r a share of the South America n 
commerce and business? Englan d and 
German y are all doing enormous business 
with Brazil , whil e we are idl y lookin g on. 
This is our dull time here. Wh y not make a 
few thousand off the dagoes?" 
Jones smiled. "Yo u remember, of course, 
that we tried once; yo u made a special tri p 
to Ri o de Janeiro to put that deal through? " 
"That's just it " 
"Bu t yo u didn't succeed, and yo u didn't 
seem talkative on just wh y yo u failed. That 
long tri p should have brought results; it 
cost enough. " 
"Jones, " began Travis, " a few foolish remarks I made is the cause of our losing 
several thousand dollars. Whil e i n Ri o de 
Janeiro I stopped at the Avenida . There I 
made the acquaintance of an Englishman , 
who was a very affable and agreeable man. 
One night he and I were i n the cafe eating 
supper and tellin g of the various places we 
had visited when i n walked a Negro, who 
seated himself not fa r from our table. I 
touched my companion on the arm. 'D o they 
allow that at this hotel?' I asked him. 
'What? ' he answered as he followed my 
gaze. 'Loo k at that black man,' I said to 
him. H e looked puzzled, but I informed him 
that his presence was disgusting to me. 
'This is South America, ' said the Englishman . 
'I know that,' I answered him, 'but I could 
kick that Negro out of my sight,' and I 
didn't speak low either." 
Jones pulled out his watch. "Really , can't 
we finish this some other time? " 
His partner flushed with annoyance. 
"This is business, yo u understand." 
"Well , what next? " 
"The following day after my supper with 
the Englishma n I had an appointment with 
one Senor L . Mario , chief of construction 
for the Brazilia n Centra l Railroad . I arrived 
at his office and there before me was the 
Negro I had seen i n the cafe at the hotel. 
'Is this Senor Mario? ' I asked him, somewhat 
surprised. H e informed me that it was and 
also that he had decided not to sign the contract for the buildin g of those bridges." 
"Perhaps the Englishma n wanted the contract himself and had peached," suggested 
Jones. V 
"No , that wasn't it, John ; the English ­
man turned out to be the general superintendent of the Brazilia n Central. Well , I 
failed ; but I have hit on a new plan. I've 
learned of a young Negro engineer who's 
sailing for Brazi l to-day to tr y for a job 
under Mario . M y pla n is to offer him a good 
percentage i f he'll represent us and lan d that 
job. He's black and he'll know how to joll y 
Mario. " 
"What—a Negro to represent us i n Rio? " 
"Wh y not? Wha t difference, i f he delivers the goods? Besides, we won't, of 
course, pay him as much as we would a white 
man. Wha t do you say? The contract wil l 
clear us at least $25,000 at any reasonable 
figure." 
"Oh , go ahead i f you want to, but deal 
with the darkey yourself, please; good-day, 
I'm off." 
A month passed. 
"Hear d from your South America n deal? " 
asked Jones one day suddenly as he spied 
a cablegram. 
"Yes, " grunted Travis, and tossed him the 
yellow paper. 
It read : 
"Lost the contract, but got a job. Mari o 
sends regards." 
Jones chuckled. 
"Senor Mari o has a good memory, " he said. ABOLITIO N and FIFT Y YEAR S AFTE R 
By STEPHEN S. WISE, Rabbi of the Free Synagogue, New York 
IF 1863 and emancipation 
were not wort h while, 
neither was 1776 nor its 
Declaration of Independence, nor yet Magn a 
Charta . W e are ready to 
consider the questio n 
whether emancipation was wort h while, because we have not taken wholl y to heart the 
response of Emerson to the statesman who 
called the Declaration of Independence a 
mass of glittering generalities—the response 
—not a glittering generality but a blazingubiquity. Emancipatio n could have come i n 
no other way. One must needs sorrow for 
those who seek to detract from the fame of 
the Abilitionists led by Willia m Lloy d Garrison ; one pities their detractors. Emancipa ­
tion was needed i n order to redeem the 
promise of the Republic , even though the 
latter was veiled by the expediency, which 
dictated the framin g of the Constitution. 
The America n democracy and Negro slavery 
could not permanently co-exist. Ou r nation 
cannot forever exist i f the white race be 
half enslaved by its prejudices and partisanships and the Negro race only half freed 
from its yoke. 
To the unjustly scorning critics of the 
Abilitionists be it said that Garriso n was a 
no less noble figure than Robert Goul d Shaw 
himself. Me n rightl y see noblest heroism i n 
the deeds of the soldiers of the Civi l War , 
and wrongl y ignore the noble courage of 
those intrepi d souls who fought the wa r for 
freedom durin g thirt y long, terrible years 
before Gettysburg. Colone l Shaw went forth 
to battle and immortalit y ami d the plaudits 
of Boston and the reverence of a nation, but 
Garriso n fared forth unto his thirty years of 
resistless, witha l weaponless, warfar e ami d 
the execrations of the mobs of his day. The 
speaker of the Harvar d commemoration 
address of 1865 said of the men of Harvar d 
and their kind , who had given their lives 
that the nation might live : "W e shall not 
disparage Americ a now that we have seen 
what men it wil l bear." This wor d might 
have been as trul y spoken of the men whose 
mora l might and spiritua l genius had made 
emancipation possible, whose voice Abra ­
ham Lincol n was when he proclaimed 
emancipation. 
Hav e we really emancipated the Negr o or 
merely abolished slavery? It is one thing 
to help a race to throw off its shackles and 
another thin g to emancipate it unto perfect 
freedom. W e have no more trie d emancipa ­
tion as yet than Christians have ever tried 
Christianity , or Jews experimented i n the 
art of livin g b y Judaism. Wh o wil l essay 
to judge the wisdom of emancipation after 
the brie f term of fifty years ? Moreover, i n 
the despite of denying to the black race more 
than a tithe of the educational opportunit y 
which is the dail y portio n of the white race, 
we yet presume to judge it, a newly emerged 
people, by the most rigorous of white men's 
standards, forgetting, as a gifted teacher o f 
his own race has said, that the Negr o began 
at the zero point wit h nothin g to his credit 
but the crude physica l discipline of slavery. 
The Negr o has proved that he has fitness 
and capacity fo r education. I n truth, he has 
shown a veritable passion fo r education, as 
is witnessed by the extraordinar y decrease 
i n Negr o illiterac y withi n half a century. 
Education , moreover, has not demoralized the 
Negro. Happil y fo r himself, the Negr o has 
refuted the calumny that education is 
dangerous, invented apparentl y i n order 
permanently to disable him on his upwar d 
march. Curiousl y the Nort h blundered i n 
fearing that education woul d for the first 
time i n the history <3f huma n strivin g unfit a 
race fo r life . Again , the States have not 
fairl y and adequately provide d educational 
opportunitie s for the Negro . The education 
which has moralized the Negr o has unfitted 
him solely for a lif e of servitude. I f it be 
sought to keep a race i n permanent subjection, every educational opportunit y must be 
sedulously withheld from it. I f the Southern 
States cannot afford to give to the cause of 
Negr o education more than one-third or onequarter of the amount needed fo r this work, 
i n order that the race ma y be led by teachers 
who are competent, educated and decently 
remunerated, and that the educational 
opportunitie s of the race be complete and 
diversified an d serviceable, then it remains 
the business of the nation to step i n and 
assume a portio n of the burden which is 
explicabl y too heavy fo r the South to bear. 
Amon g the influences whic h have operated 
as against the rise of the Negro , and to make 
emancipation a thin g of name rather than of 
fact, has been the rise i n our own generation of the spirit of race consciousness, or 
rather of race consciousnesses, together with ABOLITIO N AN D FIFT Y YEAR S AFTE R 189 
the inevitable stress upon superiority and 
inferiorit y whic h race consciousness entails. 
I n addition to a veritable madness of race 
boasting and race pride touching' the socalled meaner breeds, we have witnessed the 
rise of an almost morbi d nationalism demanding , among other things, Germany fo r the 
Germans, Russi a fo r the Slavs and Americ a 
fo r the white race. This race apotheosis and 
national self-aggrandizement might have been ' 
successfully combatted i f Garriso n and 
Phillip s had survived to do battle i n the name 
of the internationalism which i n these days 
is considered an obsolete sentimentality. 
The men of the Nort h have no right to 
cast reproaches at the South touching its 
attitude to the Negro, even at its worst, seein g that the Nort h has done no more fo r the 
Negro, and is doing no more, than to ignore 
him as though he were not, when it is not 
actually doing him injur y and harm. The 
Nort h has ceased to be ready to make sacrifices on behalf of humanitarian convictions, 
primaril y because it has no convictions of its 
own. I n the interest of fancied industria l 
relations and imaginar y politica l peace, the 
Nort h tolerates intolerable courses when it 
does not actually share i n them. A s long 
as the men and women of the Nort h suffer 
the Negr o race to live i n utter isolation i n 
our city and cities, to feel themselves shut 
out an d despised, so lon g do we forfeit the 
right to deal wit h the injustices of the South 
to the Negr o race. 
The outstanding fact i n the field of relationship between the two races is the weakness, though not want of courage, of the few 
who recognize the wron g and the inhospitality o f the multitude touching any protest 
against wrong, i f wron g be done merely (!) 
to the Negro. W e seem to have become tepid 
and indifferent touching the direst wron g i f 
it be only the Negr o who is its victim. W e 
forget that the stronger race is more susceptible to mora l damage than the weaker race. 
I f the mora l fibre of partiall y strong races 
be enfeebled, mora l havoc is likel y to result. 
Moreover, a politica l menace is involved, a 
menace to those members of the white race 
primaril y i n the South, but ultimately i n the 
Nort h as well, who are nearest to the Negro 
race i n outward or economic circumstance. 
The rights of the poor white have already 
been assailed i n the South i n order i n part 
to justif y Negr o proscription, and because of 
the ever growin g desire of the strong to 
limit the powers of the weak. A nation may 
begin by assailing the rights of the fewest 
and weakest, but it wil l not end until it holds 
lightly the rights of all save the fewest and 
strongest. 
W e may deny justice to the Negro, we 
may withhold from him elementary politica l 
rights, we may scourge and stripe him, we 
may hang and burn him, but i n the end the 
white race wil l suffer most. N o race can 
violate the mora l law with impunity ; no race 
can fo r years and generations pursue courses 
that are unjust without mutilating its own 
mora l nature and sinkin g to a lowered level 
of life . The Negro victim of the Coatesville mob was fiendishly wronged, but the 
white community of Coatesville is most 
deeply and abidingly injured, for it is hurt 
i n the very fundamentals of its life . 
Earnestly ought we appea l to-day to the 
Negro race to keep their problems out of the 
whirl of politics. The Negro must not suffer 
the fortunes of his race to be embroiled i n 
partisan strife. The Democratic part y has 
always been ready to treat the politica l disabilities of the Negro as a vote-getting 
opportunity, and the Republica n part y no 
less willin g to utilize him as an always 
dependable asset. The thir d party may mean 
to be just to the Negro, but is it just to treat 
him well i n the Norther n States, where such 
treatment wil l be unobjectionable, and to 
treat him ill , virtuall y to disable him, i n the 
Southern States, where such Negro disablement wil l be most acceptable to the citizenship, remembering that i n the South, where it 
is proposed to leave his present status of 
disabilities unremedied, there are to be found 
the Negroes who are the true leaders of their 
race? It is unworthy on the part of the 
great politica l parties to treat the fortunes 
of a race of ten millions and more as a pawn 
upo n the chessboard of politica l advantage. 
Emancipatio n came as a wa r measure, and 
rightl y so—a measure of wa r upon slavery. 
Pit y di d not free the Negro, but wa r did. 
Pit y and charity wil l not solve the Negro 
problem of to-day. It is upon the higher 
grounds of justice and democracy that the 
question must be met. W e face to-day, as a 
nation, not a Negro question, but the Ameri ­
can question.. It is and always has been the 
test and touchstone of America n life , testing 
the very foundations of the Republic . I f we 
fail here we fai l everywhere. The question 
is not one of racia l equality, but o f social 
justice, of true democracy, o f genuine 
Americanism. NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N 
FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORED PEOPLE 
MEMBERSHIP. 
WE have at last passed the "1,000 memv
 * bers" mark. The record now is 1,092 
members, which constitutes us the largest 
association of the sort which colored people 
ever had. 
MEETINGS . 
IN the South Dr . Maso n addressed meetings i n the interest of the association at 
Bennettsville, Florenc e and Charleston, S. C. 
I n Atlant a he spoke at Morris Brown , 
Clark e and Gammon Colleges. The next 
night he made an address i n Birmingham, 
and on Januar y 10 spoke before the Uppe r 
Mississipp i Conference at Durant. Dr. 
Spingar n spoke at Atlant a Baptist College 
and at Atlant a University . Dr. D u Bois 
addressed the Association of Cosmopolitan 
Clubs at their annua l conference in Phila ­
delphi a and the colored State teachers of 
Baltimore . I n the First Congregational 
Churc h at Natick , Mass., he spoke on the 
races congress and general problems. 
I n Boston, between December 29 and 
Januar y 5, four meetings were held i n the 
interest of the association. The chairman of 
the board of directors, Mr . Villard , succeeded 
i n interesting a large number of people i n 
the wor k of the association by his stirrin g 
address i n Zio n Churc h on December 29. 
Mr . Charles Edwar d Russell addressed 
enthusiastic audiences i n Kansa s City . Miss 
Gruening, the assistant secretary, addressed 
the colored branch of the Y . M . C. A . i n 
New Yor k City , the ladies' auxiliar y at 
Bet h Elohi m Synagogue, Brooklyn , and on 
•January 5 took charge of the meeting of the 
B . Y . P . U . at the Moun t Olivet Baptist 
Churc h i n Ne w Yor k City , where Miss Oving -
ton and Mr . Morto n spoke. 
On Januar y 12 there was a mass meeting 
of the Nationa l Association at Young's Casino 
i n Harlem. Bisho p Alexande r Walters presided. The speakers were : Mr . Willia m 
Pickens, professor in Talladega College, 
Alabama ; Mrs. A . W . Hunton , social worke r 
fo r the Y . W . C. A. ; Mr . W . E . B. . D u Bois 
and Mr . Joe l Spingarn , president of the Ne w 
Yor k branch. Hon . Charles Whitma n was 
unable to be present, but his written address 
was read by Dr . A . C. Powel. Nearl y 2,000 
persons were present. Musica l selections 
were rendered by the Walke r Femal e Quartet 
and Mme . Lul a Robinso n Jones. 
Emancipatio n celebrations have been noted 
elsewhere i n this issue. O n Februar y 12, 
Lincoln's Birthday , the followin g branches 
wil l hold anniversary meetings: Chicago, 
Tacoma , Kansa s City , Washingto n and 
Boston. I n Ne w Yor k the anniversary meetin g wil l be held at Coope r Union , Februar y 
10. 
ANNUA L MEETING . 
THE annua l meeting of the association 
was held in the Evenin g Post Build ­
in g on Januar y 21. There were a number of 
addresses and detailed reports by officers and 
committees, and by guests who were present. 
The guest of honor was H . O. Tanner, the 
artist. There was an- exhibition of the work 
of Mr . Harr y Roseland, the artist, who has 
achieved notable success i n portrayin g 
Negro life. 
BRANCHES . 
THE Quinc y branch, one of the youngest 
affiliating wit h the nationa l organization, reports an enthusiastic meeting i n one 
of their largest churches. Mr . Charles 
Edwar d Russell represented the Nationa l 
Association. Other speakers were Honorabl e 
George Wilson , of the State legislature, and 
several ministers. 
The Detroit branch reports that since join ­
in g the Nationa l Association , May , 1912, 
their organization has rapidl y grown i n membership and influence, and is now i n the 
midst of a vigorous campaign defendin g the civi l rights of colored people 
i n that vicinity . A s a result several TH E N . A. A. C. P. 191 
the most prominent 
large restaurants and theatres have ceased 
to discriminate against colored people. The 
branch has been greatly assisted by a clear 
and definite State law prohibiting such discrimination and by Mr . Shepherd, the militant prosecuting attorney. The branch has 
been most fortunate i n having the cooperation of some of 
colored men. Re ­
cently the Rev. Mr . 
Bagnal l and Dr . 
Albert Johnson led 
i n the prosecution of 
a restaurant keeper 
for refusing to serve 
colored people. They 
won the suit and 
although it has been 
appealed they are 
confident of u 1t i -
mate victory. 
This month two 
new branches were 
admitted to membership : Kansa s Cit y 
and Tacoma , Wash . 
No t lon g sinc e 
Chicag o was our 
most western outpost ; then cam e 
Indianapolis, n o w 
Kansa s City , and 
wit h Tacom a we 
reach the Western 
coast. 
NATIONA L 
ORGANIZER. 
WIT H the be-
' ' ginnin g of 
the new year the 
association has been 
DR . M . C. B . MASON . 
National Organize r and Corresponding Secretary. 
so fortunate as to engage the services of 
Dr . M . C . B . Mason , 
the well-know n 
clergyman and lecturer, as nationa l 
organizer . Dr . 
Mason , who needs no introduction to the 
readers of TH E CRISIS, was ordained i n 1883, 
and has held pastorates i n New Orleans and 
Atlanta . Since 1891 he has been connected 
wit h the Freedmen's Ai d and Southern Edu ­
cation Boar d of the Methodist Episcopa l 
Church , having been corresponding secretary 
for the last seventeen years. H e was 
the first colored man ever elected by the 
Methodist Episcopa l Church to such a 
position. g<| 
UNIVERSITY COMMISSION ON 
SOUTHER N RAC E QUESTIONS. 
DR. SPINGARN , as representative of the 
Nationa l Association, attended the 
Universit y Commission on Southern Race 
Question s which 
met at the Uni ­
versity of Georgi a on 
December 18 and 19), 
wit h Professo r 
Brough , of the Uni ­
versity of Arkansas, 
as chairma n and 
Professor Hurley , of 
the Universit y of 
Virginia , as secretary. This commission is an organization consisting of one 
representative from 
each of the eleven 
Southern State universities. The commission mapped out 
its work for the succeeding yea r an d 
decided to hold its 
next meeting at Rich ­
mond, Va. , on De -
cember 18, 1913. In 
the meanwhile it s 
various committees 
wil l undertak e a 
series of investigations i n regard to 
the Negro i n the 
South and his relations with his white 
neighbors. Dr. J . H . 
Dillard , agent of the 
Jeanes Fund , was, 
wit h Dr . Spingarn , 
admitted by special 
vote to the sessions of 
the commission. 
FLYIN G SQUADRON. 
"I N BUTTERFL Y LAND, " a dramatic 
•*• fantasie, was charmingly staged by the 
Flyin g Squadron i n New York , Januar y 3. 
The proceeds, i n the form of a substantial 
purse, were presented to the Nationa l Association. The entertainment was the origina l 
production of the members of the Flyin g 192 TH E CRISIS 
Squadron. The talented president, Mrs. Dor a 
Cole Norman , wrote the lyric s and wit h her 
sister, Miss Carriebe l Cole, taught the origina l 
dances whic h formed an attractive feature of 
the program. The music was directed by 
Miss Hele n Elis e Smith. The words of the 
charming selection, "Littl e Lonesome Child, " 
were written by Miss Louis e Latimer, who 
also designed the costumes. Miss Carriebel 
Cole i n her artistic solo dancing received 
enthusiastic applause from an appreciative 
audience. Miss Madeline Alliso n was delightfull y adapted to the role of "Littl e 
Lonesome." The others who took part were 
the Misses Lotti e Jarvis, Elsi e Benson, Emil y 
Douglas, Paulin e Mars, Lurlin e Saunders, 
Alic e Sousa, Mami e Sousa, Paulin e Turner, 
Vivienn e War d and Bessie Pike . 
COATESVILLE. 
IF the issue of civilization is finally enforced upo n Coatesville and the 
State of Pennsylvania , the credit wil l belong 
to this noble society. I am glad of the 
opportunity to praise them. Wit h inadequate means, lukewarm support, and wit h 
most avenues of publicit y closed to them, 
these people have given themselves to the 
most unpopula r cause i n the world , yet 
one which is obviously fundamental to 
civilization—equality of opportunity for a 
great unprivileged, overborne, unhapp y section of our people. A s long as any are 
victims of inequality, as lon g as any are 
exploited or dispossessed, there can be no 
civilization—an d this means Negro human 
beings as well as white. 
"The Association for the Advancement of 
Colored Peopl e employed Willia m J . Burn s 
to put his operatives into Coatesville. This 
took place i n the summer of 1912. I n September the chairman of the society, Mr . 
Oswald Garriso n Villard , its attorney, Mr . 
Wherry , and the write r of this article, 
accompanied Mr . Burn s to Harrisbur g and 
lai d the results of the investigation before 
Governor Tener." 
I n these words Mr . Albert J. Noc k comments i n the Februar y issue of the American 
Magazine upo n the Nationa l Association for 
the Advancement of Colored Peopl e and the 
wor k done by it in investigating the horribl e 
burnin g of "Zach " Walke r at Coatesville on 
August 12, 1911. This wil l give to the 
publi c and to the members of the association the first definite knowledge that the 
association has been actively concerning 
itself wit h the situation at, Coatesville. Its 
directors decided, after the lynchin g meeting 
held i n Ethica l Cultur e Hal l on Novembe r 
15, 1912, to devote the sums raised at that 
meeting and by an appea l to the membership, 
and also the sum contributed fo r lega l redress 
durin g the year 1912, to an investigation of 
the Coatesville lynchin g wit h a view of 
obtaining informatio n whic h might induce 
the authorities to continue the wor k of prosecuting those guilt y of this inexcusable and 
inhuma n crime. 
First that splendid journalist and warmhearted woman, the late Mar y Dunlo p Mac ­
lean, went to Coatesville an d foun d out more 
i n two days than the State of Pennsylvani a 
had unearthed i n as man y months. Afte r that 
Mr . Willia m J . Burns, the famous detective, was retained by the association, and 
under his instructions two of his men 
opened a restaurant i n Coatesville and bent 
themselves to the task o f finding out the 
whole story. This was much easier than had 
been anticipated, but the detectives stayed 
i n Coatesville fo r some months, after which 
the restaurant was sold. A s a result the 
association has the names of a number of 
participants who were not indicted, but who 
should have been indicted, and a list of witnesses who were not called b y the prosecution when the case was tried, and other 
informatio n of a damaging character against 
a number of citizens of Coatesville, the 
nature of whic h cannot be revealed even at 
this time. The substance of the information 
thus obtained has, however, been communicated to the authorities, notably Governor 
Tener of Pennsylvania , who was waited upon 
on September 19 by the chairman of the 
board of directors, Mr . Oswal d Garrison 
Villard . the counsel for the association, 
Mr . Willia m M . Wherry , Jr. , and Mr . 
Willia m J . Burns, accompanied by the head 
of his Philadelphi a office, an d Mr . Noc k of 
the American Magazine. 
The Governo r was sincere, straightforwar d and anxious to do everything that he 
could to help. H e said frankl y that his 
inabilit y to get convictions at Coatesville was 
one of the "failure s of my administration, " 
and he agreed that there should be a meeting 
wit h the assistant attorney-general, Mr . 
Cunningham, who had charge of the case. 
Mr . Wherr y went direct to Pittsburg h to call 
upon him and found Mr . Cunningham equally TH E N. A. A. C. P. 193 
chagrined that the State had not been able 
to punish the guilty. 
On December 12 Mr . Villar d proceeded to 
Coatesville and spent an evening wit h the 
courageous group of citizens who have cooperated wit h the association and aided it 
i n every wa y and are determined that the 
stain upon the good name of Coatesville 
shall be redeemed by the conviction of someone, i f this is i n any way possible. The 
basis of both these interviews was the 
admirable brie f and summary of the case and 
of the evidence obtained by the Burn s detectives whic h was prepared by Mr . Wherr y 
at very considerable inconvenience and large 
expenditure of time, which he generously 
donated to the association. The association 
feels that this visit to Coatesville and its 
other activities had something to do wit h the 
admirable recommendation by Governor 
Tener, i n his annua l message to the legislature of Pennsylvania , that the charter of 
Coatesville be revoked, since its inhabitants 
have been consorting wit h and shielding 
murderers. Fo r this action Governor Tener 
is again entitled to the gratitude of all lawabiding citizens i n the Unite d States. The 
Coatesville committee proposes, at this 
writing , to get into touch wit h him, and to 
aid it the association has placed at its 
disposal the substance of Mr . Wherry's 
report. Unde r the circumstances there is 
every reason to hope that TH E CRISIS wil l 
shortly be able to report the reopening of the 
prosecutions, i n which the association wil l 
co-operate to the extent of its ability. It 
wil l freely place the information acquired by 
the Burn s detectives i n the hands of the 
State authorities i f this is desired. 
So fa r as the crime itself is concerned, the 
investigation of the association proved that 
no more inexcusable crime ever occurred. 
The social conditions of lawlessness and 
degradation whic h made the crime possible 
are thoroughly covered by Mr . Noc k i n the 
Februar y American. I n addition, it appears 
that there was inefficiency i n the police 
department. Notabl y was this true of officer 
Stanley Howe , who had Walke r i n charge at 
the hospital and was dul y armed and uniformed, but permitted the crowd to take the 
prisoner from him without as much as 
makin g an effort to protect him, the door of 
the hospita l being opened from within . 
Anothe r police officer left town because he 
had helped i n the lynching . Stil l another 
participated, and the head of the police was 
weak i f not inefficient. It appears clearly 
that one reason for the popula r indifference 
to the punishment of the mob murderers is 
that some o f the more important criminals 
and instigators were not put on trial. Those 
whom it was sought to convict first were 
young boys who were probably drawn to 
the scene by curiosity. The chief instigator 
is known, but he has never even been 
indicted. The police officer, Howe , who 
should have been tried, though indicted, was 
not brought before a jury . The failure of 
the prosecution is, however, mainly due to the 
depraved tone of the community of Coatesville and of Chester County as a whole. It 
is easy to point out where the authorities 
made mistakes, but, on the whole, they made 
an earnest and serious effort to convict, with 
the governor doing everything he could to 
urge them on. 
A s already stated, it is the hope of the 
association before very long to report that 
additional prosecutions have been undertaken. The Governor should be all the more 
inclined to do this because it has been openly 
charged i n the publi c prin t by a burgess of 
Coatesville that, although the chief instigator 
has been known, no effort has been made by 
the State to apprehend him—this being said 
i n defense of the Chester County juries. 
M Y DEA R DR . D U BOIS : 
Relatin g to your editorial on Truth , can 
yo u keep before us any more effectively than 
yo u are already doing the Trut h that discrimination against colored Americans is not 
only an evil, but an unnecessary evil ? I find 
so many of my friends are inclined to throw 
up their hands i n despair with the confession 
that they cannot overcome the race prejudices 
of the community. 
W e must keep before them not merely the 
cruelty of their prejudices, but that the 
cruelty is unnecessary and that prejudices 
can be overcome. 
To tell a community already partiall y 
prejudicia l that other communities are more 
prejudiced than they may increase rather 
than decrease the evil, unless you counteract 
the debasing influence of an evil example by 
the inspirin g influence of a noble example. 
Sincerely, 
GEO . G . BRADFORD. THE BURDE N 
COLORED ME N AN D WOME N LYNCHE D 
WITHOUT TRIAL. 
1885 78 1899 84 
1886 71 1900 107 
1887 80 1901 107 
1888 95 1902 86 
1889 95 1903 86 
1890 90 1904 83 
1891 121 1905 61 
1892 155 1906...' 64 
1893 154 1907 60 
1894 134 1908 93 
1895 112 1909 73 
1896 80 1910 65 
1897 122 1911 63 
1898 102 1912 63 
Total 2.584 
LYNCHINGS, 1912. 
Reported i n January—1 . 
Muldrow , Okla.—Man , murder and assault. 
Reported i n February—8 . 
Hamilton , Ga.—Thre e men and a girl , 
murder. 
Cordele, Ga.—Man , rape. 
Bessemer, Ala.—Man , murder. 
Yidalia , Ga.—Man , murder. 
Macon , Ga.—Man . rape and robbery. 
Reported i n March—7 . 
Chattanooga, Tenn.—Three men, murder. 
Marshall , Tex.—Ma n and woman, murder. 
Memphis. Tenn.—Man , rape. 
Starksville , Miss.—Man , assault on a 
woman. 
Reported i n April—12 . 
Fort Smith , Ark.—Man , murder. 
Marianna , Ark.—Thre e men, labor troubles 
and insulting remarks. 
Blackburg , S. C.—Tw o men forcing a man 
to drin k whiskey. 
Olare, S. C.—Thre e men, arson. 
Cochran, Ga.—Man . murder. 
Shreveport, La.—Man , insulting a white 
man. 
Starksville , Miss.—Man , fright at his 
approach. 
Reported i n May—6 . (7? ) 
Shreveport, La.—To m Miles, insulting note 
to a white girl . 
S. Mclntyre , same offense (? ) 
Yello w Pine , La.—Boy , writin g letters to 
ladies. 
Jackson . Ga.—Henr y Ethrage , securing 
immigrants. 
Greenville, Miss.—Man , assaulting a white 
woman . 
.Columbus, Miss.—Georg e Edd , shooting a 
woman. 
Monroe , La.—Man , threatening violence. 
Reported i n June—3 . 
Tyler, Tex.—Da n Davis, rape. 
Valdosta , Ga.—Emanuel , shooting a white 
man. 
Nashville , Tenn.—J. Samuels, assault on a 
white woman. 
Reported i n July—3 . 
Pinehurst. Ga.— A woman, murder. 
Rochelle. Ga.—McHenry , murder. 
Lueesdale. Miss.—Forest Bolin , testifying 
against liquor sellers. 
Reported i n August—1 . (5? ) 
Pau l Station, Ala.— A man, murder. 
Second man, same place (? ) 
Clarksville . Tex.—Leonar d Pots, murder. 
Plummerville . Ark.—Joh n Williams, murder. 
Columbus, Ga.—T . Z. Cotton, 16 years old, 
manslaughter. 
Reported i n September—5. 
Russellville , Ark.—Monro e Franklin , 
assault on a woman. 
Cummings, Ga.—Ed . Collins, accessory to 
assaulting woman . 
Greenville, S. C.—Brook s Gordon,, assaultin g woman. 
Humboldt . Tenn.—Wil l Cook, refusing to 
dance. 
Princeton, W . Ya.—Walte r Johnson, attacking a white girl . 
Reported i n October.—5 
Bakersfield, Cal.—Unknown , attacking a 
child. 
Cullings, Ga.—Bo b Edwards, complicity in 
attacking child . TH E BURDE N 195 
Americus, Ga.—Yarborough , attacking a 
girl . 
Rawlins, Wyo.—Wigfall , assaulting a 
_ woman. 
Shreveport, La.—Sa m Johnson, murder. 
Reported i n November—1. 
Birmingham, Ala.—Wil l Smith, murder. 
Reported i n December—8. (11?) 
Norway , S. C.—Joh n Feldon , obtaining 
goods under false pretenses. 
Preston Ark.—A . Dempsey, assaulting 
woman. 
Jackson, Miss.—Jo e Beamon, resisting 
arrest-. 
Port Allen , La.—N . Cadore, murder. 
McRae , Ga.—Sidne y Williams, murder. 
Tutwiller, Miss.—Man . insultin g language. 
Littl e Briton , S. C.— Man , resisting arrest. 
Butler, Ala.—A . Curtis, murder. 
Butler, Ala.—Thre e Negroes, murder (? ) 
Tota l 63, possibly 68. 
Fo r alleged attacks on women, 17. 
m 
TH E MANUFACTUR E OF PREJUDICE. 
WOMA N CLUBBED 
AN D LEF T T O DIE; 
POSSE SEEKS NEGRO 
—Ne w Yor k Herald, December 4. 
TRENTON WOMA N 
ASSAULTE D BY A 
NEGRO IN FIELD 
—Camde n (N . J.) Courier, December 4. 
FIRST ARREST 
. IN TRENTON MA N 
CHASE MAD E 
Posse Capture Negro, Who, It Is 
Believed, Is the Assailant of Miss 
Luela Marshall—Lynching NarrowlyAverted—Bloodhounds Led the Trail 
—Jersey Cit y (N . J.) Journal, December 5. 
A BETTE R DETECTIV E SYSTE M NEEDED . 
"Th e shocking crime of a Negro in the 
outskirts of Trenton this week, of which a 
young woman was the victim, calls attention 
anew to the imperfections of the police 
detective system i n New Jersey, i f it may be 
described as a system."—Newark ' (N . J.) 
Star, December 5. 
BLOODHOUNDS LOSE 
TRAIL OF NEGRO WH O 
ATTACKE D A WOMA N 
—Ne w Yor k World, December 5. 
TRENTON DOGS LAN D 
A NEGRO IN LOCK-UP 
—Ne w Yor k Tribune, December 6. 
(No news of the matter found since 
the above in any of the metropolitan 
dailies.) 
"Willia m Atzenhalfer, a white farm hand 
of Ewin g Township, confessed to-day that 
it was he who attacked Miss Luell a Marshall 
of this city on last December 3, and injured 
her so severely that she died a week later. 
Atzenhalfe r insisted that he had mistaken 
Miss Marshall for a man on whom he sought 
revenge, and that he had not meant to kil l 
her."—Amsterdam News (colored), Januar y 
3. 
RAC E WA R IN A 
HIGH SCHOOL 
Black and White Pupils Battle in Room 
of Wendell Phillips 
INSULT TO GIRL TH E CAUSE 
Football Players Take Active Part in 
the Scrimmage 
" A miniature race wa r between the black 
and white pupils of Wendell Phillip s high 
school developed yesterday afternoon i n the 
assembly room of the school. Mor e than a 
dozen boys engaged i n the fight. 196 TH E CRISI S 
"Th e row started when Le o Stevens, a 
colored boy who ha d been expelled from the 
school a few weeks ago, was struck by a white 
boy. It was said the Negro insulted a white 
girl as the pupils were passing from the 
assembly hall at 2:30 o'clock. 
"Th e white boy was attacked by several 
Negr o boys. These i n tur n were set upo n 
by a group of the high school football players 
who were starting out fo r practice. 
"On e of the 'lieutenant marshals,' the 
police force of the student body, tried i n 
vai n to stop the fight. Some of the girls who 
had remained i n the room screamed and 
attracted the attention o f the principal , 
Spencer R . Smith . H e stopped the battle 
and took Stevens to his office. The other 
boys were not held. 
"Amon g the members of the football team 
who were mixed u p i n the fight were Fran k 
Davidson, Joh n Harper, Ro y Munger, Joh n 
Alberts and Melvi n Smith . N o one was 
seriously injured . There were several discolored eyes an d blood was drawn."— 
Chicago (Ill.) Tribune, Novembe r 1. 
"Th e Tribune published i n glarin g headlines, 'Rac e Wa r i n Publi c Schools,' then 
went on to say that a colored boy was pounced 
upo n by a numbe r of football players because he was supposed to have said somethin g to one o f the boys' sister whil e passing. 
Upo n investigation they foun d that there 
was no trut h whatsoever i n the story, so to 
ease their conscience (? ) retracted it a few 
days later. The retraction, however, was 
put i n an obscure corner o f the paper. The 
damage was done an d this great pape r seems 
to take especial pains to herald broadcast 
anythin g derogatory to the Negr o they can 
find or make up. I f they woul d devote as 
much space to extollin g our virtues as they 
do to holdin g u p our faults to the world , we 
woul d be ver y grateful."—Chicag o Defender 
(colored). 
The ALPH A PHI ALPH A FRATERNIT Y 
By CHARLES H. GARVI N 
THE existence of a Negro 
' intercollegiate Greek-letter 
fraternity is scarcely known 
to the general reading public . A s fa r as we know there 
is only one such nationa l 
undergraduate fraternity, 
although there are several loca l organizations 
that are tending to become national. 
The Alph a Ph i Alph a Fraternit y was 
founded March , 1906, at Cornell University , 
and became incorporated Apri l 16, 1912. Its 
establishment was not accidental, but it was 
designed to meet a great need among Negro 
college men. It is accomplishing its purpose 
of bringin g together the best type of men. 
Since its foundin g fifteen chapters have 
been established. The eleven active chapters 
are Alpha , Cornell ; Beta , Howard ; Gamma , 
Union ; Delta , Toronto (Canada); Epsilon , 
Michigan ; Zeta, Yale ; Eta , Columbia ; Theta, 
Medica l School of Illinois; Iota, Syracuse ; 
Kappa , Ohio State ; Mu , Minnesota ; Nu , 
Lincol n ; Xi , Wilber f oree; one graduate chapter at Louisville , Ky. , and the Alph a Alumn i 
Chapte r i n Ne w Yor k City . 
The fraternity has passed through its formative stage and his reached a stage at which 
it may, without assumption, claim to be a 
shapin g element i n the lif e of Negr o college 
men. It was organized b y seven youn g men 
of hig h character an d scholarly ambition, and 
is not to be judged b y its growth i n numbers alone, nor even by the loca l influence 
of its chapters, but b y the rea l value of its 
output. It numbers among its active members 
the leading lights i n college activities and 
scholarship. One yea r alone all the "honor 
men " i n the college class of Howar d were 
Alph a Ph i Alph a men ; fo r two years the 
leading oratorica l priz e at Columbi a and the 
honor priz e i n Frenc h were wo n by Alph a 
Ph i Alph a men. These are but a few of the 
honors wo n b y Alph a Ph i Alph a men and 
show the type of men the fraternity seeks. 
Its alumn i an d honorar y members are 
among the foremost men of the race. 
The annua l conventions of the fraternity 
have been unusually successful; the first was 
held at the seat o f Bet a Chapter, the second 
i n Ne w Yor k City , the thir d i n Philadelphia. TH E ALPH A PH I ALPH A FRATERNIT Y 197 
DELEGATE S T O TH E FOURT H ANNUA L CONVENTION . 
the fourth at the seat of the Epsilo n Chapte r 
and the fifth at the seat of the Kapp a Chap ­
ter, Ohio State University , on December 26, 
27 and 28. I n connection wit h this was held 
the first alumni reunion. The officers for the 
past year were: Charles H . Garvin , How ­
ard, president; Leon S. Evans, Michigan , 
vice-president; Joseph R. Fugett, Cornell, 
secretary, and Clarence A . Jones, Ohio State, 
treasurer. 
The Negro Greek-letter fraternity is no 
longer an experiment; it is a dominant factor 
for good and binds Negro college men as no 
other organization can. 
HARRIE T GI B BS-MAR S HAL L President 
HARE Y A . WILLIAMS , Vice-President 
LOUI S G. GREGORY , Financia l Secretary 
GREGORI A A . FRASER , Recording Secretary 
The Washington Conservatory of Music 
and School of Expression 
Piano, Violin, Wind Instruments, Piano Tuning, Vocal Expression, History of 
Music Theory and Modern Languages 
Th e first and only Missio n Musi c Schoo l founded and controlled by Negroe s 
in America . 
Man y scholarships awarded. Talented students never turned away unaided. 
902 T Street, N. W . WASHINGTON , D. C. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 198 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Publishers' Page 
PRAIS E 
FRO M A SO N O F 
WILLIA M LLOY D GARRISO N 
I wish I could adequately express my 
appreciation of the ability and attractiveness 
of the magazine. 
Sincerely yours, 
FRANCI S J . GARRISON . 
Newtonville, Mass. 
FRO M TUSKEGE E 
I think it is the best Negro publication 
ever published, not only in its mechanical 
makeup, but also in its contents. 
WILSO N S. LOVETT . 
Treasurer's Assistant. 
Tuskegee. Ala . 
FRO M HAMPTO N 
I appreciate ver y much indeed the excellent 
manne r i n which the cuts or half-tones of 
colored people are brought out i n your 
magazine. To m y min d it is most excellent. 
Your s ver y truly . 
G . W . BLOUNT , 
Assistant to Commandant, 
Hampton , Va . 
FRO M OU R LIVES T 
NEWSPAPE R 
TH E CRISI S has secured probabl y the 
biggest circulation of any race publication i n 
the country. 
TH E AFRO-AMERICAN , 
Baltimore , Md . 
An Open Letter to CRISI S Agents 
DEAR CO-WORKERS : 
Nearl y ten thousand people have become monthl y purchasers of TH E 
CRISIS since January, 1912. Ou r total circulation was: January, 1912. 15,000: 
January. 1913, 23.000. 
Yo u are largely responsible for this. You r loyalt y and aggressiveness 
indicate a devotion to the wor k whic h is a constant inspiration to us to make 
TH E CRISIS a better magazine. But we must have a circulatio n of 50,000. 
Ca n yo u produce it in 1913? W e believe yo u can. 
Begi n now a definite plan to double you r sales durin g the year. If possible, 
organize your sub-agents and assistants into a club and hol d monthl y meetings 
to discuss methods of operation and exchange selling ideas. Yo u wil l get the 
benefit of each other's experience, and the team wor k wil l produce enthusiasm 
and an increase in sales and subscriptions. 
W e also plan to make 1913 a banner year for advertisements and need 
your help. 
Th e only argument we have to present to an advertiser is our ability to 
produce results for him. We kno w we have a goo d advertising medium, for 
most of our advertisers have told us so: but there are man y people wh o take 
pleasure in boasting that they "never read advertisements, " and some of these 
are CRISIS readers. 
Ou r record for clean advertising is history. No exaggerated statements or 
impossible propositions are permitted in our columns and we exercise every 
precaution to verify the reliability of each advertiser. This gives additiona l 
prestige to the advertisements that appear, since they bear our stamp of 
approva l (whic h fact is a splendid selling argument for you). 
THEREFOR E W E WAN T YO U T O HEL P U S B Y BOOSTIN G 
TH E CRISI S ADVERTISERS . 
Whe n makin g a sale direct attention to the clean, concise businesslike 
manne r in whic h each advertiser states his proposition, as well as the wellwritten articles and other features. 
W e also wish, for the convenience of our readers, a directory of first-class 
hotels that accommodat e colored patrons. Hel p us secure the advertisements of 
such hotels in your locality. W e wil l allow yo u very libera l commission s for 
you r efforts. 
A n acknowledgment of this letter wil l be deeply appreciated by 
The PUBLISHERS OF TH E CRISIS 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 199 
DO YOU WANT A PROMOTION? 
Position s filled i n ever y line o f educationa l work . W e hav e a 
specia l deman d fo r 
Musi c Teachers Domestic Science Teachers 
Hig h School Teachers Bookkeepers and Stenographers 
Agricultura l Teachers Manua l Trainin g and Industrial Teachers 
W e ha d calls fo r teacher s i n 1912 fro m 
Alabam a Georgi a Mississippi 
Arkansa s Kentuck y Marylan d 
Delawar e Louisiana Ne w Jersey 
Florid a Missouri Nort h Carolina 
West Virgini a 
Schoo l officials ar e beginnin g no w to selec t thei r facultie s fo r 
the comin g year . Registe r earl y an d ge t i n touc h wit h them . 
Blank s an d informatio n furnishe d fre e upo n application . 
MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
133 5 T Street, N . W . Washington , D . C . 
South Carolin a 
Tennessee 
Texas 
Virgini a 
CRISIS-MAI D WILLO W PLUME S 
Wheneve r yo u see the nam e CRISIS-MAID , thin k o f 
quality , promp t servic e an d fai r prices. 
Thes e high-grad e willo w plume s shippe d prepai d to you r 
address at th e followin g manufacturer-to-consume r prices: 
No. AS. Length, 19 inches; width, 20 inches Price $4.50 
" B7. " 22 " " 23 " " 5.75 
'< C9. " 24 . " " 25 " " 6.85 
" E13. " 30 " " 30 " " 12.00 
TH E DUNBA R COMPANY , 26 V ese y Street, NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 200 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The very Business Opportunity for which YO U 
have been looking may possibly he here on this page. 
Capitaliz e your spare time selling REDDICK' S 
WORLD' S GREATES T POLISHIN G MITTS . User s 
say it's the best practica l polishing device on earth. 
Agents of both sexes say it's the best moneymake r 
on earth. Writ e at once for our liberal proposition. 
It sells itself. See advertisement on page 162. 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PE R MONT H acting as 
AGENT S for the sale of our properties in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . 
Th e real comin g country where there are 
opportunities and openings for all. Writ e 
us to-day, giving your age and experience, 
and we wil l offer yo u a FIN E PROPOSI ­
TIO N WHIC H WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVES REALT Y CO. 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ames Bldg. Muskogee, Okla. 
AGENTS— Bi g money. Johnson-Flyn n 
fight and other copyrighted Negr o pictures. Portraits. Pillo w Tops. Catalo g 
FREE . 30 days' credit. 
PEOPLE S PORTRAI T CO . 
Station U , Chicago, Ill. 
TYPEWRITER S 
Remingtons, Densmores, 
J e w e t t s, $11.50 each ; 
Franklins, Postals, Ham ­
monds, $9 each. Bargains in 
Underwoods, Smiths and all 
others. Al l guaranteed. 
Supplies. 
Standard Typewriter 
Exchange 
23B Par k Row, New Yor k 
PRESIDENT S 
NEGR O REPUBLI C 
i n colors and a short history of Liberia . 16 x 20. 
Ready to hang on the walls; only 50c. prepaid ; in 
gold frames $1.25. Everybod y wants one. Writ e 
NEGR O PRESS , Bo x 126; Gainesville, Fla. , U . S. A . 
1,000 agents wanted. 
Folding BATH TUB 
Costs little, no plumbing, requires little water. 
Weight 15 pounds, and folds into small roll. 
Full length baths, far better than tin tubs. LASTS for 
years. Write for special agents offer and description. ROBINSON 
Mfg.. Co., 111 Vanc e St.,Toledo, O. Mfrs. Turkish Bath Cabinets. 
REGALI A 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L . Jones, Pres. 
N. E . Cor . 8th and Plu m Sts. 
Cincinnati , Ohio 
WANTE D 
500 Negro families (farmers preferred) to settle on FRE E Government Lands in Chaves County, Ne w 
Mexico. Blackdom is a Negro colony. 
Fertile soil, ideal climate. N o "Jim 
Grow" Laws. Fo r information write 
JAS . HAROL D COLEMA N 
Blackdom, Ne w Mexico 
There's somethin g extremel y touchin g about 
The Oriole Concert Waltzes 
by Herma n Zimmerman . A favorit e wherever heard. 20c. per copy for the next 30 
days. 
PARK S MUSI C HOUS E 
Louisiana, Mo. 
Start the New Year Right 
Resolve to save all your extra money and begin 
that bank account. 
Yo u cannot be more profitably employed than 
acting as agent for TH E CRISIS . 
.Th e sales from our magazine will insure you a 
snug little sum of extra money each month. Fo r 
information address: 
Sales Manager of TH E CRISIS 
26 Vesey Street New York 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
A n i aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon 
champion of equal rights. Startlin g facts and crushing arguments. Fascinatin g reading. A necessity 
for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. 
Belongs in the librar y of every friend of social 
justice. Pric e 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAMES F. MORTON , JR. 
244 West 143d Street New York , N . Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 201 
UNDERTAKER S 
Telephone Columbus 3985 Open Al l Night 
RODNE Y DAD E & BROS . 
Undertaker s and Embalmer s 
Notar y Publi c 
Funera l Parlo r and Chape l Free . 
Licensed Lad y Embalme r Prompt Service 
266 Weft 6Sd Street New York, N. Y . 
Between Broadwa y and 8th Avenue 
A PLAC E T O STO P 
HOTE L WASHINGTO N 
First-class Service for First-class People 
3252 Wabash Avenue, 
Chicago, Ill. 
MOVIN G 
Telephone 4214 Greeley 
BRANIC' S EXPRES S 
PACKIN G AN D SHIPPIN G 
ANDRE W J . BRANI C 
Formerl y Manage r Virgini a Transfe r Company 
469 SEVENT H AVENU E New Yor k Cit y 
Order s b y mail or 'phone receive prompt attention 
TRUNK S STORE D 25c. PE R MONT H 
Official Expressma n for the C . V . B . A . 
PERSONA L CARD S 
WIGINGTO N & BEL L 
Architects 
Karbach Block Omaha, Neb. 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUD E E . CURTI S 
Surgeon Dentist 
188 West 135th Street, New York City 
Telephone 4885 Morningsid e 
DR. D. W . ONLE Y 
Surgeon Dentist 
S. W . Cor . 133d St. and Leno x Ave. , New Yor k 
Office Hours: 9 to 12 a. m., 1 to 9 p. m. 
Sunday s b y Appointment 
H . HENR Y HARRI S 
Architect 
Cor. 8th and Princess Streets 
Wilmington, N. C. 
LEGA L DIRECTOR Y 
This is a ready reference of some of the 
best lawyers in the country. 
If you are a lawyer and your name is 
not listed here you should write us at once. 
Residence 2546 Michigan 
Bell Phone E-2161 
Office Phone 
Home 58 Mai n 
C. H . CALLOWA Y 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Publi c 
117 W . 6th Street Kansa s City , Mo . 
FRANKLI N W. WILLIAM S 
Attorne y and Connselor-at-Law 
Notar y Publi c 
Rea l Estat e Conveyance r 
206 Parris h Street Durham , N . C. 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
5 Beekman Street (Templ e Court) 
New Yor k Cit y 
Tel . 6222 Cortlandt Cabl e Address, Judowe t 
Telephone 5574 Beekman Rooms 905 to 907 
WILFOR D H . SMIT H 
Lawye r 
150 Nassau Street New Yor k Cit y 
Uptow n Office—136 West 136th Street 
General Practic e Notary Publi c 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Buildin g 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
Attomey-at-Law 
908 Walnu t Street 
Philadelphia, Pa . 
Tel . 2026 For t Hil l Cabl e Address, Epbe n 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
34 SCHOO L STREE T Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbi e Hawkin s George W . F . McMeche n 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore , Md . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 202 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
ODESSA MILLINER Y 
Exclusive Parisian Creations for the 
Smartly Dressed Woman. 
41 West 135th Street New York 
"Phone 624 Harlem. 
No . 4 Special Buggy 
$65.00 
A value unequaled. Sol d on 
$1.00 Profit Margin . Writ e 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
Telephone 1697 Flushin g 
HERMA N WILKEN S 
PARQUE T FLOOR S AN D MANTEL S 
SCRAPIN G AN D REFINISHIN G A SPECIALT Y 
100 Broadwa y Flushing , N . Y . 
JOH N F . RYA N 
PRESCRIPTIO N DRUGGIS T 
Fo r pure drugs at fai r prices go to Ryan's Dru g Store 
51 Mai n Street Flushing , N . Y . 
MADAM E GILCHRIS T 
CORSET S 
Choosing the corset should be a serious thought 
with all well-dressed women, and par t of this 
thinking has been done for yo u by Madam e Gilchrist, 
who is an expert corset fitter and whose thorough 
knowledge of the human anatomy enables her to 
give advice wisely as to the correct mode l of corset 
to be wor n for health and comfort. 
576 Mai n Street East Orange , N . J . 
Telephone 1439 Flushin g 
JOH N FRAN Z 
VIENN A BAKER Y AN D LUNC H ROO M 
21 Mai n Street Flushing , N . Y . 
Telephone 381 Flushin g 
G. ANDERSO N 
CABINE T MAKE R AN D UPHOLSTERE R 
Agent for Ostermoor Mattresse s 
104 Lincol n Street Flushing , N . Y . 
C. BAE R 
SHOE S FO R TH E ENTIR E FAMIL Y 
389 Fulto n Street 
Nea r Hardenbroo k Avenue Jamaica , L . I. 
JOSEP H F. P. NORRI S 
HARNES S MAKE R 
Repairin g Promptl y Execute d 
Blankets, Whips, Curr y Combs, Brushes, Etc . 
72 Broadwa y Flushing , N . Y . 
Lon g Distanc e Telephone 62 Flushin g 
ELBER T HALLET T 
FUNERA L DIRECTO R AN D EMBALME R 
Established I860 
161-163 Amit y Street Flushing , N . Y . 
FRE D S. CLAR K 
Care The Dunbar Company 
26 Vesey Street New York 
Does Baby Cry? 
teething babies instantly relieved with 
Koolbite 
Koolbit e is an iced nipple For babies' inflamed gums, the 
nipple is specially made without an opening to hold the ice 
water. Ther e is an inner water-tight aluminum container to 
hold cracked ice or snow and an outer cas e of Persian Ivory 
(Choic e of white, pink or blue). This is so made that it is a 
non-conductor, remaining always at normal temperature. 
The whole toy weighs only 1 1/4 oz . Koolbit e will be delivered 
free to any address immediately on receipt of $I.00 with 
our guarantee of SATISFACTIO N O R MONE Y BACK . 
Doctor s and Dentists Recommen d It 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 203 
TH E NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D PEOPL E 
OFFICES : 2 6 Vese y Street. Ne w York . Incorporated Ma y 25 , 191 1 
OFFICER S 
Nationa l President—Mr . 
Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Rev. Joh n Hayne s Holms.- New York . 
Mr . Joh n E . Milholland , New York . 
Bishop Alexande r Walters, New York . 
Rev. Garne t R. Waller . Baltimore , Md . 
Miss Mar y Whit e Ovington, Brooklyn . N . 
Chairma n of the Boar d of Directors— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard , New York . 
Treasurer—Mr . Walte r E . Sachs, New York . 
Directo r of Publicit y and Research— 
Dr . W . E . B . D u Bois, New York . 
National Organizer—Dr . M . C . B . Mason , Cincinnati. 
Secretary—Miss Ma y Childs Nerney, Brooklyn , N . Y . 
Assistant Secretary—Miss Marth a Gruening , New 
York . 
This is the Association which seeks to put into 
practice the principles which TH E CRISI S puts 
into words. If you believe what we SAY , join this 
Association and help us to put our words into DEEDS . 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOB TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE. 
Please find enclosed _ dollars and enter my name as a member in Class 
paying $... a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Sane . 
Address.. 
Class 1. Life Members, paying $600. 
Class 2. Donors, paying $100 per year. 
Class 3. Sustaining Members, paying 
per year. 
$25 
Class i. 
Class 5. 
Contributing Members, paying $10, 
$5 or $2 per year. 
Associate Members, paying $1 per 
year. 
The subscription to TH E CRISIS is $1 extra, except to members paying $5 or more, who 
signify their wish that $1 of their dues be considered a CRISIS subscription. 
All members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the Annual 
Conference of the Association. 
PLEAS E MAK E CHECK S PAYABL E T O NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO E TH E ADVANCEMEN T 
O P COLORE D PEOPLE , 26 VESE Y STREET , NE W YOR K CITY . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 204 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
COLLEGE AND FRATERNITY PINS 
We are now prepared to supply colleges, fraternal organizations, baseball clubs, athletic 
associations, etc., with pins and emblems, no matter what shape or design. 
Send us your idea and let us send you a drawing and a quotation surprisingl y small, 
considering the superior workmanship and quality of materials. 
Watc h fobs, rings, cuff buttons and metal novelties of special design are also produced 
to your order. 
Sterling Silve r Pins 40 cents up ; Gold-filled 60 cents up ; Solid Gol d $1.10 up 
THE DUNBAR COMPANY, 26 Vesey Street, New York 
TELLIN G A STORY 
T o friends who know you, may be easy, but "putting one over" to 
strangers is quite different. 
Tellin g a busy, business man about your services or your merchandise is still less 
a "cinch, " for he hears the same story every day a dozen or more times. 
A clever speaker, before a sleepy or hostile audience, puts a good, stiff punch 
into his very first remark. This "knocks 'em off their feet" and they listen. 
You r business letters may be good, but if they lack the "punch " they won't "pull." 
Correct business stationery is the "punch " that hits the busy man "right in the eye" 
and makes him read your letter. 
We'l l show you the sort of stationery we create, if yo u write us. 
W e print for Mr . Cond e Nast, of Vogue; we print TH E CRISIS . 
ROBERT N. WOOD, Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T NE W YOR K 
'Phone 6667 Lenox 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 205 
The Crisis Calendar 
FO R 1913 
Tw o pretty dark baby faces in colors, and trie 
celebrated "Credo, by W . E . B . D u Bois, beautifully printed, together wit h a large legible calendar 
by months. Price 25 cents, postpaid. 
Nationa l Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People 
Emancipation Jubilee Seals 
for your letters. Handsomely designed by Richar d 
L . Brown , and done in colors. Price 1 cent each. 
" Show your belief in freedom on every letter' you 
write in 1913." 
A Half Century of Freedom 
B y W . E . B . D u Bois. A four-page pamphlet 
giving in condensed form a history of the material 
advancement of the Negro race. Price 2 cents. 
Emancipation Literature 
for celebrations, arguments, facts, pictures 
: Price 5 cents =^=^^^ = 
The Dunbar Company, 26 Vesey St., New York 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 206 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
$
5 
Brings Oliver 
Typewriter 
Send $5 for The Olive r Typewriter—the 
machine will come a-flying. The newest 
Model—No . 5—the regular $100 machine— 
with no extra charge for Printype. 
Fo r the price of a good fountain pen you 
secure the World's Greatest Typewriter. Yo u 
can pay the balance at the rate of 17 cents a 
day. 
This irresistible "$5 offer" is sweeping everything before it. The era of universal typewriting is coming. The triumph of the typewriter over primitive pen-and-ink has been 
brought about by the same machine that 
introduced visible writing. 
The 
OLIVER 
Typewrite r 
The Standard Visible Writer 
Thi s is the typewrite r whos e hig h efficiency ha s 
mad e it the choic e o f the greatest firms an d corporations. I t is the simplest o f al l standar d type ­
writers, ye t the swiftest an d b y fa r the most 
versatile. Th e movin g parts wor k freel y i n a soli d 
meta l framework , makin g the machin e so strong 
tha t the hardest usage has n o effect upo n it. 
No Extra Charge for 
"Printype" 
Mos t peopl e prefe r to hav e the machin e equippe d 
to writ e i n Printype . Thi s beautifu l typ e is obtain ­
abl e onl y o n Th e Olive r Typewriter . 
It is the greatest style improvemen t eve r evolve d 
fo r typewriters—th e most easil y rea d typ e i n existence—th e typ e whic h conform s to tha t i n universa l 
us e o n the world's printin g presses! 
Win Success with the Oliver! 
Th e Olive r Typewrite r aid s success-seekers i n a 
multitud e o f ways. Th e real-lif e storie s o f achieve ­
men t that cente r aroun d i t woul d fil l volumes. 
N o matte r wha t you r wor k ma y be—i n office, 
store , sho p o r home—Th e Olive r Typewrite r will 
prov e itself a grea t convenienc e an d a n actua l 
money-maker. 
It stand s fo r order an d system an d success. It is 
the visibl e evidenc e o f the progressiveness o f its 
owner. Youn g peopl e wit h brains, ambitio n an d 
Olive r Typewriters ar e succeedin g everywhere. Ca n 
yo u affor d to let $5 stan d betwee n yo u an d success? 
Sen d lo r Specia l Circula r an d Ar t Catalo g 
Ful l details regardin g the 
Olive r Easy-Purchase-Plan , 
beautifu l catalo g an d a 
specime n lette r writte n i n 
Printyp e wil l be sent yo u 
on request. 
Le t this $5 offer awake n 
you to you r need o f Th e 
Olive r Typewrite r an d th e 
ease wit h whic h yo u ma y 
own it. 
Remember—$ 5 onl y an d on 
comes The Oliver Typewriter ! Sale s Departmen t 
(206) 
Th e Olive r Typewrite r Compan y 
310 Broadwa y NE W YORK , N . Y . 
Short Talk s on 
Advertising and 
Ou r Advertisers 
It is remarkabl e to note the growin g 
interest of the genera l reader in advertisements. Fifteen or twenty years ago the 
intelligent reader regarded the average 
advertisement as a joke , because in those 
days the best "stock i n trade " of the adwrite r was bombasti c or ambiguous statements designed to deceive the public . 
The n alon g came C. H . K . Curtis, of 
Philadelphia , wh o cleaned out the columns 
of the Ladies' Home Journal by compellin g 
his advertisers to stick to the truth in their 
printed words. Othe r publishers joined in 
the movement and have succeeded i n drivin g 
the dishonest advertiser from their pages. 
O f course Dr. Harve y W . Wiley's 
struggle against medica l frauds and poisoned 
food, and the government's steady, persistent warfare on investment swindlers 
were of much assistance to these worth y 
publishers. To-da y the pages of all 
respectable publications are closed to the 
unscrupulous and left to those wh o have 
truthful promise s and honest values to offer. 
This has inspired confidence between the 
advertiser and the buyin g public . 
Whe n wil l certain members of the Negr o 
press awake to this new condition, clean out 
their pages and make a united effort to 
secure business from the progressive 
advertiser? 
A s I write , there is on m y desk a copy 
of a colored paper wit h a nationa l reputation. I n it there is the advertisement of a 
concern whic h sells "luck y stones" to give 
the purchaser "a certain strange, mysterious 
control over others." 
Imagine such piffle. 
TH E CRISIS is prou d of its policy to 
exclude the dishonest advertiser from its 
columns, and our readers show their appreciation of the manne r in whic h we protect 
them by givin g a good portio n of their 
business to our advertisers. 
T o those wh o are still skeptical of 
advertisements in general, we solicit their 
interest and confidence i n the CRISIS' 
ADVERTISER, for we wil l never knowingl y permit them to mislead, defraud or 
swindl e our readers. 
ALBO N L. HOLSEY, Advertising Manager 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . Musi c of the Masters 
W e are pleased to announce to the readers of THE CRISIS and our many 
patrons that we are now able to supply them with all the latest and best 
musica l compositions produced by Negr o writers. 
Man y of the tuneful melodies that yo u hear on the stage in big musica l 
comedies or vaudeville, and afterward hum or whistle, are composed by colored 
men, and many composers wh o enjoy national reputations and whose names 
are familia r to yo u as song writers are Negroe s wh o for business reasons cannot 
boast of their racial identity. 
Whethe r the wis h is for an ol d plantation melody, a classic numbe r or the 
latest ragtime, we have it for yo u and can supply your wants with prompt 
dispatch. 
Amon g the lyri c writers and composers whose selections we have are 
the followin g : 
S. Coleridge-Taylo r 
Harr y T. Burleig h 
Wil l Mario n Coo k 
Alex . Rogers 
"Bob " Col e 
J. Rosamon d Johnso n 
Jas. Reese Europ e 
"Chris. " Smit h 
Pau l Laurenc e Dunba r 
Ceci l Mac k 
N . Clar k Smit h 
Wm . H . Tyers 
Twenty-four Negro Melodies 
Transcribe d for the piano by 
S. COLERIDGE -TAYLO R 
Introduction by 
BOOKE R T . WASHINGTO N 
In selecting his themes from the 
native songs of Africa , the West 
Indies and the American Negro during 
slavery days, Mr . Coleridge-Taylo r has 
preserved their distinctive traits and 
individuality, while giving them a 
charming depth and spontaneity of 
feeling which places them alongside 
the compositions of Lisz t and Dvorak 
as masterly transcriptions of folk 
music. 
Pape r binding $1.50 postpaid 
Cloth binding 2.50 postpaid 
Negro Minstrel Melodies 
Edited by 
HARR Y T. BURLEIG H 
This book is a collection of twentyfive Negro folk songs with piano 
accompaniment. 
Mr . Burleigh has spent much time 
and patient study in assembling this 
collection of entertaining and educational selections. To the lover of 
music for its own sake this volume 
will especially appeal. 
Pric e 50c , postpaid 
EXHORTATION . 
Rogers and Coo k $0.60 
(Hig h in D minor; low in A 
minor) 
SWIN G ALONG . 
Wil l Mario n Cook. . 60 
(Hig h in F ; medium in Ε 
flat) 
RAI N SONG . 
Rogers and Coo k 60 
(Fo r high voice ) 
BROWN-SKI N BAB Y MINE . 
Coo k and Mac k 60 
(Medium) 
DOW N D E LOVERS ' LANE . 
Dunba r and Cook 60 
(High ) 
WI D D E MOON , MOON , MOON . 
Moor e and Coo k 60 
(Hig h in F ; low in D ) 
Writ e us for any information regarding the productions of these or any 
other composers. 
THE DUNBAR CO., 26 Vesey St., New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS . STAG E FAVORITE S 
Miss DOR A DEAN , of Johnson & Dean 
Now starring in vaudeville with her own company 
Miss Dean says of our face powder : 
" It s as good as the best. 
Whethe r the complexion is cream, olive or brown, 
we have a tint to match it. Price 50 cents per 
box. Send 2-eent stamp and name of druggist 
for sample. 
Crisis-Maid 
Perfect Fac e Powde r 
TH E DUNBA R CO. , 26 Vesey St., New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 