This is my Crisis 
OCTOBER 
1916 Publisher's Chat 
The vacation season is over! The serious worker goes 
back to his working-; the serious reader, to his reading. 
And the CRISIS? Well, to begin with, the November 
issue will be the RICHMOND (VIRGINIA) NUMBER and 
you will he pleased with it. 
And on to the 50,000! 
A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) $1.00 
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF AN EX-COLORED MAN. (Anonymous) . 1.20 
NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY. (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W . E. B. D U Bois) 1.25 
THE WHITE MAN'S BURDEN. (T. Shirby Hodge) 1.00 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.00 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
HALF A MAN. (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
JOHN BROWN. (W . E. B. D U Bois) 1.25 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W . Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINCE HALL AND HIS FOLLOWERS. (George W . Crawford) .. . 1.00 
NEGRO CULTURE IN WEST AFRICA. (George W . Ellis) 2.00 
THE NEGRO. (W . E. B. D U Bois) 5 0 
THE EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.00 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R. Lynch) 1.50 
LIFE AND LETTERS OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR. (W . C. BerwickSayers) 2.2 5 
MASTERPIECES OF NEGRO ELOQUENCE. (Alice Moore Dunbar, 
Editor) 2.5 0 
POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H. E. Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OUT OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
Address, TH E CRISIS , : : : • : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D OF TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF 
COLORED PEOPLE. AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY 
Conducted by 
W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, Business Manager 
Contents Copyrighted, 1916, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for October, 1916 
PICTURES Page 
COVER. Photograph From Life. By Scurlock. 
SHADOWS OF LIGHT. Pictures of 100 Children 285, etc. 
MEN OF THE MONTH 278 
ARTICLES 
THE HARE AND THE TORTOISE. A Negro Folk Tale. Selected by M. 
N. Work 271 
HOW I GREW MY CORN. By Helen Stevenson 273 
MY LITTLE ONE. A Poem. By G. Douglas Johnson 273 
A RAINY DAY. A Poem. By Lottie Burrell Dixon 274 
DEPARTMENTS 
EDITORIAL 267 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED 
PEOPLE 275 
MEN OF THE MONTH 278 
THE LOOKING GLASS 282 
THE OUTER POCKET 291 
THE HORIZON 295 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTRA 
RENEWALS: When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANGE OF ADDRESS: The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York. N. Y. 264 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
The NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to 
all who believe in the Negro race and in our obligation to 
help promote its intellectual, moral and religious uplift." 
'REV. DR. CHARLES H . PARKHURST, New Yor k City. 
IT IS MORE THAN A MERE SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNITY OF SERVICE AND UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, 
Y . M. C. A . and Y . W . C. A . secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced coworkers and actual every-day practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE 
DEPARTMENT. 
A HIGH STANDARD COLLEGE DEPARTMENT has now been established. 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
Next School Term Opens Oct. 4, 1916. 
For catalog and detailed information, address: 
PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPARD 
NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOOL DURHAM, N. C. 
SCHOOL OF MEDICINE OF 
HOWARD UNIVERSITY 
Including Medical, Dental and Pharmaceutic Colleges 
1867-191 6 
STEPHE N M. NEWMAN , D. D., President 
EDWAR D A. BALLOCH , M. D., Dean 
The Fiftieth Annual Session will begin October 1, 1916, and continue eight months. 
Requires for admission to the Medical College two years of college work including 
courses in inorganic and organic chemistry, qualitative analysis, physics, biology and 
either French or German. Full corps of instructors, well equipped laboratories, unexcelled hospital facilities. 
The Ninth Session of the Post-Graduate Course will begin June 1, 1917, and 
continue six weeks. 
For catalog or information concerning Medical, Dental, Pharmaceutic or PostGraduate Courses, write 
W . C. McNEILL, M. D., Secretary 
Fifth and "W " Sts., N. W. , Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 265 
Atlanta University 
I s beautifull y located in the Cit y o f Atlanta , 
Ga . Th e courses o f stud y include Hig h 
School , Norma l Schoo l an d College , wit h 
manua l trainin g an d domesti c science. Amon g 
the teachers are graduate s o f Yale , Harvard , 
Dartmout h an d Wellesley . Forty-seve n year s 
o f successful wor k hav e been completed. 
Student s come fro m all parts o f the South . 
Graduate s are almos t universall y successful. 
Fo r furthe r informatio n addres s 
Presiden t EDWAR D T . WAR E 
ATLANTA, GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautifu l Situation . Healthfu l Location . 
Th e Bes t Mora l an d Spiritua l Environ ­
ment . A Splendi d Intellectua l Atmo ­
sphere . Note d fo r Hones t an d Thoroug h 
Work . 
Offer s ful l course s in th e followin g de ­
partments : College , Normal , Hig h School , 
Gramma r Schoo l an d Industrial . 
Goo d water, stea m heat , electric lights , 
goo d drainage . Expense s ver y reasonable . 
Fal l Ter m Begin s Septembe r 21 , 191 6 
Fo r informatio n addres s 
Presiden t R . W . M e GRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerl y Atlant a Baptis t College ) 
ATLANTA , G A 
College , Academy , Divinit y Schoo l 
A n institution famou s withi n recent year s 
fo r its emphasi s o n al l sides o f manl y develop ­
ment—th e onl y institution i n the fa r Sout h 
devote d solely to the education o f Negr o 
youn g men . 
Graduate s give n hig h rankin g b y greatest 
norther n universities . Debating , Y . M . C . A. , 
athletics, al l live features . 
Fo r informatio n addres s 
JOH N HOPE , Presiden t 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognize d a s a colleg e o f th e Firs t Clas s 
b y Texa s an d Louisian a Stat e Board s o f 
Education . Harvard , Yal e an d Columbi a 
represente d o n it s faculty ; student s gath ­
ere d fro m te n differen t states . 
Stronges t Musi c Departmen t in the Wes t 
M. W . DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Founde d 1866 
Thoroug h Literary , Scientific, Educational , 
Musica l an d Social Science Courses . Pionee r 
in Negr o music . Special stud y i n Negr o life. 
Idea l an d sanitar y building s an d grounds . 
Well-equippe d Science building . 
Christia n hom e life. 
Hig h standar d o f independen t manhoo d an d 
womanhood . Fo r literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , Presiden t 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Wel l equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location- central and healthful. . 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training, Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester begins Sept. 28th, 1916. 
For further information address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN, President 
BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Board. 
THE 
AGRICULTURAL ANU 
TECHNICAL COLLEGE 
(Formerly A. & M . College) 
Fall Term begins September 1, 1916. 
Board, lodging and tuition $8.00 per 
month. 
Maintained by the Governments of 
the United States and of North Carolina. 
Short courses. 
Courses leading to the degrees of 
Bachelor of Science in Agriculture 
and Bachelor of Science in Mechanics. 
Write today for catalog. 
Address: 
PRESIDENT DUDLEY 
A. & T. College 
Greensboro, N. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 266 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
The Cheyney Training School 
for Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNSYLVANIA 
Under the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, healthful, well appointed. 
This school offers to young colored 
men and women who have a reasonable secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to 
become teachers, courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, manual crafts and 
agriculture. Tuition is free. Board, 
lodging, heat, light and laundry 
privileges are offered for nine 
months for $100 . The entrance 
fee is $7. Fall term opens September 16, 1916. 
There will be no summer school 
during 1916. 
For full information, write to 
LESLIE PINCKNEY HILL, Principal. 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of the Sisters of St. Mary. 
Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
609 N. 43d St. W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
MME . BRIDGES ' SCHOO L O F 
French Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring and Millinery. 
Bridges System. 
Special Courses in Designing, Copying, Draping, 
Making, Trimming, Finishing, Cutting and Fitting. 
Special reduction in tuition given to students entering in groups of three or more or to one student 
taking two or more consecutive courses. 
Individual Instruction. A Bridges Diploma means 
something to you. 
507 E. 34th Place Chicago, Ill. 
In your own home, during the 
evenings of just one week you 
can learn the famous 
7 DAYS PARAGO N 
SHORTHAND 
Speed comes with use. Speed capacity practically un 
limited. Wonderfully easy to read. Writers in service 
of U. S. Government and offices of largest corporations. 
System alreadv adopted by number of cities for High 
Schools.. Write now for full proof. 
PARAGON INSTITUTE, 222 Coliseum St.. New Orleans. La. 
TEACHER S (ALL SUBJECTS) 
AND INTERPRETERS 
STANDAR D TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
J. T. C. NEWSOM. PROPRIETOR 
1011 NEW YORK AVENUE WASHINGTON. D. C. 
ROLAND W. HAYES, Tenor 
RECITALS CONCERTS ORATORIO OPERA 
"An unusually good voice. THE natural 
quality is beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr. Hayes sings freely and with good 
taste."—Philip Hale, in the Boston Herald. 
"A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre." 
—Chattanooga Times. 
ADDRESS: 3 WARWICK ST.. BOSTON. MASS. 
Stenography TYPEWRITING BOOK-KEEPING 
TEACHERS 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
- • m > 
1. Short Courses in Typewriting 
2. Shorthand made as easy as A. B. C. 
3. Brief Courses in Practical Book-keeping 
We typewrite Letters, Postal Cards, Wills; fill in 
Deeds and multigraph Circular Letters cheap. 
EDWARD T. DUNCAN, President 
1227 SO. 17TH STREET, PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
A live agency furnishes the 
connecting medium in a business way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi. Missouri, New York, North Carolina. Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West 
Virginia. 
THE MUTUAL TEACHERS' AGENCY 
1403 New York Avenue Washington, D. C. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
You can operate in your own home during spare 
time. •) The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU. Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Why can't you? By our method you can 
start with $5 and up. We offer you thirty live, 
money-making mail order plans. You can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. We furnish circulars, printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today—Now! 
MAIL DEALERS WHOLESALE HOUSE 
517 Dearborn Street * Chicago. Ill. 
Make $35 to $65 a week showing this great Tailor-Book. 
Good s so muc h finer an d price s 
so muc h lower, every one sees 
th e difference at a glance. 
Specia l Offe r 
To prove our unequalled quality, 
we will let you order at the 
wholesale price, a Sample Suit or 
even a pair of pants as lo w as $2.25 
—and no extra charges even for the 
biggest peg top styles. You can _ 
now make more quick money and buy your 
own fine tailored clothes cheaper than you ever thought possible. 
We prepay the charges on every order and don't keep a cent of 
any customer's money unless he is well pleased. Let us send you 
this fine sample outfit and show you how to take the most perfect 
measures for the finest tailoring on the market. Write us today. 
Th e Chicag o Tailors' Associatio n 
Dept. 808 515 South Franklin Street. CHICAGO 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
FREE 
TAILOR 
BOOK THE CRISIS 
Vol. 12-No. 6 OCTOBER, 1916 Whole No. 72 
"WAIT, THOU CHILD OF HOPE, FOR TIME SHALL TEACH THEE ALL THINGS." 
Editorial 
THE IMMORTAL CHILDREN 
CHILDREN give us the real 
immortality — the endless 
life concerning which there 
is no doubt or casuistry, no 
selfishness nor fear. With the children, whether they are ours or others, 
our life goes on renewed in its splendid youth, uplifted by its quivering, 
ever-glorious dreams, like to all life 
and yet always different because it 
grasps new worlds and lives in a universe continually unfolding to new 
possibilities. 
To all this we are singularly obtuse. Our children are in our way; 
they hinder the settling of life's problems; they are the after-thought of 
things and not things themselves; 
they must be broken to our world and 
their wills enthralled. Yet now and 
then the thrill and glory of their 
meaning emerges. We see ourselves 
as we should—the servants of our 
children; the followers of their 
knowledge; the worshippers of their 
future. 
To none can this be truer than to 
the children of the darker world who 
hold in their little hands so vast a 
destiny. They will look back some 
day in wonder at their files of the 
CRISIS and say, can these things be 
true? Was not this exaggerated? 
Little realizing that the editor must 
palliate and soften the awful truth 
even for his darkest readers less they 
sicken and fail and die. 
Through children's eyes, then, we 
look to a triumphant future and this 
Children's number of the CRISIS is a 
sort of annual festival decorated with 268 THE CRISIS 
their flowering faces and their wonder-filled eyes and the mighty softness of their hands. 
They who look at you from these 
pages are but a little and imperfect 
selection of those who might. We 
have chosen them out of hundreds of 
their fellows and we are full of apologies to the mothers of those not 
chosen; after all, these are not individual children; they belong to no 
persons and no families; they belong 
to a great people and in their hands 
is that people's future. 
THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN 
THE Negro voter enters the 
present campaign with no 
enthusiasm. Four years ago 
the intelligent Negro voter 
tried a great and important experiment. He knew that the rank and 
file of the Bourbon democracy was 
without sense or reason, based on 
provincial ignorance and essentially 
uncivilized, but he saw called to its 
leadership a man of high type and one 
who promised specifically to American Negroes, justice—"Not mere 
grudging justice, but justice executed 
with liberality and cordial good feeling." They have lived to learn that 
this statement was a lie, a peculiarly 
miserable campaign deception. They 
are forced, therefore, to vote for the 
Republican candidate, Mr. Hughes, 
and they find there little that is attractive. 
Mr. Hughes is a northern man of 
sterling honesty, but he knows nothing about Negroes and he has neither 
time nor inclination to learn. His 
final conclusions concerning them 
were made twenty or thirty years 
ago. Since that time he has neither 
examined these conclusions nor is 
there any reason to suppose that he 
will. Under ordinary circumstances 
the Negro must expect from him, as 
chief executive, the neglect, indifference and misunderstanding that he 
has had from recent Republican presidents. Nevertheless, he is practically the only candidate for whom Negroes can vote. We say nothing concerning the Socialist candidate. They 
are excellent leaders of an excellent 
party; God send them success! But 
the effective voter has a choice between two parties, the vote for the 
third party is at least temporarily 
thrown away. 
THE NEGRO PARTY 
THERE is for the future one 
and only one effective polit- ' 
ical move for colored voters. 
We have long foreseen it, 
but we have sought to avoid it. It 
is a move of segregation, it "hyphenates" us, it separates us from our 
fellow Americans; but self-defense 
knows no nice hesitations. The 
American Negro must either vote as 
a unit or continue to be politically 
emasculated as at present. 
Miss Inez Milholland, in a recent 
address, outlined with singular clearness and force a Negro Party on the 
lines of the recently formed Woman's 
Party. Mr. R. R. Church, Jr., of Tennessee, and certain leading colored 
men in New Jersey, Ohio and elsewhere have unconsciously and effectively followed her advice. 
The situation is this: At present 
the Democratic party can maintain its 
ascendency only by the help of the 
Solid South. The Solid South is built 
on the hate and fear of Negroes; 
consequently it can never, as a party, 
effectively bid for the Negro vote. 
The Republican party is the party of 
wealth and big business and, as such, 
is the natural enemy of the humble 
working people who compose the 
mass of Negroes. Between these 
two great parties, as parties there is 
little to choose. 
On the other hand, parties are represented by individual candidates. 
Negroes can have choice in the naming of these candidates and they can 
vote for or against them. Their only EDITORIAL 269 
effective method in the future is to 
organize in every congressional district as a Negro Party to endorse 
those candidates. Republican, Democratic, Socialist, or what-not, whose 
promises and past performances give 
greatest hope for the remedying of 
the wrongs done the Negro race. If 
no candidate fills this bill they should 
nominate a candidate of their own 
and give that candidate their solid 
vote. This policy effectively and consistently carried out throughout the 
United States, North and South, by 
colored voters who refuse the bribe of 
petty office and money, would make 
the Negro vote one of the most powerful and effective of the group votes 
in the United States. 
This is the program which we must 
follow. We may hesitate and argue 
about it, but if we are a sensible, reasonable people we will come to it and 
the quicker the better. 
LESSONS IN GOVERNMENT 
FOR effective political action 
such as is outlined in the 
last editorial there must be 
undertaken a course of political education among Negro voters. 
Few people, and colored folk least of 
all, realize how little Negroes have 
been educated in politics. If a campaign of education is going on they 
are tacitly left out. Moreover, as the 
subject of the campaign has usually 
little to do with their particular disabilities, they voluntarily withdraw. 
If they are especially brought into a 
campaign they are given over to the 
lowest white politicians and ward 
heelers, and the only arguments used 
are money and honeyed words. Consequently, the average colored voter 
looks upon politics as a method of getting his friend, Bill Jones, a job as 
janitor, or possibly warding off some 
threatening calamity. As a method 
of government, a way of securing 
decent schools, healthful conditions 
of living, the right of administration 
of the law, and the like, the colored 
voter is singularly in the dark. He 
needs systematic education. 
The new Negro Party, or perhaps 
even better, an organization like the 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, should 
through its branches begin systematic 
effort to teach voters their duty, to 
decry the ridiculous bribe of small 
office, to put office holding in its real 
place as an opportunity to serve the 
public and not as an ornament or an 
honor. Send the Negro voter to 
school and let him teach himself the 
higher art of politics. 
DISCIPLINE 
OUR children are soon returning to school and it may 
be well to warn parents 
and teachers, especially of 
colored private schools and colleges 
in the South, of certain dangers 
ahead. 
I have before me as I write a catalog of a small and undoubtedly deserving colored school in South Carolina. I am particularly struck by the 
extraordinary character of the regulations: Girls are forbidden to wear 
jewelry; students are allowed to 
write to their parents on Saturday 
and their letters are subject to inspection ; students must attend all religious exercises; a school conference 
is held in the interest of student and 
teacher and attendance is obligatory; 
students must not loan each other 
money or clothing; they must attend 
all meals promptly and punctually; 
they must not dispute with teachers; 
their rooms must be open for inspection at 7 A. M., etc. All this indicates 
a prison-like discipline, an insistence 
on the letter of the law at variance 
with our modern conception of education. 
In the same sort of way the larger 
southern colleges are insisting upon 
a discipline which is growing more 
and more irksome to their students. 270 THE CRISIS 
Outbreaks have occurred at several 
large institutions. We may talk as 
we will of students "running" an institution and the necessity of obedience and all that kind of thing, but 
we must, nevertheless, remember 
that it is not the business of the 
school to break the student's will, to 
reduce him to an automaton, or to 
"make" him do things. On the contrary, a real school wishes to turn 
out a self-disciplined man; self-reliance, self-respect and initiative are 
the things to be emphasized and our 
schools will forestall trouble and approach nearer the ideal of education 
if they would do away with some of 
these mediaeval rules and look upon 
their students as embryonic men and 
women rather than as babes or imbeciles. 
MIGRATION 
IT has long been the custom of 
' colored leaders to advise the 
colored people to stay in the 
South. This has been supplemented by the startling information on the part of southern whites 
that they are the "best friends of 
the colored people", etc. 
We might as well face the facts 
squarely: If there is any colored man 
in the South who wishes to have his 
children educated and who wishes to 
be in close touch with civilization and 
who has any chance or ghost of a 
chance of making a living in the 
North it is his business to get out of 
the South as soon as possible. He 
need not seek for reasons for so doing. The same reasons that drive 
the Jew from Russia, the peasants 
from Austria, the Armenians from 
Turkey and the oppressed from 
tyranny everywhere should drive the 
colored man out of the land of lynching, lawlessness and industrial oppression. 
It would, of course, be foolish for 
a man to give up a good chance of 
making a living and migrate to a 
country where he had little or no 
chance. But we are speaking of the 
case where men have an opportunity. 
These opportunities at present are 
widening in the North. Every single 
colored man who can should take 
advantage of it. The only effective 
protest that the Negroes en masse 
can make against lynching and disfranchisement is through leaving the 
devilish country where these things 
take place. 
The colored people of the North, 
on the other hand, should welcome 
their escaping fellows. It means, undoubtedly, increased hardships for 
them; it will bring proscription and 
temporary difficulties, but anything 
that means freedom to black slaves 
should be welcomed by their free 
northern brothers. 
COWARDICE 
NO colored man can read an account of the recent lynching 
at Gainesville, Fla., without 
being ashamed of his people. 
The action was characteristic. White 
officers, knowing themselves in the 
wrong and afraid of the resistance of 
colored men, sneaked in at midnight 
to serve a warrant on a person who 
they hoped would be helpless and ignorant of their intentions. Two of 
them seized the man in his house and 
after the melee one of the white men 
was dead and the other seriously 
wounded. Of the right and wrong 
of this no one will ever be really sure. 
There is no proof that the black man 
was guilty; there is no proof that he 
knowingly resisted arrest. There is 
proof, on the other hand, that after 
this extraordinary attack his colored 
fellows acted like a set of cowardly 
sheep. Without resistance they let 
a white mob whom they outnumbered 
two to one, torture, harry and murder their women, shoot down innocent men entirely unconnected with 
the alleged crime, and finally to cap 
the climax, they caught and surren-THE HARE AND THE TORTOISE 271 
dered the wretched man whose attempted arrest caused the difficulty. 
No people who behave with the absolute cowardice shown by these colored people can hope to have the sympathy or help of the civilized folk. 
The men and women who had nothing to do with the alleged crime 
should have fought in self-defense to 
the last ditch if they had killed every 
white man in the county and themselves been killed. The man who surrendered to a lynching mob the victim 
of the sheriff ought himself to have 
been locked up. 
In the last analysis lynching of Negroes is going to stop in the South 
when the cowardly mob is faced by 
effective guns in the hands of the 
people determined to sell their souls 
dearly. 
"It may be a good thing to forget 
and forgive; but it is altogether too 
easy a trick to forget and be forgiven."—G. K. Chesterton. 
"WHO KNOWS THE THOUGHTS OF A CHILD !" 
TH E HAR E AN D TH E TORTOIS E 
A Negro Fairy Folk-Tale From Uganda 
I m. Selected by M. N. WOR K 
THE hare and the tortoise were great 
friends. One day they decided to 
search for food. They went to an ant hill 
and dug a hole in it so as to trap the ants. 
The next day, as the time drew near for 
them to visit the hole, the hare said, "Wh y 
should an old fool like the tortoise share 
this feast with me? I can easily outwit 
him." So he told his friends to wait in a 
quiet place for the tortoise and when he 
came by to seize him and carry him into the 
tall grass through which he would have 
great difficulty in pushing his way. His 
friends did as he requested. They waited 
and as the tortoise came by they caught 
him and carried him into the tall grass. 
In the meantime the hare ate all the ants 
he wanted and scampered off home. 
The tortoise, after a long struggle, man-
* Johnston, The Uganda Protectorate, Vol. II, 603-604 
aged to get out of the grass. Tired and 
vexed he made his way to the ant hill, but 
found no food. He saw there, however, 
the footprints of the hare, and as it flashed 
upon him that he had been outwitted, he 
became angry and said, "Never mind, my 
cunning friend, I will get even with you 
for this." 
When he reached home the hare rushed 
out to meet him and said, "How thankful 
I am to see you safe. I feared you were 
killed. I only escaped myself by the merest 
chance. Three spears just missed me. We 
must never go back to that ant hill." 
"Have no fear", said the tortoise. "Our 
enemies are not likely to come to the same 
spot again. It will be quite safe for us 
to go there another day." 
The tortoise, knowing that the selfish 
hare would sneak off alone to feast on the 272 THE CRISIS 
ants, arranged with his friends to catch 
the hare when he was busy eating. "Wait 
for him", said the tortoise, "and when he 
has his head deep in the hole pounce upon 
him, but," he added, "do not kill him." 
"Oh" , said the friends, "we like hare's 
meat; we want to eat him." 
"Very well", said the tortoise, "but if 
you kill him quickly he will be tough. Yo u 
must take him home, then make a pot ready 
half filled with fine oil and salt. Put the 
hare in the pot leaving a hole in the cover 
so that you may add cold water from time 
to time, for if you let the oil get hot you 
will completely spoil the hare. Be very 
careful, therefore, not to let it boil." 
The friends did exactly as they were 
told. They trapped the hare and carried 
him home. Then they put him in a pot 
with the best of oil, the proper amount 
of salt and placed the pot on the fire. Water 
was added occasionally through the hole 
made in the cover. After some hours, when 
all was thought to be ready, the friends, 
having washed their hands and nicely laid 
out the dishes, seated themselves expectantly. The pot was placed in their midst and 
the cover was withdrawn when hoy! presto! 
out jumped the hare, and to their horror, 
ran away. As he rushed into his house he 
found his comrade waiting. 
"Dear me", said the tortoise, "Where 
have you been?" 
"Alas! " said the hare, "I have been in 
great danger. I nearly lost my life. I've 
been caught and cooked. It was only by 
a miracle that I escaped." 
As he said this he began to lick himself. 
The tortoise, noticing that a look of pleasure rapidly succeeded that of fright, went 
across to him and also began to lick. 
"Ho w delicious", said he. 
"Get away" , said the greedy hare. "Yo u 
have not been in the pot or through all the 
trials I've been through. Keep off." 
The tortoise, feeling that his cunning 
had supplied the oil and salt, began to get 
angry. 
"Let me have your shoulder and left side 
to lick? " 
"I will not", said the hare, more and 
more enjoying himself. 
The tortoise, in great fury, left the house. 
He had not gone far before he met his 
angry friends coming to meet him. 
"Wha t do you mean" ? they asked. 
"Through your advice we have lost not 
only the hare, but also our fine oil and salt. 
When we uncovered the pot the hare 
jumped out and ran off with the oil and 
salt all clinging to him." 
The tortoise, in his rage, lost every feeling of friendship for the hare and said, 
"I will tell you what to do. Yo u arrange 
a dance and invite the hare and when he is 
dancing to your tom-tom seize him and this 
time kill him." 
The dance was arranged. The hare was 
invited and came. While he was dancing 
the friends suddenly seized him. To make 
sure that he would not escape this time 
they killed him, skinned him and cut him 
up. 
Thus the hare, for once, was outwitted 
and because of his greediness, miserably 
perished. 
'CHILDREN AND FOOLES CANNOT LYE.' HOW I GREW MY CORN 273 
MY LITTLE ONE 
By G. DOUGLA S JOHNSON 
THE infant eyes looked out amazed upon 
the frowning earth, 
A stranger, in a stranger land, child of 
the mantled-birth; 
Waxing, he wondered more and more; the 
scowling grew apace; 
A world, behind its barring doors, reviles 
his ebon face : 
Yet, 'mid this maelstrom forms a man and 
like to God is he! 
He loves a world, all loveless, and can 
smile—on Calvary! 
HOW I GREW MY CORN 
By HELEN STEVENSON 
IN the year 1914 all the children in the schools of 
Cumberland county, N. J., were 
given the privilege to enter a 
contest. The girls were to sew, 
patch or bake and the boys to 
grow corn or sweet potatoes. 
As I liked to work out of doors 
I entered the corn contest. The 
rules were that the boys should 
do all the work themselves; the 
girls were to do all except the 
plowing. We were to have onetenth of an acre and find our 
own seed. 
When I first asked my father for a piece 
of ground he said, "I can not spare it." 
But at last he consented to give me a plot 
next to the woods, if I could get one-tenth 
of an acre from it. 
One night after school I went down and 
measured off my ground. On the nineteenth of May I took my old friend, Harry 
(the horse), whom I had worked in the 
field before, and went down to my farm, 
as I called it. There I worked until I had 
an even seed bed, after which 
I marked it out and fertilized 
it. On the next day I planted 
my corn putting three grains in 
a hill and covering it with a 
hoe. 
I paid it daily visits and when 
it was about two inches high I 
replanted it and hoed the hills 
which were up. From then on 
I hoed and cultivated my crop 
and kept it free from grass 
until it grew too large to be 
attended. As it was a dry season that year, the stalks next to 
the woods did not grow to their full height. 
I also had visitors to come and see my 
corn. This gave me more courage to go 
on as all the other girls and boys in Fairfield township had given it up. Mother and 
father had also tried to discourage me, but 
I kept on. 
I did not cut it down until November. 
I then measured my highest stalks which 
were from fifteen to sixteen feet. On the 274 THE CRISIS 
day before the contest I stayed home to get 
my corn ready. Mother and father Coaxed 
me not to take it away, but I did. 
Afte r selecting ten of my largest and 
best ears of corn, I put them in a basket 
and went to Bridgeton with one of my 
neighbors, as father would not take them. 
Afte r arriving in town I carried my corn 
up to the Court House. 
The next day I went to school and in the 
afternoon my teacher received a telephone 
message which said I had won a prize. I 
was very happy indeed; mother and father 
were surprised. 
On Saturday I went to the Bridgeton 
Library annex where things were being exhibited and saw my corn with a prize tag 
on it which made me feel very proud. I 
then went to the Commercial League room 
where the prizes were distributed. I received my prize and went home very happy 
and full of courage to try again. 
The amount I cleared for my corn was 
$12.00—$5.00 for my fodder, $4.00 for my 
seed and $3.00 for my prize. 
I am going to try again this year and 
I think all boys and girls who have the 
privilege of learning to farm should do so 
—fo r there is nothing better than life on 
a farm. 
A RAINY DAY 
By LOTTIE BURRIL L DIXO N 
m 
OUTSID E I hear the dashing rain 
Fall full against the window pane. 
On such a day, the fire aglow, 
An easy chair, a book or so,— 
Wha t more would I that fortune bring? 
Ye t hark! I hear a step—a ring— 
And close to heart and hearth I fold 
My friend, who guessed my wish untold. 
For other joys I do not pray, 
Content am I this rainy day. 
SWEET CHILDISH DAYS, THAT WERE AS LONG AS TWENTY DAYS ARE NOW. National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
THE LYNCHING FUND 
AS we go to press the Ten Thousand 
Dollar Anti-lynching Fund has 
reached the sum of $10,177.50 in cash and 
pledges. We Congratulate America. 
ANOTHER LYNCHING 
By M. A. H. 
GAINESVILLE , a charming town about 
eighty miles southwest of Jacksonville, Fla., has a population of about 11,000. 
It is in a turpentine country, but the immediate neighborhood is chiefly devoted to 
truck and cotton farming. The University of Florida, with its beautiful buildings, is on the outskirts of the town. 
Newberry is eighteen miles west by the 
driving road. It is entirely different in 
character. It is a railroad station; its 
total population is recorded at 1,000, but 
that seems a high figure, and two-thirds of 
the inhabitants are Negroes. Newberry 
was built when the phosphate fields were 
being worked in the close vicinity. These 
phosphate fields have been closed for several years and since then farming and 
trading have been the chief occupations. 
The town is a desolate place of shanties 
and small houses, and has the reputation 
of lawlessness. There is not one good 
building in the place and many of the 
houses are vacant. The sun beats down on 
the roofs and there is almost no shade. 
The white men live chiefly by small stores. 
The colored people hire out to farmers, etc. 
Many of the colored women go out to service in other cities. 
The driving road between Gainesville and 
Newberry is more of the Gainesville character. Most of the land is under cultivation. Four or five large farms lie along 
the road, but most of them are small farms. 
Roads branch off from the main road leading to other farms. The chief products are 
cotton, corn, some sugar cane, peanuts, pecans, melons, cucumbers, and other garden 
truck. A large number of the farmers are 
Negroes. They own their own land, to a 
large extent, and are prosperous. 
Jonesville is a blacksmith shop and a 
store with adjacent farms five miles from 
Newberry and thirteen miles from Gainesville. The rioting was along the road between Jonesville and Newberry. The white 
men were all either from Newberry or the 
neighborhood. 
The trouble arose over hogs. In the last 
few years hog raising has become profitable here. A Gainesville firm buys the 
farmers' hogs and ships them to a large 
packing concern in Georgia. Many of the 
farmers have hogs which roam at large in 
the road and in the woods. They are supposed to be branded, but they are not 
always and there is constant trouble about 
them. 
Some of the white farmers accused Boisy 
Long and another colored man of stealing 
hogs. The latter man was arrested on a 
warrant and is now in jail. 
The story is that the sheriff went to serve 
a warrant on Boisy Long at two o'clock on 
the morning of August 18, which seemed 
an extraordinary thing to do—to go out on 
a lonely road to arrest a man at this hour. 
The reason given is that he got the warrant 
in Jacksonville and came out on the train 
at 12:30 at night to Gainesville, where he 
took an automobile. Wh y he should be 
275 276 THE CRISIS 
coming out on that train, or why he 
should come out at that time, is not known. 
With him was a Dr. Harris (white). Some 
say that Dr. Harris was the owner of the 
hogs and had had the warrants sworn out. 
A third man drove the automobile. 
Boisy Long was adopted into the Dennis 
family when a boy. His house and the 
Dennis' house are rather pleasantly located 
on a little rise of land on this road and are 
of the ordinary shanty type. Long and the 
Dennises owned their farms. 
Dr. Harris and the sheriff got to Long's 
place and went in to arrest him. No one 
knows what happened except that it is 
clear enough that Long shot the two of 
them. As soon as the man in the automobile heard the shooting he rushed into the 
house and helped the two wounded men 
back to the automobile. They drove back 
to Jacksonville and at Jacksonville the 
sheriff died. There seems to be a good deal 
of controversy as to just how the shooting 
occurred. A current story says that Longslept with a revolver strapped to his side. 
Another story is that it was the sheriff's 
revolver with which the shooting was done; 
that the sheriff felt under Long's pillow to 
see if he could find a revolver and he could 
not. 
Their going back to Jacksonville gave 
Long a chance to escape. The Newberry 
people came down to Long's place, and since 
he had escaped, they took his wife, Stella, 
and Mrs. Dennis along and put them in 
jail on the ground that they refused to 
give information. I do not know whether 
or not Stella Long was in the house at the 
time of the shooting, but it is said the two 
women were tortured for information. 
All day Friday, the 18th, men in automobiles seem to have been riding up and 
down the road, their rage increasing every 
hour. They met James Dennis, a colored 
man, in Jonesville, and shot him. James's 
brother, Bert, went to Newberry to get a 
coffin for his brother's body, and he was 
thrown into jail. 
The men met Josh Baskin on his way 
back from Newberry, where he had been 
marketing. His farm is about two miles 
from the Long and Dennis farms, toward 
Gainesville. He owned his land, and was a 
preacher. Last year he was accused of cow 
stealing, arrested, and discharged because 
there was no evidence to hold him. The 
men took him out of his wagon into the 
automobile, returned to a group of trees 
near Newberry and hanged him. 
This clump of bays, water oaks and 
sweet gums is the one beautiful spot near 
Newberry. It is a lovely little grove. The 
report is that in former years other' lynchings have taken place there and the spot 
has the name, "Hangman's Island." 
The men next returned to Newberry and 
took the two women and the man out of 
the jail, brought them to the same place 
and lynched them. The Negroes came pouring from Newberry into Gainesville for 
safety. 
Stella Long had four or five children. 
Mary Dennis had two children and was 
pregnant. The other Dennis man had a 
family also. 
Boisy Long has an uncle, Squire Long, 
who owns 100 acres of land a few miles 
away. The mob visited him and terrorized 
him, and when Boisy Long appeared at his 
house for food he took him a prisoner and 
gave him up to the authorities. Long is 
now in the Jacksonville jail. 
A special session was called for the circuit 
court for September 4. The coroner's jury 
will report about the lynching at this time 
and Long will be tried for the shooting. 
The next term will be in December. 
AMENIA 
FIFT Y representatives of the Negro race 
of every school of thought and every 
form of activity held an important conference on August 24, 25 and 26 at "Troutbeck", the country home of Dr. J. E. Spingarn. The members of the conference 
formed a tent colony and enjoyed camp life 
throughout the conference. Every phase of 
the race question was discussed. The conference was fully attended and lasted three 
days. 
The following resolutions were unanimously adopted: 
The AMENI A CONFERENC E believes 
that its members have arrived at a virtual 
unanimity of opinion in regard to certain 
principles and that a more or less definite 
result may be expected from its deliberations. These principles and this practical 
result may be summarized as follows: 
(1) The conference believes that all 
forms of education are desirable for the Ne-N. A. A. C. P. 277 
gro and that every form of education should 
be encouraged and advanced. 
(2 ) It believes that the Negro, in common with all other races, cannot achieve its 
highest development without complete political freedom. 
(3 ) It believes that this development and 
this freedom cannot be furthered without 
Organization and without a practical working understanding among the leaders of the 
colored race. 
(4 ) It believes that antiquated subjects 
of controversy, ancient suspicions and factional alignments must be eliminated and 
forgotten if this organization of the race 
and this practical working understanding of 
its leaders are to be achieved. 
(5 ) It realizes the peculiar difficulties 
which surround this problem in the South 
and the special need of understanding between leaders of the race who live in the 
South and those who live in the North. It 
has learned to understand and respect the 
good faith, methods and ideals of those who 
are working for the solution of this problem 
in various sections of the country. 
(6) The conference pledges itself to the 
inviolable privacy of all its deliberations. 
These conclusions, however, and the amicable results of all the deliberations of the 
conference are fair subjects for discussion in the colored press and elsewhere. 
(7 ) The conference feels that mutual understanding would be encouraged if the 
leaders of the race could meet annually for 
private and informal discussion under conditions similar to those which have prevailed at this conference. 
Amon g those present were : Fred R. 
Moore, John Hope, J. R. Hawkins, James W . 
Johnson, J. E. Spingarn, Committee. W. E. 
B. Du Bois, Mary Church Terrell, H. A. 
Hunt, Hutchins C. Bishop, Mason A. Hawkins, J. Rosamond Johnson, Addi ; W. Hunton, W. Ashbie Hawkins, Leslie Pinckney 
Hill, Montgomery Gregory, W. Scott Brown, 
Jr., Francis H. Warren, Charles E. Bentley, 
James A. Cobb, Wm. L. Bulkley, Mary B. 
Talbert, William H. Lewis, L. J. Coppin, 
Oswald Garrison Villard, Emmett J. Scott, 
Geo. W. Cook, Kelly Miller, J. C. Napier, L. 
C. Laney, Wm. Pickens, Geo. W. Crawford, 
Garnett R. Waller, Chas. W. Chesnutt, 
Arthur B. Spingarn, Brown S. Smith, Roy 
Nash, R. R. Wright, W. Justin Carter, John 
Hurst, L. M. Hershaw, R. R. Wright, Jr. 
Besides the conferees a number of distinguished and representative members of both 
races were invited to be present and take 
part in the discussions from day to day. 
Amon g the guests and visitors who addressed the conference were: His Excellency 
Charles S. Whitman, Governor of New 
York ; Oswald Garrison Villard, editor of 
the Evening Post; Hon. Herbert Parsons 
and Miss Inez Milholland. Edward Ware, 
president of Atlanta University; Dr. V. 
Morton Jones, Lieut. V. W. Tandy, John E. 
Nail, A. G. Dill and Gilchrist Stewart. Men of the Month 
SOME BELGIUM REFUGEES 
HERE are the two children of Lieuten-
••
 A ant-Colonel Charles Young of the 
United States Army. We think of them, 
naturally, as good Americans and that they 
are; but they are also Belgium refugees. 
While Colonel Young was detailed for 
road building in Liberia his two children 
were put to school in Belgium. Suddenly 
came the war and its path was right over 
the place of their schooling. For a long 
time they were lost and their frantic parents cabled the world in vain. Then Mrs. 
Young started—through Spain and France, 
hindered and annoyed, across the channel 
to England and over the waters to Holland with bombs falling. 
A t last the children were found well 
housed and carefully taken care of in Holland and in course of time they came back 
to the United States and to Wilberforce, 
having forgotten all their English. 
RACE SUICIDE 
THIS is the sturdy family of a teacher 
in a southern school. One thinks of 
the families of colored people as growing 
smaller, and they are. Particularly the educated and careful folk have few or no children; but some are willing to bear the 
burden of the next generation and to train 
little men and women to go forth and fight. 
Here are the protagonists from one 
family. 
A STORY IN CLAY 
A CURIOUS tale of inner tragedy is 
portrayed by one of Mrs. May Howard Jackson's latest works. It shows the 
Octoroon mother and her darker child. 
Many of the so-called "near whites " walk 
off and marry into the other race, as they 
have a perfect right to do being more white 
than black. Their children learnedly discuss the race problem from the standpoint 
of white folk. Others, however, in just as 
large numbers, feel the call of the blood 
and marry within the race, often to men of 
A TEACHER'S FAMILY. 
278 MEN OF THE MONTH 279 
THE CHILDREN OF LIEUT.- COL. YOUNG 
darker and stronger Negro blood. Then 
to the mother comes the new sense of racial 
difficulties. She sees her child proscribed 
in a hundred ways where she was not, 
since the public did not so easily sense her 
race identity, and she holds the little one 
to her in fierce protection. 
A BISHOP 
ALEXANDE R P. CAMPHO R was born 
of slave parents in Jefferson Parish, 
La., in 1865. When eight years old he was 
sent to New Orleans to live with Stephen 
Priestley, a rugged, old-fashioned Methodist 
preacher, who had been a fellow slave of his 
mother. He attended Public School in Carrollton and received his A. B. from New 
Orleans University in 1889. The degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity was conferred upon 
him by Gammon Theological Seminary, at 
Atlanta, Ga., and he was appointed pastor 
of James M. E. Church, Germantown, Pa. 
The Rev. Mr. Camphor and his wife were 
the first regularly appointed colored missionaries to the "Dark Continent" under the 
Prent Board. He was President of the College of West Africa and Superintendent of 
Methodist Schools in Liberia from 1896 to 
1907. While there he gathered original material for two volumes: "Missionary Story 
Sketches and Folklore From Africa " and 
"Liberia, the Afro-American Republic." 
Returning to America Mr. Camphor accepted the presidency of Central Alabama 
Institute, at Birmingham, and held this position eight years. He was three times 
elected delegate to the General Conference 
and once a delegate to the World's Missionary Conference at Edinburgh, Scotland. 
At the recent General Conference of the 
Methodist Episcopal Church he was elected 
Bishop to Africa. 
A BUSINESS MAN 
WILLIAM H. LITCHFER D has recently opened the New Litchferd 
Hotel in Columbus, O. The building is a 
three story fire-proof brick structure on 
the southeast corner of Fourth and Elm 
streets and is but three blocks from the 
State capitol building. It is the only property in that vicinity owned exclusively by 
a Negro. The hotel has fifty guest rooms, 
a dining room, lobby, office, beautiful parlor and a grill room. 
"MOTHER AND CHILD" 
By Mrs. May Howard Jackson 280 THE CRISIS 
MISS M. E. ANDERSON REV. MR. E. A. JOHNSON MISS B. E. ROLLINS 
THE LITCHFERD HOTEL 
BISHOP A. P. CAMPHOR MISS K. E. GALE MR. W. H. LITCHFERD MEN OF THE MONTH 281 
THE JOHN BROWN TABLET 
See page 297. 
(Copyrighted, 1916, John Williams, Inc. 
Mr. Litchferd was born in Columbus, O., 
over a half century ago. His hotel represents years of hard labor and sacrifice. 
A MUSICIAN 
MISS B. ERNESTIN E ROLLINS is a 
native of Springfield, Mass., and a 
product of its schools. She received her 
musical education under Professors Gustav 
Kriedte and C. W . Burnett and at the 
Springfield School of Music and the Cleveland Conservatory of Music. 
Miss Rollins is one of three colored members and a leading soprano of the Musical 
Festival, a permanent organization of four 
hundred voices in Springfield. She also 
teaches music and is the organist of Third 
Baptist Church in Springfield. Her professional services are in great demand. 
A MINISTER 
REVEREN D MR. EUGEN E A. JOHNSON has been pastor of Grace Presbyterian Church, at Seattle, Wash., for the 
past four years. This is the only colored 
Presbyterian church in the northwest. 
Mr. Johnson was recently elected Commissoner from the Presbytery of Seattle to 
the General Assembly of the Presbyterian 
Church in Atlantic City, N. J. He has been 
Moderator of the Carlisle Presbytery of 
Pennsylvania and examiner in Greek and 
Hebrew. 
A SINGER 
MISS MARIO N E. ANDERSO N was 
-*•'-*• one of the leading singers with the 
People's Choral Society of one hundred and 
twenty-five voices in the rendition of Handel's "Messiah" at Musical Fund Hall, Philadelphia, Pa., last April. 
Miss Anderson is in her second year at 
the William Penn High School in Philadelphia. She has been singing before the public for the past two years and the People's 
Choral Society has contributed $144 toward 
a scholarship for her. She is now studying 
under a German teacher and anticipates 
going abroad after her schooling if she can 
secure sufficient engagements; but her 
father is dead and Miss Anderson is one of 
a family of four. 
A SOCIAL WORKER 
MISS KAT E E. GALE, of Virginia 
Union University, in Richmond, is a 
white woman who has faith in Negroes. 
She has been superintendent of Hickory 
Hill Mission for many years. 
This mission, which is located in a very 
crowded and neglected part of the city, recently presented Miss Gale a gold medal in 
appreciation of her labor among the colored 
people. 
GEN. PERSHING, GEN. BLISS AND LIEUT-COL. 
YOUNG, "SOMEWHERE IN MEXICO" The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
CARRIZA L has brought some verse 
that may not be forgotten. Perhaps 
the most touching is Jean Stansbury Holden's "Troope r at Carrizal" in the New 
Yor k Times: 
"Black Sophy, way down on the lower branch 
Is washing the white folks' clothes; 
The 'light wood' burns bright 'neath her 
iron pot, 
And all around her glows. 
"He r strong arms rustle the feathery suds 
While she pictures her soldier Joe 
As he rode in his handsome khaki suit 
On his way to Mexico" . 
The word comes to her: 
"He writ how Joe stood in the frontmost 
rank 
And was shot straight through the haid, 
And left by the soldiers at Carrizal, 
Amongst the brave young daid. 
"All night Sophy Jones sat still on her log, 
And the bright fire faded gray; 
While her neighbors came and wailed long 
and loud— 
And Joe's dog went away. 
"But when the day dawned, the tender June 
day, 
All quietly she arose 
And, lighting the pine 'neath the great iron 
pot, 
She washed the white folks' clothes." 
Precious little the American people care 
about Sophy and her sorrow. As Ralph 
Rankin Murray puts it in the Philadelphia 
Record: 
"Yes! it's 'please to go away,' 
And it's 'come some other day,' 
And it's only 'coal black niggers' when 
you're home, 
Ah ! but when it's time to fight, 
Then your tarnished souls are white 
And the meagre lauding honors start to 
come ; 
You were Johnnie on the spot, 
When the Cuban fight was hot, 
And they praise you when you're dying— 
noble Tenth; 
When you have to face the guns, 
Then you're Uncle Sammy's sons, 
And they only praise your fightin' brutal 
strength; 
And your 1 troop is not the 'crack,' 
'Cause your skin is brown and black,— 
But they praise you when you're dyin'— 
noble Tenth." 
AMON G the pamphlets that have come 
to us is an interesting reprint on 
"Early Negro Deportation Projects " by H. 
N. Sherwood of the State Normal School of 
Wisconsin. It is especially informing for 
the period before 1816. 
The Rev. Albert T. Kropf published his 
Kafir dictionary in 1899. A new and enlarged edition of this work has recently 
been brought out by the Rev. Robert Godfrey of the Lovedale Mission, South Africa. 
It consists of 525 pages. 
The Negro Yea r Book for 1917, edited 
by Monroe N. Work, of Tuskegee, Ala., 
has appeared. It has many additions and 
teems with interesting facts. 
282 THE LOOKING GLASS 283 
OUR LYNCHING CULTURE 
SOME correspondents to the Little Rock, 
^ Ark., Democrat are peeved at certain 
criticisms and strictures of their lynching 
activities. They declare that the black 
"Mo b Victim Wa s Extended Every Earned 
Courtesy." He was "hanged in as humane 
a manner as possible." 
"Quite recently, in England, a man was 
hanged for high treason. He suffered the 
tortures of strangulation for nine minutes 
before he was pronounced dead by the attending physicians. W e give you our word 
that the criminal we 'lynched' did not live 
nine seconds after his feet left the ground 
as the shot wounds on his body will prove. 
"The only request made by the criminal 
was that he be hanged or shot and not tortured or burned. That his request was 
granted was self-evident to every one who 
saw the remains." 
The San Francisco Bulletin says: 
"Just how many Americans have been 
killed in Mexico since the revolution began is not known. A good many have been 
killed or barbarously abused. For a comparison consider the American State of 
Georgia: 'For three years,' says Dr. W. E. 
B. Du Bois, 'the State of Georgia has been 
torn with lawlessness. The lives of Americans and also aliens have been sacrificed. 
Fifty-six persons have been lynched, property has been destroyed and homes violated. 
Peaceful citizens have been systematically 
driven from their homes and occupations.' 
"The source of trouble in Georgia is racial. Most of the victims, though not all, 
were Negroes. Lynching is defended in 
Georgia as a weapon by which an inferior 
breed of men is kept in its proper place. 
In Mexico Americans are not considered to 
be an inferior race, but with certain elements in the Mexican cosmos they are unpopular. Even then, as Colonel Burns 
pointed out in the Bulletin a few days ago, 
very few Americans out of the large number 
living in Mexico have been injured in person or property. A Mexican might say that 
its federal government had met its race 
problems as well as the American government has done." 
Herbert L. Stewart, writing in the New 
Yor k Nation, evidences the beginning o f 
sound, deep thought on the lynching horror. 
He cites the usual discussions in railway 
cars: 
"The matter is broached, perhaps, by a 
lately arrived Englishman who has read in 
his newspaper about some horrible occurrence in Georgia or Texas and who asks 
with true British naivete why 'the police' 
did not interfere. A raucous laugh from 
his companions conveys to him that his 
question must have been unutterably foolish. He is quickly made to understand that 
when a mob in Georgia or Texas chooses to 
set upon a black man, tie him to a pillar 
upon the stage of a music-hall, take potshots 
at him with revolvers from innumerable 
points in the auditorium, finally anoint him 
with petrol and set him on fire, it is recognized in that community that a policeman's 
wisdom is to keep out of sight." 
He continues: 
"A s a sort of climax to the discussion, 
it often happens that one of the party, who 
has been regaling the rest with risque anecdotes and boasting of his own sensualities, 
will spring to his feet and swear by his 
Maker that if ever he catches a black man 
who has dared to be unchaste he will flay 
him alive with his own righteous hand. 
"The truth upon the matter is plainly this 
—that in the lynching districts the habit is 
maintained far less because any special 
Negro tendency calls for it than because on 
general grounds the white man there thinks 
it indispensable if the blacks are to be kept 
in their place. It is an instrument of racial terrorism, to be displayed periodically 
with cause or without cause, just to show 
who is master. Policy of this sort is soon 
reinforced by the easily awakened blood-lust 
of a mob; to-day a lynching seems to be demanded from time to time in Georgia much 
as the Roman proletariate called for panem 
et circenses; Americans elsewhere have to 
blush with shame to think that there are 
men holding American citizenship whose 
nervous systems need the occasional 'thrill' 
of a fellow-creature's agony. 
* * * * * * 
"It is so satisfying to be able to speak 
in the refined rhetoric of the Governor of 
Georgia about the 'burning, boiling, roaring 
cauldron of the soul' of somebody else. But 
the Nemesis of such a policy is never far 
off. Lawlessness which pleases you when 
it is on your side has an unfortunate tendency to change sides. Encourage a mob to 
strike wild blows on the merest suspicion, 
or on no suspicion, and you cannot predict 284 THE CRISIS 
where their blows will fall next. The cauldron will not always burn, roar, and boil 
precisely to order. 
"W e are sometimes impatiently told that 
this matter is the business of the Southern 
States alone. It is nothing of the kind. As 
the Nation has repeatedly insisted, it concerns the honor of America as a whole. 
And, still more, it challenges the thought 
of every scientific student of criminology 
throughout the world. The advocates of 
lynch law have denied some of the most 
fundamental principles which had been 
reached in this field after laborious investigation". 
We are sorry to see Mrs. Lucia Ames 
Mead joining those who, fearing to censure 
the South for a dozen mob murders, find 
tripping tongues as soon as anything happens in the North. The Lima tragedy is, 
of course, a matter of wild congratulation to 
the Charlotte, N. C , Observer: 
"This lynching outbreak among men has 
long ago passed the bounds of geographical 
lines. Atlanta, Springfield, Illinois and Cincinnati and now this Ohio frenzy to set off 
against outbreaks in the South. Some papers will be saying to the North, 'Who's 
looney now? ' in bitter recollections of taunts 
thrown at the South at times by those who 
write without poise". 
This is what we would expect; but we are 
disappointed to find a social reformer like 
Mrs. Mead taking comfort in the fact that 
a Baylor college professor has no "personal 
knowledge" of lynching souvenirs and showing satisfaction because "at Lima the reputed criminal was black and the northern 
mob was as full of venom as that at Waco, 
Tex., where it burned a Negro last spring". 
Saunders' Weekly National Independent, 
published by a southern white man at 
Washington, D. C , adds this edifying footnote to Wac o history: 
"Wac o has been placed on the map again. 
It was placed on the map some years ago 
by that brilliant satirist, William Cowper 
Brann. Brann placed Wac o on the map. 
The story is especially interesting in the 
light of subsequent events. 
"In Brann's time there was another notorious assault case in Waco . That time a 
Negro didn't assault a white woman. That 
time a white man, prominently identified 
with Baylor University, the great Baptist 
college at Waco , seduced a colored girl. 
To be more exact, the girl was a Brazilian 
who had been taken away from her people 
and brought to this country by Baptist missionaries who promised to have her educated 
at Baylor University. 
"The little Brazilian girl's skin was dark 
and at Baylor she was soon shown 'her 
place,' with the 'niggers' down in the 
kitchen. They snatched her away from 
her home in Brazil to make a missionary of 
her and they made of her a scullion; this 
girl, Antonia Teixeira, age only thirteen 
years. . 
"W. C. Brann told the story, exposed the 
whole awful mess. Did Wac o lynch the 
'ultra respectable' Christian ravisher of little Antonia Teixeira? It did not. Wac o 
lynched Brann. Brann was shot like a dog 
on the streets of Waco , on a summer's day 
in 1894 by one of the infamous scoundrels 
concerned in the ruin of the poor little Brazilian girl. Brann's ashes rest today in the 
soil of Wac o and Baylor University still 
rears its arrogant head, flourishing like a 
green bay tree over his grave. " 
But what difference does all this make? 
As Chenery says in the Chicago Herald: 
"The most impressive development of the 
last few years so far as the Negro is concerned is the moral fatigue with which 
(Continued on page 289) Shadows of Light 
"SOULS MADE OF FIRE, AND CHILDREN OF THE SUN, WITH WHOM REVENGE IS VIRTUE" 
285 286 THE CRISIS 
"A SIMPLE CHILD THAT LIGHTLY DRAWS ITS BREATH, AND FEELS ITS LIFE IN EVERY 
LIMB, WHAT SHOULD IT KNOW OF DEATH?" "LET THE CHILDREN FLAY AND SIT LIKE FLOWERS UPON THY GRAVE AND CROWN WITH 
FLOWERS,—THAT HARDLY HAVE A BRIEFER BLOOMING-TIDE THAN THEY" 
SHADOWS OF LIGHT 287 288 THE CRISIS 
"I HEAR THE LITTLE CHILDREN OF THE WIND CRYING SOLITARY IN LONELY PLACES" SHADOWS OF LIGHT 289 
(Continued from page 284) 
white people have viewed him. For a long 
time the country traveled on the moral momentum generated by the abolitionists and 
by the political results of the civil war. 
That no longer exists. 
"Outside of a small group of relatively 
dumb reformers nobody cares seriously. 
Disfranchisement is an accepted principle in 
the South. 'Jim Crow' laws no longer 
arouse comment. Segregation is growing, 
South, Southwest and North. The most frequent feeling on the part of whites is one 
of helpless, hopeless acquiescence in forces 
which they feel unable to challenge. 
"The old belief in equality is dormant. 
Orators will not admit it. No one whose political faith must be on parade can afford 
to admit it, but the truth is that race prejudice was never stronger. Not even the 
Christian brotherhood of man is a powerful enough motive to weld together different races belonging to the same religious denomination." 
PIN PRICKS 
AFTER all, lynching is but incident and 
indication. It is daily tyranny and injustice that shows the real enemies of the 
South. Even southern white papers now 
and then reveal it. The Miami, Fla., Metropolis says editorially: 
"This Negro is known by reputable white 
men to have tried to pay a license for operating a cleaning and pressing business. He 
was informed that such license was not required, and was unaware that he had been 
misinformed until a deputy sheriff arrived 
and arrested him, dragged him to jail like 
a criminal, permitted him to be subjected 
to the insulting treatment of a bunch of 
Negro prisoners—all without inquiry or human interest. 
"The question is, do deputy sheriffs hunt 
up white men who have not paid their licenses and drag them to jail? 
"No , a Negro who does not pay his occupation tax is a bad citizen—a white man 
who 'neglects it' is merely a good man overburdened with many pressing interests! 
"Let's have done with this discrimination." 
Later it adds: 
"The county officials have started the enforcement of the cigarette law. They have 
arrested a Negro because he gave the 'butts' 
of his cigarettes to another little Negro 
boy! 
"Now that's courage! That, we should 
say, is not only courage but great sleuth 
work! " 
The Richmond, Va., Evening Journal 
says: 
"For disorderly conduct on the street, 
Lizzie Shelton, colored, was fined five dollars 
by Justice Crutchfield. For being 'sassy' to 
the official the woman was sentenced to one 
year in jail. Queer kind of justice that, and 
manifestly unfair. Respect for a court is 
obligatory, but by no stretch of fancy is it 
conceivable that a justice of the peace has 
the legal—certainly not the moral—right to 
imprison an ignorant woman for twelve 
months because she was impudent in the 
court room. " 
There is an illuminating editorial in the 
Greensboro, N. C. News: 
"The people of South Greensboro ought 
not to have a Negro moving picture show 
thrust upon them against their wishes. It 
would be tyrannous to do so and we; have 
no idea that the city commissioners would 
consider such a course for a moment if they 
are assured that there is real objection. 
"At the same time the Negro population 
of the city is entitled to have some place 
of decent amusement; to deprive them of 
it simply because it might be troublesome 
to supply is not less tyrannous than to 
thrust such an institution on a reluctant 
neighborhood. It isn't right to deprive the 
Negroes of all amusement which ought to 
settle the question; but if any other argument were needed it isn't wise either. It 
encourages a spirit of restlessness and bitterness that is not good for the community." 
Note that the six or seven thousand colored people of Greensboro have no voice in 
this matter, in the year of the republic the 
one hundred and fortieth. 
REVOLT 
RESENTMEN T and revolt must be the 
result of this despicable policy. The 
children of slaves cannot for generations 
fight with weapons and red blood. That will 
come later, but it will come. As Stephen S. 
Wise said at North Elba, N. Y., in dedicating the John Brown tablet: 
"It is the business of America to perfect 
the work of John Brown, or rather to insist, 
if no more can be, that it shall not be undone. 
Nothing save evil is self-perpetuating. No 
one man can do the work of humanity. John 
Brown was not a sign-post, but a leader and 
yet he could do no more than lead a part of 290 THE CRISIS 
the way. The question for us of the American democracy to answer is—Shall we suffer to die the spirit that moved John Brown 
in his immortal ministry? 
"If it be urged as against his memory 
that he resorted to the use of weapons, let 
it not be unsaid in his defence that he 
sought nothing for himself, nor fame nor 
glory nor power nor reward nor territory, 
and that he entered upon his quest not to 
slay but to be slain, not to destroy but to 
free. John Brown did not advocate the use 
of force and then quietly buy and sell munition stocks at a profit. He did not send 
others forth to do battle for him. He pitted 
his life against evil and gladly surrendered 
it at the behest of duty. Wa r will not be 
ended until some day another John Brown 
will arise who will smite the evil of evils 
with the same God-given power with which 
an earlier John Brown smote the evil of 
slavery. 
"If, I repeat, it be urged against him that 
he used weapons of violence, let men remember that there are only two ways and no 
more. The one is the way of violence and 
the other is the way of love. The one is the 
way of force, and the other the way of 
reason. The one is the way of war and the 
other is the way of fraternity. But know 
you that if you deny the one to men, the 
other will inevitably be their way. Yo u 
shall not forever deny men the use of force, 
if you deny them the rights of peaceful redress and remedy." 
But there are many methods of effective 
peaceful revolt. Just as sure and just as 
soon as Negroes can earn a living outside 
the tyranny and lawlessness of the South 
they will do so. The present northern demand for black labor is a case in point and 
the antics of the Bourbon South are funny 
and matched only by the northern copperheads. The New Orleans States, for instance, is patronizing and pleasant: 
"So he would rather stay here, among the 
people who know and understand him and 
as a rule are willing to help him. As a matter of fact politics bother him but little. 
He really would never have taken very much 
interest in it if it had not been for designing 
men of both races who wanted the benefit of 
his vote to feather their own nests; and now 
that he finds registration difficult he concerns himself but little with our elections 
and wouldn't do so at all if he wasn't stirred 
up occasionally by agitators among his own 
people. As long as he was a factor in politics he had a more or less miserable time. 
Since he has been out of politics he discovers himself happier and more prosperous and entirely free from interference in 
the peaceful pursuit of his livelihood and 
happiness." 
The copperhead Hartford Courant, a singularly contemptible sheet on the race problem, ventures: "the opinion that most of 
them will be back South again before snow 
flies." 
The Montgomery, Ala., Advertiser weeps 
at the Negroes' plight, but recognizes "the 
dignity of a fact" : 
"Will the Negro fare as well in New England in winter and after the war as he fares 
in the South? It is very doubtful, but it is 
a fact that New England tobacco growers 
will draw a large number of southern Negroes to their fields. Other industries affording a greater day wage are drawing 
heavily upon Southern farm labor. It is a 
problem that cannot be ignored, because it 
has already assumed the character and dignity of a fact. " 
The Macon Daily Telegraph, from the 
state that lynches more Negroes than any 
state in the Union, drones solemnly: 
"Awa y from his own country and his own 
white folks the Negro has a hard row to 
hoe. White labor, skilled and unskilled, will 
not work with him, or allow him to work at 
their work by himself, except in abnormal 
labor times when the employers need so 
many more men they can herd the Negroes 
together into big gangs and separate divisions where they will not come into contact 
with the whites. These times are rare and 
they don't last long. It appears, however, 
one of them is obtaining just now. 
"The South's loss is not merely the best of 
its labor but to it is added the dependents 
the emigrant of color leaves behind him. 
In the first place, only the good Negro with 
the job is taken because these northern 
agents want steady, disciplined, dependable 
workers. These sort of Negroes, always 
have a family, generally plenty of children 
and a wife who is the treasure of some 
white man's family kitchen or linen closet. 
The man gone, the entire burden of support 
of that family is thrown on the community 
in which it is left. Nothing may be contributed directly, but in the end the general 
run of folks pay the bill and with interest. 
"It does not appear quite clear what can 
be done about it, but certainly the situation 
calls for quick action by the most resource-THE OUTER POCKET 291 
ful minds we have locally. Macon has a 
great many good Negroes, men and women, 
who are a credit to themselves and their 
environment and a real asset to the city, just 
as Macon has fa r too many of the other 
kind. 
The Raleigh News and Observer rises to 
positive eloquence: 
"The South is not inviting labor agents, 
the southern Negro does not need them and 
the days when men can trade in labor and 
sell it at so much a head ought to be a thing 
of the past. Kindly, gentle persuasion by 
the application of the labor law to all agents 
might aid North and South Carolina communities in saving their Negroes from the 
disaster that awaits their arrival in the 
Pennsylvania industrial slave marts." 
Meantime, we find but one voice that 
seems to show any ordinary common sense 
and this, a correspondent in the Macon, 
Ga., Daily Telegraph: 
" I unhesitatingly do say that the better 
class—the thrifty and law-abiding Negroes 
—can do well up North, for the Negroes are 
more in demand and good wages are paid 
them. Therefore, we are not slaveholders; 
we do not own the Negroes; we cannot compel them to stay here. Therefore, we want 
to keep the Negroes here. Then some of the 
farmers quit running six, eight or twelve 
plow farms, come down to two or three 
plows, plant less cotton, raise more grain, 
vegetables, foodstuffs, and can what's left 
of the truck that can't be sold or used at 
once. Pay good wages." 
The Outer Pocket 
T LIKE the September CRISIS real well, 
except the story, "Joan", and for the 
good of both races I feel it not best to 
print such. 
Now, being a servant of God and doing 
most all of the preaching that I do to the 
white race, as there are just a few colored 
people in this county, I am somewhat acquainted with the white people and one of 
their greatest fears seems to be that their 
children may fall in love with the black 
people and marry. 
Now, as for me, I believe the same with 
all good thinking people of both races. They 
would have their children choose a mate of 
their own race. Such stories as "Joan" 
take too much effect on the ones of our 
race that are weak. 
Tyron, Neb. 
MAGGIE A . CALDWELL. 
I miss to a very great extent those sweet 
little fictions which have a great and powerful moral lesson in them for the young 
Afro-Americans; that which inspires us to 
greater ambitions and achievements; that 
which encourages us to fight fearlessly and 
intelligently all difficulties which confront 
the colored American in this country. But 
this encouragement cannot come by reading 
about the "blue-eyed, white-skinned types 
which are set before us in school and literature." We long to read about the rich, 
brown and black men and, women with 
glowing, dark eyes and crinkling hair." 
An interested reader of the CRISIS. 
St. Louis, Mo. 
Last year several times after reading the 
CRISIS I would find myself plunged into 
deepest despondency because of reading 
such discouraging items as often appear 
in your columns. Impulsively I thought of 
discontinuing my subscription, but on more 
sober thought, knowing as I do the terrible 
obstacles which confront my people, I decided that the magazine was only the more 292 THE CRISIS 
"BACKWARD, FLOW BACKWARD, O TIDE OF THE YEARS! 
I AM SO WEARY OF TOIL AND OF TEARS,— 
TOIL WITHOUT RECOMPENSE, TEARS ALL IN VAIN! 
TAKE THEM, AND GIVE MY CHILDHOOD AGAIN!" THE OUTER POCKET 293 
valuable because it is strong enough to tell 
the truth. Fo r 'tis only through the truth 
that we can be free. Therefore, as an individual, I must see, as well as hear of the 
terrible injustices we must bear and it will 
only make me more determined to work and 
hope for ultimate and absolute freedom. 
MARGARET DOWN S MCCLEARY. 
Jacksonville, Fla. 
I have been a subscriber and reader of 
the CRISIS for two years or more, and I 
have not language to express my appreciation of it and of those who are responsible 
for its existence. Through its columns we 
are enabled to become better acquainted 
with our own race and the hopes and aspirations of our leaders—and I think it will 
become more and more a factor in promoting race respect. 
Guthrie, Okla. A. E . JACKSON. 
I would not waste my time and paper 
writing this letter if you were not so persistent, but since you insist I must say you 
are perfectly intolerant of any one who 
differs from you in opinion. 
Chicago, Ill. MRS. A. GRAVES. 
Let me say you are making a mighty 
strong and valuable organ of the CRISIS. 
I was probably the first northern man to 
put a gang of white men under the direction of a Negro. There was a hot protest; 
but I settled it by agreeing that when anyone of the party knew more about the work 
and could manage it better he was to have 
the leader's place—and there was no more 
kicking and the black man held to his place 
through sheer superiority. 
Ogunquit, Me. FREDERIC A. WHITING. 
Last issue o f CRISIS received. The supplement on the Wac o horror causes one to 
shiver. Please send bundles of it to Texas, 
Georgia and other states. If lynching is 
not then stopped then we are irretrievably 
brutal. The sight of that supplement will 
pain, but no cure without pain. Be not discouraged. Better times must come. 
Denton, Tex. RAYMOND VERNIMONT. 
I consider the CRISIS one of the most potent educational factors before the public. 
It is a recorder not only of our present history in all of its vicissitudes, but also of 
our ancient history whenever possible. 
This is best seen in your spirited responses 
as you bring to light carefully hidden facts 
to refute the criticisms of our enemies 
thus giving at the same time much useful 
knowledge to the reader. 
McGill University, PHILIP SAVORY. 
Montreal, Canada. 
We have been reading your valuable 
paper for the last three months and at our 
last meeting it was moved and seconded 
that I write you to express our appreciation and gratitude to you for the edition of 
such a paper. 
KENNETH L. HAMILTON, 
Sec'y British Negro Protection Association. 
West St. John, New Brunswick. 
I appreciate the reference to a silent constituency of the CRISIS. What editor of the 
colored publication has not had the same 
experience? 
Baltimore, Md. CARL J. MURPHY, 
Associate Editor, Afro-American. 
The CRISIS aims to state conditions as 
they are; it does not smooth them over nor 
exaggerate them. I like it for its truth. 
Then, I like its brave, reasonable and uncompromising stand for justice to all people. 
It is hardly necessary to say that it is dear 
to me because it is the champion of our own 
cause. And in addition to these reasons 
some of its editorials have impressed me by 
their strength and beauty as "Carrizal" and 
"Benson." 
Baltimore, Md. Miss MARGARET E . HOWE. 
The members of the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People and 
others are cordially invited and earnestly 
requested to attend the National Colored 
Citizenship Rights Congress to be held Oct. 
4-5, in the John Wesley A. M. E. Zion 
Church, 14th and Corcoran Streets, N. W., 
Washington, D. C , called by the National 
Equal Rights League. 
The abridgment of their citizenship rights 
a half century after Congress voted for citizenship for colored Americans will be a 
paramount matter for consideration at this 
national assembly of the race. 
BYRON GUNNER, Millburn, N. Y., President. 
WILLIAM MONROE TROTTER, Boston, Mass. 
REV. R. C. RANSOM, Oceanport, N. J 294 THE CRISIS 
"O THOU CHILD OF MANY PRAYERS! LIFE HATH QUICKSANDS; LIFE HATH SNARES !" The Horizon 
MUSIC AND ART 
MISS SARA H MA Y TALBERT , pianist, 
daughter of Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Talbert, of Buffalo, N. Y., was awarded first 
prize of $25, offered for the best vocal composition, at the annual session of the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs 
held in August at Baltimore, Md. Miss Talbert is a graduate of the New England Conservatory of Music. 
Mr. Kemper Harreld, violinist, of Atlanta, Ga., has given a number of mid-summer recitals. A t Tuskegee Institute and in 
Atlanta he was heard in numbers by Vieuxtemps, Ries, Sarasate, Schumann, Schubert, 
Kreisler and his own arrangement of Cadman's "From the Land of the Sky Blue 
Water. " 
Mme. Cara Sapin, contralto of the former 
Boston Opera Company, gave much pleasure 
at her recital at Northport, Me., by the singing of songs by Will Marion Cook and a 
group of plantation songs in which she is 
said to be inimitable. Mme. Sapin is a native white Southerner. 
Programs recently presented by George 
Hamlin, the noted tenor, comprise songs of 
H. T. Burleigh and Rosamond Johnson. 
The Hampton Quartet gave a concert recently before a large audience at Duffield, 
Conn., under the auspices of the Banner 
Fountain Order. 
At the twenty-second midsummer musical 
festival held at Norfolk, Conn., distinguished artists appeared and their numbers by H. T. Burleigh proved to be among 
the most enjoyable of the songs offered. 
Daniel Beddoe, tenor, sang "Th e Young 
Warrior" , while the spiritual, "Deep River", 
arranged by Mr. Burleigh, had a notable 
presentation by an octet of singers. A t a 
banquet after the concert, given by the 
Misses Eldridge, patrons of these concerts, 
the octet repeated "Deep River". 
Negro composers have received wide recognition at the numerous mid-summer musical events held in New England. A t Bridgton, Me., in August, Mme. Ruth ThayerBurnham, mezzo-contralto, included in her 
group of modern songs Burleigh's "One 
Year " and Coleridge-Taylor's "Lif e and 
Death". Frederic Martin, bass, sang Will 
Marion Cook's "Exhortation" which was repeated at special request of the chorus of 
the festival. Two Negro Spirituals by H. T. 
Burleigh were sung by the chorus, the second of which had to be repeated. 
J. Rosamond Johnson has written the 
music for J. A. Middleton's "I Told My 
Love to the Roses". G. Schirmer, New York, 
is the publisher. 
The college department of Samuel Huston College, Austin, Tex., rendered Shakespeare's "Macbeth" to a large and enthusiastic audience in the college auditorium in 
May. 
A folk song festival under the direction 
of Mrs. E. Azalia Hackley was held at the 
auditorium at Asheville, N. C , recently. 
A Southern Negro folk song festival has 
been held in Dallas, Tex., at the Fair Park 
Coliseum. Thousands of people attended. 
Amon g the singers were Mrs. Anita Patti 
Brown and Mrs. Daisy Tapley. 
SOCIAL UPLIFT 
THE colored people of Greensboro, N. C , 
are to have a new $10,000 Carnegie 
library. 
A museum and parliamentary delegation 
has been visiting Canada on its way to the 
Empire conference in England. Amon g the 
members was Sir James Carroll, a man of 
Maori descent, for twenty-two years a member of the House of Representatives and a 
former cabinet minister. New Zealand is 
civilized. 
Garrett A. Morgan, a colored man of 
Cleveland, O., helped rescue eleven white 
men, in Cleveland, who were the victims of 
an explosion. He used the safety hood of 
which he is the inventor. 
In a baby improvement contest in Philadelphia a colored child, William Johnson, 
won the first prize of $10. 
C A t a summer Y. M. C. A. camp held at 
Diamond Lake, near Chicago, eighteen colored boys and one hundred and thirty-two 
white boys encamped. One colored and one 
white boy were voted the most popular boys 
in the camp. 
The mayor of Charlotte, N. C , has presented two colored men, Fons Ross and Peter 
Stowe, a fund of $550 for saving the lives of 
six white men during the recent flood. A t 
the peril of their own lives the two ventured 
not once, but three times out into the river. 
On their first trip, when they succeeded in 
295 296 THE CRISIS 
rescuing Killian and Kale, their boat capsized and they were as near death as they 
possibly could be, but they held to their 
paddles and soon righted the skiff and kept 
on their way. Each time the torrent would 
sweep their craft further down stream, but 
each time they succeeded in grasping 
branches and tree limbs and holding desperately to where the white men were perched. 
The entire six, if not taken from their 
perilous places, would have been sooner or 
later swept to destruction. The waters were 
rising and the trees shook and rocked with 
the impact of the mighty volume of water 
which rushed against them. 
The Birmingham, Ala., Ledger has published a supplement of four pages with pictures on the colored people of the city. 
Ground has been broken for the new 
$100,000 Y. M. C. A. for colored men in 
Atlanta, Ga. 
The Negro Fresh Air Committee, of New 
York City, in the summer of 1915 spent 
$1,100 helping 247 people and providing 
328 weeks' care. 
A "Ta g Day " for the benefit of the colored Clara Frye Hospital was held at Tampa, Fla. 
The first Negro regiment of the New 
York National Guard, known as the 15th, is 
rapidly getting its full quota of men. A 
large number of the officers are colored and 
it is hoped that Lieutenant-Colonel Young 
will eventually be put into command. 
The Afro-American records eight colored 
newspapers started in the United States before 1850. They were Freedom's Journal, 
New York, 1827; the Weekly Advocate, New 
York, 1837; the Elevator, Albany, N. Y., 
1842; the National Watchman and Clarion, 
Troy, N. Y., 1842; the Mystery, Pittsburgh, 
Pa., 1843; the Genius of Freedom, Rochester 
N. Y., 1845; the Ram's Horn, New York, 
1846, and the North Star, Rochester, N. Y., 
1847. 
The question of colored bishops over colered churches will again take the attention 
of the General Convention of the Protestant 
Episcopal Church which meets this month in 
St. Louis. The Joint Commission has disagreed. The majority report recommends 
that all Negroes from the South be put 
under Negro bishops at large. The minority 
report calls this unchristian and recommends suffragan bishops for colored people 
under the white bishops. 
The Catholic Federation, meeting in New 
York, adopted this section concerning Negroes: Solicitous for the spiritual and temporal welfare of the ten millions of colored 
people in the United States, we regard with 
satisfaction the splendid work being done 
for them by the various organizations. W e 
pledge our loyal support and heartily commend all those zealous, self-sacrificing religious people who devote their lives to 
the evangelization of the colored people. 
The annual State Colored Fair of South 
Carolina will be held at Columbia next 
month. 
President R. R. Wright, of Georgia, is 
starting a home for destitute colored children in Savannah. A t present there is no 
protection or succor for them. 
The colored people of Nashville have had 
a Carnegie Public Library since February, 
1916. During this time 15,066 persons have 
used the library and have drawn 4,205 books. 
The Rev. J. S. Jackson, former financial 
secretary of the A. M. E. Zion Church, has 
turned over $5,000 worth of property to the 
church in settlement of his alleged shortage. 
MEETINGS 
THE colored Baptists are now divided 
•*- into two parts. The followers of Dr. 
Boyd, who practically insists that the National Publishing House is his private property, met last month in Kansas City, Mo. 
The opposing faction, under Dr. Morris, met 
in Savannah, Ga. 
The Southern University Race Commission met in Asheville, N. C , and congratulated itself on the "decrease in lynching". 
It announces that the Negro is the "weakest 
link in our civilization!" Professor E. C. 
Branson was elected chairman for the ensuing year. 
The ninth annual convention of the National Association of Colored Graduate 
Nurses was held at Mother Zion, A. M. E., 
Church, in New York City, during August. 
One hundred and thirty delegates were in 
attendance and Miss Adah B. Thomas, 
president, presided. 
The colored Masonic convention recently 
held in Chicago, Ill., was honored with a 
banquet by Julius Rosenwald, the philanthropist, at the Sears-Roebuck & Company's 
building. 
The seventeenth annual session of the 
Grand Lodge, Improved, Benevolent and 
Protective Order of Elks of the Worl d has THE HORIZON 297 
met in Philadelphia. Wolverine Lodge, Detroit, Mich., holds property valued at $27,-
501. Reports further show that $11,338.72 
was paid to sick members, $8,721 to beneficiaries of the dead and $2,792.92 contributed 
to charity. 
The National Association of Teachers in 
Colored Schools held its annual meeting in 
Nashville, Tenn. John Hope, president of 
Morehouse College, presided. 
The National Negro Business League 
held a large and successful meeting at Kansas City, Mo. The Hon. J. C. Napier was 
elected president to succeed the late Booker 
T. Washington. 
The Biennial Movable Committee of the 
Grand United Order of Odd Fellows met in 
Washington, D. C , last month at Convention 
Hall. 
A t Lake Placid and Mt. Elba, N. Y., on 
August 23, a bronze tablet in memory of 
John Brown and his followers was unveiled. 
The tablet is fastened to a great boulder on 
John Brown's farm and was cast by the 
John Williams Bronze Foundry, New York. 
Amon g the speakers were the Hon. Frank 
B. Sanborn, Dean Kelly Miller, Mr. John E. 
Milholland and Rabbi Stephen S. Wise. 
The tenth biennial convention of the National Association of Colored Women met in 
Baltimore, Md., with some five hundred delegates. Mrs. Mary B. Talbert, of Buffalo, 
N. Y., was elected as president and Denver, 
Colo., was chosen as the next meeting place. 
The association will take over the Frederick 
Douglas Home in Anacostia, D. C , and make 
it a national headquarters. 
INDUSTRY 
MR. H. C. WEBB, a colored man of 
Bradentown, Fla., has invented a 
plow which the local papers pronounce a 
great success. 
John T. Patrick is said to be planning a 
Negro town on the coast of South Carolina. 
Thousands of colored laborers are coming North to work. Every effort is being 
made by southern states and cities to hinder 
their exodus by exorbitant taxes of $500 and 
$1,000 on immigration agents. Meetings 
and agitation of all sorts have been carried 
on. 
_ Colored moulders, who have long been refused admission to the Moulders' Union, 
have replaced striking white moulders at 
Chattanooga, Tenn. 
Hosiery manufacturers, of Pennsylvania, 
are considering the importation of Negro 
girls for their knitting mills. 
Colored artisans are used in four shoe 
factories in New Orleans, La. 
There are said to be at present fifty-one 
colored banks in the United States. 
Colored labor union leaders in Jacksonville, Fla., have published the following 
card: "To the Public: We , the officials of 
the colored organized labor unions of Jacksonville, who are recognized as the only legal 
representatives of organized Negro labor 
here, feel that the remedy for all labor 
troubles or controversies should be submitted to labor organizations. Recently we noticed in the columns of the local daily papers 
articles of advice in the form of a resolution, 
to the colored people of Duval county and 
the city of Jacksonville in particular, concerning the present disturbances brought 
about by the transportation of hundreds of 
colored laborers from this point to Northern 
fields of labor. We take this method of informing the public that the undersigned are 
the only authorized leaders of the labor organizations of Jacksonville (colored) and 
we have in no wise participated in any of the 
meetings nor given our consent to any of the 
sentiment expressed in any of the meetings, 
nor have we in any way given authority to 
anyone to represent us in the expression of 
opinion in the matter." 
The colored knitting mill at Ocala, Fla., 
employs one hundred and eight colored girls. 
The colored people of Macon, Ga., celebrated their first Labor Day this year. 
The North Carolina Mutual and Provident Association shows gross assets of $169,-
690. It has $5,000,000 worth of insurance 
in force. 
The Pennsylvania Railroad has imported 
2,000 Negroes from Georgia to work on their 
railroad. The laborers were taken from outside Savannah because of an ordinance imposing a fine of $1,000 for taking them from 
the city. 
PERSONAL 
TH E Right Rev. S. D. Ferguson, for thirty-five years bishop of the Episcopal 
church in Liberia, is dead. 
The Rev. Isaac C. Decatur, a well known 
colored preacher and teacher of Atlanta, 
Ga., is dead. 
Mrs. Fannie Welters, of St. Augustine, 
Fla., was drowned with two companions in 
Sanches Creek. 298 THE CRISIS 
Dr. William Hayes Ward, for fortyeight years writer and editor of the Independent and well known friend of the colored race, is dead. 
Simon G. Atkins, formerly educational 
secretary of the A. M. E. Zion Church, has 
been elected president of Livingstone College 
in North Carolina. 
Mr. Joseph S. Cotter, a school principal 
of Louisville, was the only colored man invited to be present at the dedication of the 
Lincoln Memorial at Hodginsville, Ky. 
Dr. G. D. B. Gordon, a post graduate of 
Freedman's Hospital, Washington, D. C , is 
Acting District Medical Officer for the Buff 
Bay District on the Island of Jamaica and 
has charge of the second largest hospital on 
the Island. 
C Tuskegee Institute has published the first 
number of the Foreign Leaf in the interest 
of its foreign students. Eighty-four students 
from twenty foreign countries attended the 
school last year. 
Mr. Harry C. Simmons, formerly of New 
York and Boston, is chief custodian of the 
Anaconda Copper Mining Company's general offices in Montana. He has been in the 
service of the company for twenty-five years. 
Father S. L. Theobald, a Negro Catholic 
priest in St. Paul, Minn., has been adopted 
as a son by Mrs. Mary E. Falihee, a wealthy 
white resident of the city. 
Brevet Lieutenant - Colonel Stanton 
Weaver, a white man formerly captain in 
the 62d Regiment, U. S. Colored Infantry 
Volunteers, died recently in Washington, D. 
The official records show that this regiment fired the last volley of the Civil war 
near Brownsville, Tex., May 13, 1865. 
C J. G. Ish, Jr., has been re-elected superintendent of Branch Normal College at Pine 
Bluff, Ark. Isaac Hathaway, the sculptor, 
is teacher of ceramics in this school. The 
school is teaching the history of the Negro 
and using as texts Brawley, DuBois and the 
CRISIS. 
Mr. John A. Hodge has been made principal of the Sumner High School, Kansas 
City, Kan. He is a graduate of Indiana 
University where he took his master's degree and is a member of the Sigma Xi. 
Dr. D. A. Ferguson, of Richmond, Va., 
president of the Tri-State Dental Association, was presented with a silver loving cup 
by the dentists of Virginia at the third annual meeting of that association at Buckroe Beach, Va., in July. 
Mrs. Ellen Stuart Bentley, formerly of 
Richmond, Va., who died last April in New 
York, left $8,000 of her $10,000 estate to 
her Negro maid, Minnie F. Smith. 
Walter R. Livingston, of the Florida A . 
& M. College, received first mention in architectural drawing at Armour Institute this 
summer. 
Sotero Quevedo, a colored linotype operator of Tuskegee Institute, Ala., won a 
prize of $10 from the Mergenthaler Linotype Company for an alphabet he wrote for 
the July Linotype Bulletin. 
POLITICAL 
THE Supreme Court of the state of Oklahoma has before it the question of the 
right of Negroes to act as election officers. 
The question arose, strange to say, at Boley 
which is an exclusively Negro town. 
C The Negro problem stalked in the recent 
National American Woman's Suffrage Association which held its forty-eighth annual 
convention at Atlantic City. Southern 
women like Laura Clay, of Kentucky, and 
Kate Gordon of Louisiana, fought bitterly 
the Federal Amendment and instanced the 
Fifteenth Amendment. They were decisively beaten. 
The literacy test in Oklahoma, designed 
to get rid of the Negro vote, was beaten in 
the last election despite various tricks and 
subterfuges. The Democrats now claim 
that they did it. 
The Honorable Charles E. Hughes, Republican candidate for president, recently 
said to a delegation of colored men in New 
York City: 
"I am and always have been friendly in 
my feelings to the colored people. I have 
expressed it in this city at a meeting held 
with reference to Dr. Washington. I know 
the burdens and problems of your people. 
In what I say as to brotherhood and oppotunity denied to none because of race, in 
that word race I include the colored American and am mindful of your problems. 
"There are parts of my career I cannot 
bring into politics, but in the position that 
I have taken is to be seen my principles as 
to equal rights. 
"Americanism is a spirit. It means 
equality of opportunity, character and intelligence. In intellect, in character, in 
equality of opportunity there can be no 
color line. That is the Americanism for 
which I stand." THE HORIZON 299 
The "Lily White " Republican faction, of 
Tennessee, refused all recognition to colored Republicans. Thereupon the colored 
men nominated an entire ticket of colored 
candidates for the Tenth Congressional 
District. In New Jersey dissatisfaction with 
the tactics of the white leaders has led to 
the naming of colored tickets in a number 
of sections. 
The Republicans have nominated a colored man, Harry E. Davis, as state representative from Cleveland, and another colored man, Lee Beaty, to be representative 
from Cincinnati, O. Mr. Davis has an excellent record and is recommended by the 
best organizations. 
EDUCATION 
A GOVERNMEN T report on educational facilities for colored people 
is about ready for publication. The 
entire work has been done by southern 
white men headed by a former white 
Hampton teacher. 
In Bessemer, Ala., out of 4,090 Negro 
children there is not one illiterate between 
the ages of seven and twenty-one, and this 
in spite of indifferent school facilities. 
There has always been a great amount 
of dishonesty connected with the administration of school funds in Mississippi. Alcorn College is a case in point. Recently a 
former president of Alcorn and a number 
of colored teachers were convicted for 
trafficking in school warrants and illegally 
retaining funds. Nothing was said of the 
white accomplices. 
Lucy Dahlgren, now a Sister of the 
Catholic Church, is teaching in the orphanage for colored children at Cornwells, N. Y. 
She was formerly a well known heiress. 
A recent report of the public schools of 
Greenville county, S. C , shows that the 
annual per capita expenditure for white 
pupils was $19.38; for colored pupils $1.40. 
Three years, ago these figures were $15.32 
and $1.25 respectively. Each white teacher 
had 39 pupils and each colored teacher 95. 
The Brick School, N. C , is building a 
model school house at a cost of $2,000. 
A new colored high school building in 
Louisville, Ky., is being finished. It is a 
remodeled building taken over from the 
whites. 
The Progressive Negro Association has 
been formed in the Island of Jamaica for 
the general uplift of the colored race. 
The annual report of the superintendent 
of education for Charleston county, S. C , 
shows some interesting results. The majority of the population of the county is 
colored, yet the expenditures for schools 
were : 
For whites, $148,734.37; and for Negroes, 
$57,307.06. The teachers in the white 
schools received $89,835.22; and in the 
Negro schools, $49,770.02. The per capita 
expenditure per white pupil was $27.16, 
$3.79 less than last year; while the per 
capita expenditure per Negro pupil was 
$6.88, $.26 cents less than last year. Notwithstanding these reductions these figures 
are far above the average for the state. 
The schedule of teachers' salaries is above 
the average for the state and for the nation. White men received $1,161.29; white 
women, $517.26; men in Negro schools, 
$911.77; women in Negro schools, $339.23. 
In the white schools each teacher had an 
enrollment of 35 pupils and an average attendance of 27. In the Negro schools each 
teacher had an enrollment of 64, with an 
average attendance of 43. 
GHETTO 
A TAXI-CA B driver in Wilmington, Del., 
refused to haul Mrs. Booker T. 
Washington and a number of other prominent delegates to the National Association 
of Colored Women's Clubs. 
A Jitney bus line running from Houston, 
Tex., to a colored suburb became very profitable. Thereupon the white people had it 
abolished claiming that it ran through a 
white red light district and disturbed law 
abiding citizens! 
Mrs. Lillian Fields, a colored woman, secured in New York City a verdict of $500 
against a white employer who falsely 
charged her of theft. 
It is reported that a colored regiment 
with exclusively white officers is beingformed in Pittsburgh. 
The Georgia legislature refused to pass 
an anti-lynching law increasing the responsibility of the sheriff. 
Discrimination against colored children 
in schools is being fought in Ann Arbor, 
Mich., and in Portland, Ore. 
Springfield, Ill., is attempting to deny the 
use of its public swimming pool to colored 
people. 
Colored men have been refused admis-300 THE CRISIS 
sion to the Plattsburg Military TrainingEncampment. 
The attempt of the police to move Frank 
Harden, a Negro resident of 8 Myrtle 
street, Atlanta, Ga., from that locality, has 
resulted in a court test of the second city 
segregation ordinance passed recently after 
the first had been declared unconstitutional in the higher courts. 
The new segregation ordinances have 
been upheld by the lower courts in Atlanta, 
Ga., and enjoined in Norfolk, Va . 
Mr. Frank Williams, the colored principal of the Sumner High School, separated his white and colored auditors at this 
year's commencement exercises in St. Louis. 
Mr. A. T. Smith, manager of the Paul 
Quinn Weekly, Waco , Tex., has been in jail 
over a month because of an article on the 
recent lynching. It is said that his wife 
is destitute and ill. 
A new segregation order has been issued 
by the secretary of the navy. It says in 
part: 
Beginning Wednesday morning, August 
9, 1916, the toilets in the State, Wa r and 
Navy Department Building will be allotted 
for use as toilets as follows: 
FO R WHIT E MEN—Sub-basement, OA, 
OB; basement, B, C, D, E, F, G, H ; 1st 
floor, IB, 1C, ID, IF, 1G, 1H; 2nd floor, 
2A, 2B, 2C, 2E, 2F, 2H; 3rd floor, 3A, 3C, 
3D, 3E, 3G, 3H; 4th floor, 4A, 4C, 4D, 4F, 
4G, 4H; 5th floor, 5G, 5H. 
FO R COLORED MEN—Sub-basement, 
OD, OH ; basement, A ; 1st floor, IE ; 2nd 
floor, 2G; third floor, 3E; 4th floor, 4E. 
The jailer of Roanoke, Va., has recently 
revealed the fact that the colored man. 
Smith, who was lynched September 21, 
1893, for assaulting a woman, was innocent and known to be so by the officials a 
short time afterward. The real criminal 
was arrested, but after a conference he 
was allowed to leave on promising never to 
return. 
In the August CRISIS details were given 
of the wanton killing of Charles Burwell 
in Selma, Ala. The white murderer was 
held on a charge of murder in the first degree, but was acquitted on a plea of insanity. 
A colored man, Charles H. Haines, of 
Tampa, Fla., discovered a white man criminally intimate with his wife. He killed 
him and was sentenced to be hanged. He 
said on the scaffold: 
"I went to a judge and to an officer of 
the law and told them about it. The first 
question they asked me, was, 'Is he a white 
man? ' I said that he was and an officer 
of the law told me that the best thing I 
could do was to go away from here. He 
ruined my home and made it unsafe for me 
to go there and when I went, as a law-abiding citizen, to ask that something be done 
about it they asked first of all, 'Is he a 
white man? ' 
"An y man would have done what I did. 
Mr. Walker was my friend for years, but 
he tried to kill me when I wouldn't give him 
that shotgun." 
A t Lima, O., a mob tried to get Charles 
Daniels, a Negro prisoner accused of assaulting a white woman, but failed. They 
seriously wounded the sheriff and it is said 
caused the death of his child. 
The following lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: 
Aug . 9, Stutgart, Ark., unidentified Negro for attacking the daughter of a farmer. 
Aug . 19, Newberry, Fla., for alleged complicity in the escape of a criminal: Josh 
Baskin, James Dennis, Bert Dennis, Mary 
Dennis, and Stella Long. 
Aug. 19, Rice, Tex., Ed Lang, attempted 
assault. 
Aug. 19, Valdosta, Ga., Lewis, for entering a house, is supposed to have been 
lynched. 
Aug. 26, Shreveport, La., Jesse Hanmet, 
attempted assault. 'THE CHILDHOOD SHOWS THE MAN, AS MORNING SHOWS THE DAY' 
THE HORIZON 301 302 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Watch this page each month. 
It belongs to the 
STANDARD LIFE 
INSURANCE COMPANY 
OLD LINE—LEGAL RESERVE 
Not Fraternal — Nor Assessment 
CAPITA L STOC K 
$100,000.0 0 
INSURANC E IN FORC E OVE R 
$2,500,000.0 0 
Responsible agents wanted in 
Georgia, Alabama, Tennessee, Kentucky, Missouri, Arkansas, Texas, 
Mississippi and the District of Columbia. This is the big opportunity 
for HIGH CLASS MEN, and they 
must BE MEN in every sense of 
the word. Only men who are willing to work hard and have salesmanship ability need apply. 
HOME OFFICE, 200 AUBURN AVENUE 
ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 303 
National President 
MOORFIELD STOREY, Boston 
Chairman of the Board of Directors 
DR. J. E. SPINGARN, New York 
Director of Publications and Research 
DR. W. E. B. DU BOIS. New York 
Vice-Presidents 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD, New York 
REV. JOHN HAYNES HOLMES, New York 
JOHN E. MILHOLLAND, New York 
ARCHIBALD H. GRIMKE, Washington 
MARY WHITE OVINGTON, Brooklyn 
REV. G. R. WALLER, Springfield, Mass. 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION 
FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD 
Treasurer 
ROY NASH 
Secretary 
ADDITIONAL MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
Chicago 
JANE ADDAMS 
DR. C. E. BENTLEY 
Boston 
JOSEPH PRINCE LOUD 
BUTLER R. WILSON 
Baltimore 
BISHOP JOHN HURST 
DR. F. N. CARDOZO 
Brooklyn 
DR. V. MORTON JONES 
DR. O. M. WALLER 
New Haven 
GEORGE W. CRAWFORD 
Philadelphia 
DR. WILLIAM A. SINCLAIR 
Washington 
PROF. GEO. WILLIAM COOK 
New York 
REV. H UTCHIN S C. BISHOP 
REV. W. H. BROOKS 
MRS. FLORENCE KELLEY 
PAUL KENNADAY 
CHARLES EDWARD RUSSELL 
ARTHUR B. SPINGARN 
CHARLES H. STUDIN 
DR. JOHN G. UNDERHILL 
LILLIAN D. WAL D 
WILLIAM ENGLISH WALLING 
The Anti-Lynching Fund of $10,000 has been 
raised; but $10,000 is a very small sum. Wh y not 
make it $15,000? Awake! Put on thy strength, O 
Zion! 
Membership Blank 
The Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying two dollars or more. 
Date 1916. 
OSWAL D GARRISON VILLARD, Treasurer, 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
SIR : 
I desire to become a member of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People and to receive The Crisis. 
In payment of my dues for one year, I enclos e dollars. 
Name 
Street 
City and State 
Mention TH E CRISIS 304 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
BOOKS BY COLORED AUTHORS 
Nearly a quarter of a century has passed since the Neale house was founded. Hundreds 
of its publications are in active circulation. None of these are more vitally important to 
the American people than those that relate to racial problems. They comprise a library 
in themselves. Limitations of space enable us to announce here but a few of these books 
by prominent colored authors. 
Race Adjustment: Essays on the Negro in 
America. By Kelly Miller, colored; Dean 
of the College of Arts and Sciences and Professor of Mathematics, Howard University. 
Third thousand. $2.15 by mail. 
Chicago News: "The book is written with great 
ability, in English quite free from fault, and its logic 
is fairly inexorable." 
New York Evening Post: "As admirable for its 
calmness and good temper as for its thoroughness 
and skill." 
Out of the House of Bondage. By Kelly 
Miller, colored; Dean of the College of Arts 
and Sciences, Howard University. $1.65 by 
mail. 
Boston Transcript: "Written in a clear and decisive style, with a comprehensive and convincing 
command of the subject. He neither denounces nor 
condemns; he analyzes and constructs possibilities 
upon the fundamental basis of human nature. No 
man of his race has so sure a power of pruning the 
fallacies with passionless intellectual severity from 
the pernicious arguments of the prejudiced demagogues." 
The Facts of Reconstruction. By John R. 
Lynch, colored; formerly Member of Congress; later Fourth Auditor of the Treasury; 
at present Major in United States Army. 
Fourth thousand. $1.65 by mail. 
Chicago Tribune: "This book is perhaps the most 
important contribution which has been made by any 
political writer during recent years to the political 
literature of the reconstruction era." 
The Key; or, a Tangible Solution of the 
Negro Problem. By James S. Stemons, 
colored; Field Secretary of the Joint Organization of the Association for Equalizing 
Industrial Opportunities and the League of 
Civic and Political Reform. Mr. Stemons 
contends that industrial opportunity, rather 
than industrial education, is the basic need 
of the Negro. He presents his arguments 
in vigorous English of extraordinary 
purity, and the book may easily be classed 
with the foremost literature of the Negro 
race. $1.00 by mail. 
Racial Adjustments in the Methodist Episcopal Church. By John H. Reed, D. D., 
K. C , colored; with an introduction by Adna 
B. Leonard, D. D., LL. D. $1.60 by mail 
Philadelphia Christian Recorder: "The book is 
filled with splendid idealism, and in spite of its 
somewhat verbose character, presents a fine argument, which in this day of compromise for the present 
exigencies may not be heeded." 
Haiti: Her History and Her Detractors. By 
J. N. Leger, colored; formerly Minister 
from Haiti to the United States. Illustrated. Two editions: one in English and 
the other in French. Each edition $3.20 
by mail. 
The Nation, New York: "Haiti, at last, has a 
champion who is entitled to be heard; for he speaks 
from fullness of knowledge, and from a position of 
political eminence sends forth no uncertain sound. 
It is not too much to say that the latest book on 
Haiti is also the best that has ever appeared respecting the so-called 'Black Republic' Minister Leger 
has struck a new note, for, unlike others who have 
written on the subject, he places himself against a 
veritable wall of facts, and not only wards off the 
blows that are aimed at his country, but takes the 
aggressive against her critics." 
The New Negro; His Political, Civil, and 
Mental Status. By William Pickens, Lit. 
D., colored; Dean of Morgan College, Baltimore. Dr. Pickens was graduated from 
Yale in the highest grade of his class and 
won the Phi Beta Kappa Key and the Ten 
Eyck Oration. Although a young man, he 
has won distinction as a scholar; he is 
among the foremost men of his race. $1.60 
by mail. 
Negro Culture in West Africa. By George 
W. Ellis, K. C , F. R. G. S., colored; recently, and for eight years, Secretary of 
the United States Legation in Liberia; 
author of "Liberia in the Political Psychology of West Africa, " "Islam as a Factor 
in West African Culture," "Dynamic Factors in the Liberian Situation," and other 
works. Profusely illustrated. $2.15 by 
mail. 
Chicago Tribune: "It is the third consecutive contribution made by a noted man to our knowledge 
of conditions and peoples in West Africa." 
Albany Times-Union: "It is easily one of the most 
important contributions ever made to the literature 
of the Negro race." 
New York Crisis: "This history ought to be in 
every American's library." 
The Black Man's Burden. By William H. 
Holtzclaw, colored; Principal of the Utica 
Normal and Industrial Institute for the 
Training of Colored Young Men and YoungWomen, Utica, Mississippi. With an introduction by the late Booker T. Washington. 
Illustrated. Third thousand. $1.60 by mail. 
New Orleans Times-Picayune: "It is an interesting study of Negro achievement and should be an 
inspiration to the young men and the young women 
of the race." 
Prof. Wm. E. Chancellor, Ph. D,, the eminent historian and educator, writes: "The 
Neale Publishing- Company to-day represents high-water mark in America for its historical 
works. Upon its list are to be found the best books upon each and every side of the common issues of our public life. Such is the authority of the list considered as an entirety 
as to lend luster to each separate title, creating a presumption in its favor. " 
Order through 
THE NEALE PUBLISHING CO., 440 Fourth Avenue New York City or THE CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenu
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 305 
THE NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOOL, DURHAM , N. C , 
extends a cordial invitation to the heads of Universities, Colleges and Secondary Schools for the education and training of 
colored people in the United States to be the. guests of the 
School, November 21-24, 1916, for the purpose of Conferences, 
closer unity and understanding of the needs and educational requirements 
of the colored people. / 
Among the subjects to be discussed particular stress will be laid on 
the following: 
1. What is the opinion of the Educators themselves in regard to the 
duplication of work in schools in the various communities? Has it been 
hurtful, unwise and wasteful ? What plans ought to be fostered to correct the evil? 
2. To what extent should classes devoted to Teacher Training be 
encouraged ? How and where located ? 
3. What system should be devised to meet the requirements of the 
rural teacher? 
4. What should be the standard of the University, College, Normal 
School, Teacher Training and Secondary Schools? 
5. How should students be received from one to the. other? 
6. To what extent should religious instruction be carried on in the 
various schools ? . / . 
7. Should there be a general clearing-house for aid for Negro 
schools ? 
8. Is the aid given by the various Funds and Boards to Negro education wise, economical and helpful? 
Many other and kindred subjects will be announced on the tentative 
program which will be published in the early Fall. 
This Conference has been suggested by a great many who desire to 
know the actual condition and needs of the schools devoted to Negro 
education from those who are actually doing the work. No Conference 
in recent years will be more far-reaching in its effects than this. 
The guests will be entertained free of charge by the National 
Training School. Durham itself presents a field of study and inspiration, 
which will be furnished by no other city of its size in the country. 
Do you approve of such a Conference? Will you be present? Please 
let me know at your earliest convenience. 
Yours for service, 
James E. Shepard 
President National Training School, 
Durham, N. C. 
UlllllillllllllllllllllliUlllllllllllllllllllllllllllta 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
AN INVITATION TO EDUCATORS 306 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
NATURAL HAIR WIGS 
Direct From Manufacturer 
M y business is selling fine quality Human Hair Goods direct to the 
wearer by mail. 
Every wig is hand made, by skilful workers, using only the best of 
materials, and should not be confused with machine made goods which 
are frequently advertised at lower prices. 
This wig has two parts in front, is dressed in 
one handsome swirl all the way from front to the 
back, as illustrated. This can also be dressed in cluster of puffs in back, if so desired. No. 2 Wig, Price $10 
EVERY WIG MADE TO YOUR 
OWN MEASUREMENT ^ 
This wig has a continuous part from the center 
of forehead to the nape of neck. Another part 
across the head from ear to ear, also two additional parts in the front on the right and left side 
commencing at the forehead meeting the part that 
crosses from ear to ear making three parts in front; 
an additional part runs across the back of head 
under both ears. No. 16 Wig, Price $16 
In addition to the two styles illustrated, I make many other styles of 
wigs, also a complete line of switches, transformations, etc. 
FREE—Illustrated catalog with instructions for ordering, sent on 
request. 
SATISFACTIO N GUARANTEED—Al l goods as represented or 
money refunded. 
ALEX MARKS 
652 Broadway New York City 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 307 
The World's Greatest Array of Literary 
Celebrities Will Write During 
1916-17 for 
The 
CHAMPION MAGAZINE 
EDITE D BY FENTON JOHNSON 
Kelly Miller. Benjamin Griffith Brawley, 
William Pickens. George W. Harris, Binga 
Dismond. James Weldon Johnson, Richard T. 
Greener, Walter S. Buchanan. E. T. Ware, 
Mary McLeod Bethune, George W. Ellis, 
William Moore. Monroe W. Work, Ida B. 
Wells Barnett, R. R. Wright, Jr., W. S. Scarborough, Emory E. Scott, Leslie Pinckney 
Hill, "Scrip" and others. 
Read "The Ledger," "Paste Pot and Shears" 
and other interesting departments. A great 
Pictorial Review in Letogravure each month. 
Special Numbers: October—Conventions; November — Educational; December — Business. 
Forty-eight Pages of Current Literature. 
Order Early! Agents Wanted Everywhere! 
ONE DOLLA R A YEA R 
TE N CENTS A COPY 
OFFICES: 
4724 South State St. CHICAGO, ILL. 
quality v. quantity 
Liquid enamel 
HIGH SUR FACE 
_ POLISH 
TRADEMARK 
The Wonder 
of the Age 
LIQUID ENAMEL 
Is the last word in a High surface 
Polish. Positively gives the most brilliant and lasting lustre known. Is absolutely waterproof, dustproof and finger 
mark-proof not affected by heat, cold, 
or dampness. Keeps indefinitely. Liquid 
Enamel's only rival is a large diamond 
under the rays of a powerful arc-light. 
Dries spontaneously with each stroke 
of the cloth. 
USES 
Admirably adapted for use on automobiles, 
exterior and interior of Pullmans and all 
steam cars, carriages, mahogany, wainscoating of hotels, banks, office buildings, 
private residences, motor cycles, victrolas, 
desks, clocks, furniture, cabinet flies, safes, 
book cases, exterior and interior surfaces 
of electric cars, violins, interior woodwork 
of stores and steamships, delivery wagons. 
PRICE 50c PER BOTTLE. 
W. AUGS. B. MATTHEWS 
79 Dexter St., Medford, Mass. 
Agent. 
To Get Your 
Clothes 
FREE 
WE 
Don't 
ASK YOU 
TO SPEND 
YOU R 
PROFITS 
FOR CLOTHES 
ij Make Bio Money During spare time 
Something Different,bigger, more liberal 
than any offer ever made. Lower prices 
better clothes— bigger cash profits. 
Express paid on everything. 
Complete AGENTS Outfit FREE Your name on a postal card brings 60 
real cloth samples and everything needed 
to start earning big money free. 
Spencer Mead Co., Dept. 1351 Chicago, 
Correct calling Cards 
POPULA R STYLE S FO R LADIE S O R GENTLEMEN . 
100 FO R 50 CENT S O R 50 FO R 3 0 CENTS , N O 
EXTR A CHARG E FO R ADDRESS . AL L ORDER S 
FILLE D PROMPTLY . ATTRACTIV E PROPOSITIO N 
FO R AGENTS . WRIT E FOR SAMPLE S AN D TERM S 
TH E HOUS E O F CHOWNIN G 
Indianapolis . Indian a 
THE PACE & HANDY MUSIC CO. 
of Memphis, Tenn. 
is a race enterprise and asks the co-operation of 
all readers of TH E CRISIS. 
This firm leads in the publication of BLUES and 
is dedicated to the task of publishing the "SOUL 
MUSIC" of the darker races in all lands. 
A copy of Handy's AFRO-AMERICAN HYMN 
free for 30 days only. 
Send 11c for "DOWN BY THE CHATTAHOOCHEE RIVER" or "UNTIL YOU STOP 
THE WORLD FROM TURNING." 
PACE & HANDY MUSIC CO. 
388 Beale Ave. 
MEMPHIS, TENN. 
YOUR FALL SUIT 
FREE 
Send postal today for full infor ­
mation how to get your Fall suit, 
made to measure, without a penny's 
cost. $30 to $40 would not buy a 
better one. Simply wear it, tell your 
friends where you got it—take their 
orders—and make 
$10 to $15 
a Day 
in your spare time . It is dead 
easy—you never saw a nobbier suit or 
a more stunning pattern, cut in very 
latest style. Your choice of 60 fabrics and 82 styles. Drop us a postal 
card for heavy pattern book, inside 
information abou t stvles, selfmeasuring blanks, etc. DON'T 
WAIT- Mail Postal NOw! 
We Pay Delivery Charges Get ahead of other fellows, write this mi
American Woolen Mills Company 
Dept. 1051 Chicago 
Mention TH E Crisis 
A New WAY 308 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
19 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY ATLANTA, GA. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. -Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street •:• New York, N. Y. 
"GLEANINGS FROM DIXIE-LAND" 
Ten poems by 
Effie T. Battle , A.M . 
"Mrs. Battle has an individual gift of melody." 
—Springfield Republican. 
"You owe it to your race to publish your poems in 
book form."—Editor, Southwestern Christian Advocate. 
"Verses are smooth, graceful, high-minded and clear, 
reverent to all truth, appreciative of all beauty and 
true inspiration."—George W . Cable. 
PRIC E 25 CENTS . 
Address: Okolona Industria l School, 
Okolona, Miss, 
$25.0 0 PER WEEK 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street NE W YOR K 
THE HAITIAN REVOLUTION 
By T. G. STEWAR D 
A book of 30 0 pages, beautifully Illustrated. 
Tells the story of the birth of the Black Republic. 
$1.25 Net 
"The Haitian Revolution, 1701 to 1804, by Mr . T. GSteward, is now reissued in a second edition (Crowell). 
•Enthusiasm for his subject and a personal knowledge of 
present-day life on the island help the author in his endeavor, as he suggests in the introduction to present 
touches of genius in character, and here and there glimpses 
of moral grandeur in action. A list of authorities consulted, a chart of the presidents of Haiti with their terms 
of office, a classified list of Haitian authors with name s of 
their works, and an appendix containing Thiers' Exposition 
of the Revolution are useful features of the volume.*'—The 
Dial. 
ORDE R FRO M TH E AUTHO R 
T. G. STEWARD, Wilberforce, Ohio 
Or from TH E CRISIS . 70 Fifth Ave. , New York. 
University Literary Bureau 
Manuscript Criticized 
and Revised 
Poems, Short Stories, Novels, Scenarios, 
Magazine and Press Articles, Sermons and 
Addresses. 
Advice on Publication 
Correspondence Solicited 
Strictly Confidential 
Montgomery Gregory Alain Leroy Lock 
ADDRESS : Box 102 , Howard University, 
Washington, D. C. 
"The Truth About the Bible" 
This book deals with the sex of the Bible. "It 
will empty our jails, insane asylums and hospitals 
in time; it should be in every home in the world." 
—J. H. Powell, M. D. "For ideas, it is the world's 
greatest book."—J. Silas Harris, A. M. "It is 
the world's most revolutionary hook; it means a 
better race."—W. A. Swan, M. D. Head this 
hook. Price $3.00. Address the Author, Sidney 
C. Tapp, Ph.B., 601 Delaware St., Kansas City, Mo. 
PAPERS OF AMERICAN NEGRO ACADEMY' 
Sex Question and Race Segregation, 
Archibald H. Grimke 
Message of San Domingo to African Race, 
Theophilus G. Steward 
Status of Free Negro Prior to 1SG0, 
Lafayette M. Hershaw 
Economic Contribution by Negro to America, 
Arthur A. Schomburci 
Status of Free Negro from 1860 to 1S7C, 
William Pickens 
American Negro Bibliography of the Year, 
John W. Cromwell 
Papers read at the 19th annual meeting, December 28th 
and 29th, 1915. 84 pp. Price 25c. ^ 
Address ? * 
J. W. Cromwell 
1439 Swann Street Washington, D . C. 
LET U S SHO W YO U HO W T O GET FREE SUITS 
Here w e g o again, 
breaking- all records for 
new, nobby, ahead-of-thetime styles. Be the first in 
your town to wear, a suit 
that is ahead, of time. Earn 
it while you wear it. We 
send the suit • complete. 
You can make big money, 
too. There is 
$50 TO $100 a Week 
in it for you. Drop us a 
postal for cur advance 
book, select the styles you want 
and the cloth. 
Let us prove our wonderful 
offer. Don't wait a minute. 
Costs you nothing to look into 
this. We send everything the 
day your request is received. 
We prepay delivery charges on 
everything. Simply send in a 
postal with your name and address on it. Do it right now. 
Parago n Tailorin g Co . 
Dept. 1051 CHICAGO 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 309 
If It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
We manufacture Lodge Regalia for every 
Fraternal Society. Cash or Installment 
Plan. Cheapest Badge House in the Country. Catalogue for your Society FREE. 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES. Pres. 
N. E. Cor. 8th & Plum 
Cincinnati. Ohio 
$20.00 to $40.00 per week 
being made selling the new history of colored 
people; everybody buys; anyone can sell. A 
man or woman wanted for each county to 
work full or spare time. 
Write for terms and free outfit. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO., 7th Street, Washington, D. C. 
SPLENDID OPPORTUNITY 
for a Dentist desiring to locate in 
Philadelphia, Pa. For particulars 
address Frank Dawson, 1020 Chestnut Street. 
Something New Under the Sun "Allianceskin" Pants $1.00 Pronounced, Stronger than A Lion's skin 
We Pay Express or Parcel Post Charges 
Made As You Like Them. A new cloth 
—beautiful finish and texture. Can be worn 
for dress, or work and the formula for 
weaving "ALLIANCESKIN" IS our exclusive 
property. Wonderful value. Only $1.00. 
We make suits to measure from $7.50 up, 
also overcoats and "Yearound" Raincoats 
_ at$3.85. Just mail us your name 
Agent s and address and we will send 
Wante d FREE all our catalogs, with real 
A t Once samples of cloths, illustrations. 
. _ tape line, order blanks, etc. Biggest bargains you ever saw. Our prices save 
half. Satisfaction guaranteed. See all our 
references and with them Make Big Money. 
PRODUCERS & CONSUMERS ALLIANCE 
Dept. 117 Wholesale Tailors, Chicago 
PAAINLESS treatment for 
CORN'S, BUNIONS. IN- , 
GROWN' NAILS, and ALL 
other AILMENTS' of the FEET. 
DR. WILLIAM J. CARTER 
CHIROPODIS T — 
Registered in the States of New York and New Jersey 
Telephone 1284 Audubon. 167 West 136th St., New York City 
FEET 
The SLAUGHTER SYSTEM introducing 
LYDA'S HAIR BEAUTIFIER 
Guaranteed to Grow Hair In SIX TREATMENTS 
or Money Refunded. Price 5 0 cents per box. 
Agents Wanted. System Taught by Mail or at College. 
Mrs. E. Slaughter Gamble 
300 1 LAWTON AVENUE ST. LOUIS. MO 
RED ROSE FACE POWDER 
All Shades 
Talcum Powder, Face Lotion. Cold Cream and other 
toilet preparations made of the best materials. Write 
for samples. Agents wanted. 
FLORESSENCE MFG. CO. 
Box 7. 239 W. 63d St., New York City. 
GANTT QUINO SCHOOL OF BEAUTY CULTURE 
Enroll in our Correspondence School. Anything in Beauty Culture. By Mail. Diplomas Issued. 
Terms Fine. Quino Hair Grower, 60c. Temple Oil, 75c. Try a Box. 
Write: QUINO. 636 Fogg Street. NASHVILLE. TENN. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
$l0.00 A DA Y 
STEADY WOR K 
Write at once for the greatest offer ever made 
by any tailoring concern on earth. Hundreds 
of our agents are making $10 a day 
in their spare time while doing 
other work. 
BIGGEST MONEY MAKER 
We will send you our magnificent 
outfit free—the greatest ever. 
Everything to start you FREE. 
64 real cloth samples, 35 fashion 
plates and everything needed to 
make a howling success. Start in 
now. Success sure. Make big 
money right from the jump. 
OUR PRICES THE LOWEST 
Made to measure pants, 
$2.75 up. Suits $8.00 up. 
Express or postage paid. 
Our fine stylish, well-made, 
carefully finished clothes 
beat anything ever offered. 
Everythin g guaranteed. 
Money back unless satisfied. 
Write today for FREE ( 
OUTFIT. ' 
The Progress Tailoring Co 
Dept. 502 Chicago 
BIG OUTFIT FREE 310 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
PERSONA L CARD S 
telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR..GERTRUD E E. CURTI S 
Surgeon DENTIST 
183 W . 135th Street Ne w Yor k City 
T.1. „ >,„„.. . /Centra l 104-W Telephones: Mai n 61 
HARR Y E. DAVI S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW NOTARY PUBLIC 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohio 
Office L. D . Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L. D . Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORGE A. DOUGLA S 
COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N . J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn. 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hill" Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMIN 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
34 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W . F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
Telephone Central 3087 
HARR Y M. COOPER 
Druggists' Specialties 
Chemicals, Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 
Write for Quotations 
Room 612, 58 W. Washington St. CHICAGO, ILL. 
FREE Business opportunity for the housewife. A 
line of needed new specialties will be sent 
to you free. Send postal or letter; no money. Fifty 
free specialties free every month. Get one. 
SCARBOROUGH SPECIALTY SHOP, TULLY. N. Y. 
AGENTS WANTED FOR M i 
W. T. McKissick & Co's. 
FAMOUS 90 DAYS TREATMENTS 
No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3 
For Scalp, Hair and Skin 
P . O . Bo x 102, WILMINGTON, DEL 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
Books? SEE THE SELECTED LIST ON 
THE INSIDE FRONT COVER 
Yo u Sav e $8.50 
WE DRESS 
YOU 
From Head 
to Foot 
OUR AMAZING OFFER 
To secure ne w customer s 
we mak e this matchless 
offer. W e will dress you 
from head t o foot 
in the finest made -
to-order suit, shirt 
and tie t o match, 
suspenders, shoes, 
and hat, everything 
guaranteed. 
W e mak e clothes to individual measure , your choice of 
fabri c and fashion. Exper t 
tailors do the work 
in our ow n shops. 
Ou r system assures 
exactly right fit. If 
you are wideawake 
this is your chance to 
start your own business. Act TO-DAY. 
Total Value $31.75- our Price $23.25-You Save$8.50 
FREE Ou r bi g outfit of cloth samples, fashion plates order blanks, tape measur e and 
, Catalog1. It's a big book of bargains, 
everything men wear from head to foot. Writ e for it now 
THE CAPITOL TAILORS, Dept. 125 , CHICAGO , ILL. 
$6 0 A WEEK and this free automobile 
EVERY AGENT CAN 
get AN Auto FREE 
NO CONTEST 
Tu b 
Guarantee d 
Fo r Te n Year s 
You—yourself—can positively make $60 a week and get a Free 
Auto. I want men, hustling, energetic, ambitious fellows, 
amicus to make money, who are willing to work with me. Not 
for me, but with me. Are you that kind? I want you to advertise, sell, and appoint local agents for the biggest, most 
sensational seller in 60 years—the ROBINSON FOLDING 
BATH TUB. Demonstrating' Tub Furnished. Here's an 
absolutely new invention—nothing like it. Makes instant 
appeal. Sells easily. Gives every home a modern up-to-date 
bathroom in any part of the house. No plumbing, no waterworks needed. Folds i n small roll, handy as umbrella. Selfemptying, positively unleakable. Absolutely guaranteed for 
10 years, Remember, fully 70% of homes have no bath rooms. 
Sensational Sales Successe s 
Two sales a day mean s $300 a month. Breeze, of Idaho, made 
$400 profit in 80 days. Rev. Otto Schulze, Mo., got $1600 to date. 
Burkholder, Mont., orders $1072 in 17 days. Hamlinton, of 
Wyo., made $60 first two days. Hundreds like that, pleasant, 
permanent, fascinating work. Write a postcard. Let me 
write you a long letter. No experience needed, no capital. 
Your credit is good if you mean business. But you must be 
ambitious, you must want to make money. That's all. Write 
a postcard now. I want to pay you $60.00 every week. 
H. S. ROBINSON, PRES. THE ROBINSON CABINET MFG. CO. 
4284 Factories Building TOLEDO, OHIO A New Book by Dr. Du Bois 
TH E NEGR O 
By W. E. BURGHARDT D U BOIS, author of "Souls of Black 
Folk," "Quest of the Silver Fleece," "Select Bibliography of 
the Negro American," etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. He is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating' story is followed in Africa, America, and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
256 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
At the low price of 50 cents net—By mail 56 cents 
Dr. Du Bois's new book is the latest addition to a remarkable 
series of low-priced new books with which everybody should become acquainted. 
THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 
94 volumes now ready 
Published by HENRY HOLT & COMPANY, 34 West 33d Street, New York 
Is made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY, H. A. L. FISHER, W. T. BREWSTER 
and J. ARTHUR THOMSON. 
Cloth bound, good paper, clear type, 256 pages per C/" \ • 
volume. Each complete and sold separately - - 50c. net 
Postage extra 
"A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 50 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES: 
EVOLUTION By J. A. Thomson LATIN AMERICA By W. R. Shepherd 
THE FRENCH REVOLUTION VICTORIAN LITERATURE 
By Hilaire Belloc By G. K. Chesterton 
ROME By W. Warde Fowler GERMANY OF TODAY 
PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY By Charles Tower 
By Bertrand Russell EURIPIDES AND HIS AGE 
NAPOLEON By H. A. L. Fisher By Gilbert Murray 
THE CIVIL WA R By F. L. Paxson UNEMPLOYMENT By A. C. Pigou 
Order through the publishers or through 
The CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS SAMUE L COLERIDGE-TAYLO R : Musicia n 
HIS LIFE AND LETTERS By W. C. Berwick Sayers 
SAMUE L COLERIDGE-TAYLOR , the first compose r of classic music to 
come from the colored races, was born in London forty years ago. His 
genius asserted itself at the early age of six when, as one of his admirers 
describes it, he was found "holding a very small-sized violin in one hand, and 
playing at marbles with the other." The real discovery was, however, made by his 
guardian, friend, and benefactor, Colonel Herbert, of the Queen's Regiment. 
At thirteen, he was a brilliant solo violinist. Entering the Roya l College of 
Music in 1890, three years later, he won an open scholarship for composition. His 
progress was marked by such landmarks as ''Hiawatha's Wedding Feast," known 
the world over, "Herod, " "Ulysses," "Nero, " "Faust," "Endymion's Dream," "A 
Tale of Old Japan," "Othello." 
The tribute we pay to the darker races of the world who have produced artists, 
thinkers, and composers is notorious by its absence. Proud of his race, it was 
indeed characteristic of the sturdy, honest nature of Coleridge-Taylor that he never 
sought to keep in the background his Negro origin, but, on the contrary, was 
thoroughly proud of it and of his own position. Of the fascination the tale of his 
life holds for a biographer, it is needless to speak. Mr. Berwick Sayers has 
brought to his loving task an enthusiasm which makes of his volume charming 
reading. 
Alfred Noyes, in the poem entitled "Samuel Coleridge-Taylor," writes: 
The spark that falls from heaven, not oft on earth, 
To human hearts its vital splendor gives; 
His was the simple, true, immortal birth! 
Scholars compose; but 
THIS MAN'S MUSIC LIVES. 
Price, $2.25. Postage Extra 
THE CRISIS :: :: :: 70 Fifth Avenue, NEW YORK CITY 
The Journal of Negro History 
Published Quarterly Edited by 100 Pages 
CARTER G. WOODSON 
TH E JOURNA L OF NEGR O HISTOR Y is the official organ of 
the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, which is now 
trying not to promote an isolated research into the history of the black race 
but to show how civilization has been influenced by contact with the people 
of color. This publication aims to popularize the movement to save and 
make available the scattered historical materials bearing on the Xegro. In 
it appear scholarly articles and valuable documents giving information 
generally unknown. It is concerned with facts not with opinions. 
Subscription price, $1.oo per year. Foreign subscriptions, 25 cents extra. 
Single numbers, 25 cents; 3 0 cents by mail. 
Checks should be made payable to TH E JOURNA L OF NEGR O 
HISTOR Y and addressed to 
CARTER G. WOODSON, 2223 12th St., N. W., Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 