The CRISIS 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R AUGUST, 1919 TE N CENT S A COP Y NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPL E President Secretary 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y JOH N R. SHILLAD Y 
Chairman Board of Directors Director of Publications and Research 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N DR . W . E . B. DuBOI S 
Acting Treasure r Field Secretary 
MAJO R J . E . SPIXGAR X JAME S WELDO X JOHXSO X 
Assistant Secretary 
WALTE R F . WHIT E 
FACIN G FACTS — 
The war is ended—the peace terms signed by Germany—President Wilson 
is home again after fighting for the rights of the oppressed peoples of 
Europe:— 
YE T I N AMERICA — 
Thirty-six Negroes are known to have been lynched since the armistice 
was signed last November—one of them a woman—six of the others lynched 
by being burned at the stake. 
Negroes are disfranchised in whole or in part in at least fourteen states of 
the Union. 
Negroes are "Jim-Crowed" in all states of the South. 
Negroes are deprived of their just share of school funds. 
Negroes are robbed and exploited and then dared to resent it. 
Negroes are kept out of lucrative and dignified positions in many instances 
for no other reason than their color. 
D O YO U BELIEV E THA T DEMOCRAC Y IS ONL Y FO R TH E 
WHIT E RACE ? 
If you do, then you should not be a member of the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People. 
But, if you believe that justice and freedom belong to all races then you 
should be a member. 
HEL P EN D TH E FARC E MASQUERADIN G A S DEMOCRAC Y 
B Y JOININ G TH E ASSOCIATIO N WHIC H IS FIGHTIN G 
T O EN D DISCRIMINATIO N BECAUS E O F RACE — 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T 
O F COLORE D PEOPL E National Office, 70 Fifth Ave., New York City 
Dat e 1919 
The CRISI S is sent without furthe r charge to member s payin g two dollar s or more . 
Majo r J . E . Spingarn, Actin g Treasurer , 
70 Fift h Avenue , Ne w York . 
SIR : 
I enclose $ in payment of membership dues for one year in the Nationa l 
Association for the Advancemen t of Colored People , wit h the stipulation tha t one 
dollar of any amount remitted herewith in excess of one dolla r is for one year's subscription to TH E CRISIS . 
Nam e 
Street 
Cit y and State CLEVELAN D CONFERENC E NUMBE R 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 7 0 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CON ­
DUCTE D B Y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS ; AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINES S 
MANAGE R 
Vol. 18—No. 4 AUGUST, 1919 Whole No. 106 
PICTURES 
Page 
COVER . A Study. By Laura Wheeler. 
DRAWING. After Alice R. Winter in "The Masses" 184 
DELEGATE S T O TH E TENT H ANNIVERSAR Y CONFERENCE, N. A . A. 
C P 189-192 
ME N O F THE MONT H 199-201 
REPRINTS SHOWING PREPARATIONS FOR TH E LYNCHING OF JOHN 
HARTFIEL D " '. 208 
ARTICLES 
SOUL AN D STAR. A Poem. C. Bertram Johnson '. 183 
TH E BROTHERHOO D OF MAN . A Story. E. Liebowitz 184 
SHAL L I SAY , "MY SON, YO U AR E BRANDED" ? A Poem. Georgia D. 
Johnson 188 
TH E TENT H ANNIVERSARY , N. A . A . C. P 189 
SONNET. Alice Dunbar-Nelson 193 
POTENCY . A Poem. Georgia D. Johnson 200 
DEPARTMENT S 
OPINION 179 
TH E LOOKING GLASS : 194 
MEN OF TH E MONT H 199 
TH E HORIZON 202 
COMIN G ISSUES OF TH E CRISIS Th e September CRISI S will be Labor Number, 
Th e October CRISI S will be our annual Children's Number. Pictures must reach us before 
September 1. 
Th e November CRISI S will begin our Tenth Year. Wit h that issue the size will be increased to 
sixtj eight pages and the price to One Dollar and a half a year, Fifteen Cents a copy. 
TE N CENTS A COPY ; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Th e date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a Wue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New York, 
under the Art of March 3, 1879. 176 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM , NORT H CAROLIN A 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Sciences The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economic ! 
The Department of Social Service 
NEXT TER M OPENS SEPTEMBER 22, 1919 
For further information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, Ohio 
(Established 1856) 
The school with the recognized 
Military Department. A strong and 
thorough course in Military Science 
and Tactics given all male students, 
by regular U. S. officer. Graduates 
in great demand by U. S. Government for selected service. Given 
quota of 20 men for Fourth Officers' 
Training Camp, Ft. Dodge, la. 
Courses of Study—College (Scientific, Classical and Educational) ; Normal (Elementary and Industrial 
Teachers) and Vocational; Theological (Regular and English); Academy 
—Four years with diploma. $40,000.00 
gymnasium just completed. 
School opens September, 1919. For 
information address 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH , 
President. 
The Cheyney Training School for 
Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNA. 
A normal school of high grade for 
young colored men and women of good 
abilities, who desire to prepare themselves to be teachers. Courses include 
the regular academic and professional 
subjects, and special departments in domestic art, domestic science, manual 
training and agriculture. Board and 
tuition $125. Next regular term begins 
Thursday, September 18, 1919. Summer 
school for teachers in active service, 
four weeks beginning July 1. Board and 
tuition for the month $20.00. For further particulars and catalog write 
Leslie Pinckney Hill, Principal, Cheyney, Penna. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 177 
Atlanta University Is beautifull y located In the Cit y 01 Atlanta , Ga . 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School, forma l 
School and College , wit h Manua l trainin g and domesti c science. Amon g the teachers are graduat e 
of Yale , Harvard , Dartmout h and Wellesley . Fift y 
year s of successful work have been completed. 
Students come fro m al l parts of the south. Grad ­
uate s ar e almost universall y successful. 
Fo r furthe r informatio n address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA , 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND, VA . 
Three Departments, College, Theological and High School. Work 
of highest grade. Pre-medical 
course in College. Thoroughness 
and accuracy emphasized. New 
year begins September 2gth. For 
information address the President. 
1870
 CLARK UNIVERSITY 19, 9 
ATLANTA , GEORGI A Beautiful campus overlooking the city. Comfortable buildings with modern conveniences: talented faculty; vigorous, religious atmosphere; excellent library and laboratories; co-educatlonal; athletics. Admission only by application. 
Course s of Study : 
Domestic So: e nee. Public Speaking. Music; 
Pre-Academy. Seventh and Eighth Grades. 
Academy or High School, four years with diploma. Pre-Medical, two years above academy. Normal, two years above academy with diploma. College, four years with A B degree. 
Fiftieth year opens September 24, 1919. 
Expenses, SI 5.00 per month will cover all necessary expenses. 
HARRY ANDREWS KING, President. 
KNOXVILL E COLLEG E Beautifu l Situation. Healthfu l Location. 
Best Mora l and Spiritua l Environment. 
Splendid Intellectua l Atmosphere . 
Note d for Honest and Thoroug h Work . 
Institution offers ful l courses in the followin g departments: College , Normal , Hig h 
School, Gramma r School, Domesti c Science 
and Industrial. 
Good water , steam heat, electri c lights, 
natura l drainage , splendid dormitories. Ex ­
penses ver y reasonable. 
Fo r catalo g and othe r information address 
PRESIDENT J. KELL Y GIFFEN 
Knoxville, Tenn. 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL , TEXA S 
Recognized as a college of the First Class by Texa s 
and Louisiana State Boards of Education. Harvard , 
Yal e and Columbi a represented on its faculty; students gathered fro m ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in! the West 
M . W . DOGAN , President 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its. emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y, M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY CHARLOTTE , N . C . 
Biddle University, operated under the auspices of the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Depart­ ments—High School, Arts and Sciences Theological tod Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School course is the requirement, for entrance to the first year of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses of study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the scientific, German is substituted for Greek or Latin. The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class li 15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each consisting of three years. The first Is purely English. Greek and Hebrew are taught In the others. 
All students in the High School Dept. are required to take trades In the Industrial Dept. 
For further Information, address 
President H. L. MoCrorey, 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga . 
Co-Educational The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Wel l equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics unde r faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, . College Preparatory, Nor ­
mal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurs e 
Training . Sewing, Printing and Tailoring . 
First Semester begins October, 1019. 
Fo r further information address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN , President BISHO P J. 8, FLIPPER , Chairma n Truste e Board 
Mention TH E CRISIS , 178 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
TH E FLORIDA AGRICULTURA L AN D 
MECHANICA L COLLEGE 
TALLAHASSE E - - - FLORID A 
NATHA N B . YOUNG , President 
DEPARTMENTS : 
1. Academic 
a. Hig h School. 
b. Norma l School. 
c. College . 
d. Music . 
2. Agricultural. 
a. General. 
b. Vocational . 
3. Mechanic Arts 
a. Technical. 
b. Vocational . 
4. Home Economics 
a. Domesti c Arts. 
b. Domesti c Science. 
• c. Nurse-Training . 
EQUIPMENT : 
1. 250 Acres. 
2. 21 Buildings. 
3. 42 Officers of Instruction and 
Administration. 
The Agricultural and 
Technical College 
is improving its organization to 
meet the greater demand for skilled 
workmen. Fou r Strong, Practica l 
Departments: 
1. The Academic Department. 
2. The Agricultural Department. 
3. The Mechanical Department. 
4. The Department of Vocational 
Training in Agriculture. Short 
Courses in Agricultural and 
Mechanical Branches. 
Th e new Department, No . 4, presents an excellent opportunity to those 
desirin g to prepare as teachers of 
Agriculture . 
Write today for terms and catalog 
J AS. B. DUDLEY, President 
GREENSBORO , N . C. 
The Slater Industrial and 
State Normal School 
For Colored Youth of Both Sexes WINSTON-SALEM , N . C . 
I. Offering Standard Courses 
In Academi c Subjects 
In Industrial and Vocational Subjects, 
In Education. 
II. Graduates receive the Teachers' Certificate. 
III. Located amid the foothills of the mountain section of Western Nort h Carolina 
and the health conditions are ideal. 
IV . Accommodations excellent and expenses 
moderate. 
Fo r furthe r informatio n communicat e wit h 
S. G . ATKINS , Principal SLATE R STAT E NORMA L SCHOOL , 
Winston-Salem , N . C. 
Lincoln University 
Beginning September 22, 1919, the requirement for admission to the Theological Department will be graduation from a College of 
Libera l Arts. Youn g Me n wishing to prepaid 
for the Ministr y in a Seminary, all whose resources will henceforth be devoted to the education of the adequately trained alone, are 
invited to write to 
President, John B. Rendall Lincol n Universit y P. O. , Pennsylvania . 
COLEMA N COLLEG E 
GIBSLAND , LA . 
Supported b y Baptist Stat e "Woman's Hom e 
Missio n Society of Chicag o and Boston and 
A . B . H . Society of Ne w York . Students 
from six different states. Graduate s exempted on first grade by Louisiana , Arkansa s 
and Oklahoma . 
O. L . COLEMAN , President 
W e hav e roo m for a few mor e youn g me n i n ou r 
RESERVE OFFICERS TRAINING CORPS Th e Government furnishes cots, blankets, bed sacks, 
uniforms, rifles, ammunition and an officer to give 
MILITARY INSTRUCTION Students pay their own board and lodging amounting 
to $12 per month, but they may work out all or any 
part of this according as provision is made with the 
President. 
Al l students carry on their regular academic studies 
and trades courses in connection with their military 
training. 
Camp Opens Sept. 22nd, and Closes June 1st Fo r admission write 
LIEUT , W . R . SMALLS , 
A . & M . College, Normal , Ala . 
Fo r work write 
PRESIDEN T "WALTE R S. BUCHANA N 
A . & M . College, Normal , Ala . 
THE BEST SCHOOL In which to learn a trade and at the same time take yoi;r literary course. Do not waste money and time taking their separately. Positions await the well trained. 
BEFOR E YO U DECID1I which ts the best school for you to attend, =pnd lor a catalog. 
NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL FOR WOMEN AND G1RIS 
Miss Nannie H. Burroughs President, 
Lincoln Heights, Washington, 0 . C. 
(Continued on Pane 209) 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS 
Vol. 18-No. 4 AUGUST, 1919 Whole No. 106 
Opinionof W. E. B. DuBois 
T O YOU R TENTS , O ISRAEL! 
ACROS S the giant plains that 
swept their empty girth 
about Palestine came ever 
and anon a cry : " They 
come! " Then the mothers held i n 
terror their children to their breasts; 
then the fathers dropped to their 
knees and held hard hands against 
the anxious skies; then the young men 
girded their grim swords and looked 
yonder where the golden haze was 
already dripping dark and bloody 
hosts — chariots and the horsemen 
thereof. 
Then came the cry : TO YOU R TENTS , 
0 ISRAEL ! Drop Beauty, drop Work, 
drop Home, drop Life , and gather, 
stripped for war, in the tiny, fluttering covers of the march. Face heat 
and cold and hunger; know hurt and 
death; and FIGHT , FIGHT , FIGH T for 
Freedom, for the Assyrian is death 
and slavery — TO YOU R TENTS , 0 
ISRAEL ! 
* * * 
Behold the day, 0 Fellow Black 
Men ! They cheat and mock us; they 
kil l and slay us; they deride our 
misery. When we plead for the naked 
protection of the law, there where a 
million of our fellows dwell, they tell 
us to "G O TO HELL! " 
To YOU R TENTS , 0 ISRAEL ! An d 
FIGHT , FIGHT , FIGH T for Freedom! 
How shall we fight? Not by Might 
nor by Power but by M y Spirit, saith 
the Lord ! Wit h the Great Weapon. 
The day of Beginnings is at end. We 
are a mighty organization. Therei n 
Cleveland, i n the springtime of Worl d 
Peace, there met 265 delegates and 
members, from thirty-four states of 
the Union, representing 75,000 members of the National Association for 
'the Advancement of Colored People. 
This is the Great Weapon. 
How did they tell us to wield it, in 
those nineteen sessions, with aggregate audiences of 10,000 persons? 
Listen to their words: 
FIGH T 
BISHO P JOH N L . HURS T 
ACCORDIN G to every definition the American Negro 
is a citizen and under the 
Constitution of the United 
States he is so recognized. The 
Fourteenth Amendment to the 
Constitution calls for his enjoyment of 
every right and privilege accorded 
every class of citizens. But there is 
a group in the country whose fundamental conception of democracy is an 
institution where women and 
Negroes are excluded from Government 
and the right to rule denied them. 
Steadfastly this group have set their 
faces against the Constitution and 
through every conceivable device they 
have succeeded in annulling each decree so that well nigh two-thirds of 
the Negro population entitled to exercise the franchise are excluded from 
the ballot box. Amon g them are to 
be found two distinct governments— 
one for themselves and by themselves, 
and the other for the colored man, 
but also run by the whites and for 
the whites. They see to it that the 
tax levy is the same for both, but i n 
the division thereof, if division at all, 
the whites get almost all of it and 
the Negro what may be left ... . 
178 180 TH E
The people of color and their 
friends who believe in absolute justice must bring forth every vestige 
of wisdom and courage, and energy 
at their command and hurl it against 
this colossus of race hatred upon 
which is based this systematic robbery and damnable injustice to the 
Negro. The colored people especially must resolve to make a sacrifice of 
their means, yea, of all they have, to 
back up their contention and employ 
the most capable and consciencious 
counsel that the Ba r affords. If need 
be, they must be ready to offer their 
lives for their freedom and the things 
that make life worth living. A s a 
race, we gave the country four hundred thousand of our best sons to 
make the supreme sacrifice i n order 
to make the world free from German 
oppression. These same boys should 
be willin g to make this country free 
from American oppression against 
their race. I know they are willin g 
and ready. Some may say this is 
madness. If it is, let me reassure 
them that the entire race must be 
mad, for this is the language they 
speak today and the only thing they 
wil l listen to. 
TH E BITTER TRUT H 
P. O'CONNEL L 
MY own heart—and I must be 
personal — my own heart 
has been a sensitized plate 
that has received every 
impression from childhood up to this 
present moment, every impression of 
the degradation, the shame, the 
wretchedness, the woe, the torture, 
the heartlessness, the oppression, to 
which our people have been subjected 
by the superior race. I feel it all. I 
am lynched daily. I have i n the night 
time awakened my wife wit h cries of 
agony uttered i n sympathy wit h the 
people to whom I belong; I have made 
white men hate me because I have 
cried and prayed to God i n their presence to pity my people; I have made 
 CRISIS 
my people weary of me because I have 
repeated what I have gathered from 
the newspapers and periodicals, especially from TH E CRISIS, because I 
have repeated wit h iteration and reiteration the horrors that we daily 
endure uncomplainingly. 
I know this question; I am this 
question embodied. I drew from my 
mother's breast the capacity for resentment and I do resent. I drew 
from her breast courage to speak and 
I do speak. I drew from her breast 
reverence for myself as a man that 
is never daunted by any manifestation of power, or capacity, or dignity, 
or greatness, on the part of any man. 
I am a man and I challenge for myself 
as a man reverence from all men 
everywhere. I know no superior. I 
never feared a white man .. . I 
have felt, however, difficulty i n my 
own proper person, i n the realness of 
my manhood, in the terribleness of 
my wrongs and i n the consciousness 
that the very saints i n Heaven are 
muttering curses on my behalf, that 
the sunlight is darting demons 
against my foes—I have had difficulty 
in restraining myself from entering 
the list and challenging them anywhere and everywhere to utterance. 
FIGH T B Y VOTIN G 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
SO long as there is one class of 
Americans denied their civic 
rights, it is useless to talk 
about social democracy. So 
long as there is one class of America n 
citizens to whom one avenue of employment is closed, it is perfectly idle 
to talk about industrial democracy. 
So long as there is one system of 
justice for men of a light complexion 
and no system of justice for men of 
dark complexion, it is useless and idle 
to talk about justice. So long as there 
are three amendments to the 
Constitution that can be nullified in any 
part of the United States, it is idle 
to talk about this as a constitutional OPINION 181 
country. So long as there is i n the 
Southern States nothing but anarchy, 
it is useless for a certain part of my 
white brethren to shiver with fear at 
the sound of that word, for they have 
anarchy already i n the South 
Now, then, Colored American 
Brother of Mine , wil l you seize this 
opportunity that God has placed withi n your reach and make this country 
really free? It rests with you. Fo r 
fifty years the colored American of 
the Nort h has been voting for somebody else. Now, in the name of God 
and Freedom, vote for yourselves! 
Vote for yourselves once. Tr y it just 
once. Yo u have tried everything 
else, so try that just once. Wha t do 
you care whether the tariff duty on 
glass is sixty-seven or sixty-six and 
a half cents? That makes no difference to you. Wha t do you care what 
the tariff duty on lumber, planed on 
one side, is? Nothing is of any importance to you except the fundamental matter of Liberty and Justice. 
When a candidate comes to you 
and asks for your suffrage on the 
ground that he is a member of the 
Grand Old Part y or any party and 
you ought to vote for him, tell him to 
get while getting is good. The only 
thing you care about is where does 
he stand on this issue. Nothing else 
is of any importance. Make your 
candidate come up and answer that 
question. If he is right on this, he 
is right on everything else so far as 
you are concerned. 
REGISTERE D FIGHTER S 
COR A FINLE Y 
EVE R since we in Atlant a have 
re-organized the National 
Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People an 
appeal has been made to the male 
members to register and qualify, pay 
their taxes and get ready to vote. A t 
every meeting of the branch this appeal has been made, but when the 
Cit y of Atlant a proposed to issue 
bonds and raise the tax rate from 
$1.25 to $1.50, the men then saw their 
opportunity and a great effort was 
made to have every man in Atlant a 
qualified to vote in this election. Mor e 
than two thousand colored men registered, some paying back taxes to 
large amounts; some borrowed the 
money with which to pay them. Promotors of the bond campaign, hearing 
of the activity of the colored men, 
came and asked them to vote for 
bonds and taxes. The men replied: 
"If you wil l guarantee us certain improvements in the schools, we wil l 
gladly vote for bonds and taxes; if 
not, we wil l vote against bonds and 
taxes." The committee replied that 
they were not in position to guarantee, but that they would give their 
word as gentlemen. The reply was 
made that "We have had i n the past 
one bond issue when we were promised schools if the bonds sold at a 
premium, and they sold at a premium 
and we were given only one school. 
Now we wish a guarantee of some 
kind. " 
Amon g the things demanded by the 
committee were that double sessions 
i n the public schools be abandoned 
and that the colored teachers receive 
the same salary as white teachers for 
their services. No one was able to 
make such a promise, so when the day 
of election came, two thousand colored men voted against everything. 
The bond issue was lost. Then another effort was made. Someone said 
the colored voter did not understand; 
that the matter had not been thoroughly explained to him; that if thoroughly understood, they would vote 
for the bonds. So another bond issue 
was set and another conference was 
held. The same proposition was 
made. The same demands were made 
by the colored citizens, but no definite 
assurance could be obtained. The 
day of the bond election came around 
and this time more than two thousand 
colored men voted against everything 
and the bond issue was lost. 182 TH E CRISIS 
FIGH T TH E A. F. O F L . 
E . K . JONE S 
THE decision which was reached 
by the American Federation 
of Labor at Atlanti c City, 
last week, is a decision which 
has thus far been put only on paper. 
It may mean a great deal; it may 
mean nothing. It wil l only mean a 
great deal provided that in every locality throughout this country the 
colored men and women come together and demand of the various labor 
locals recognition of Negroes as workingmen. It means that in Washington, there ought to be stationed men 
who are big and broad enough to see 
the importance of this decision on the 
part of organized labor; who wil l see 
that the internationals change their 
constitutions so as to admit Negro 
men; and to see that the internationals and the Executive Council 
pass on the final word to the locals in 
regard to this matter. Because, after 
all, it is entirely a local question as to 
whether a man wil l or wil l not be admitted when he is qualified. The internationals only decide as to policy, 
as to constitutional rights. Putting 
into execution is a matter of local 
concern. 
TH E SWORD O F TH E SPIRIT 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
THE Negro in Americ a asks no 
special privilege, no favor. 
He might have; he might 
have said: "Yo u stole my 
labor as you stole my body and soul 
for generations; pay me the wages 
that were withheld and give me that 
as an endowment for a life of freedom and self-help." He did nothing 
of the kind. He asks nothing now, 
save that that shall be his which is 
other men's. He wishes to live and 
to let live in this fair country of ours. 
He merely asks that if he pays for 
courts, he shall have the courts; that 
if he pays for the police, the police 
shall protect him in life and limb and 
property; that if he pays for schools, 
there shall be schools for his children; 
that if he pays for land, it shall be 
his; that if he is a tenant, he shall 
be a tenant and not a peon or serf. 
He goes back to our text-books of history and finds something therein 
about no taxation without representation. He says that this is a good 
Americanism; that it is neither the 
doctrines of Bolshevists nor of 
Anarchists, but of the founders of the 
American Republic. Bu t when he 
seeks to apply it to himself, why then 
he is told that he wil l do so at the 
peril of his life in certain sections 
of our country 
The Negro problem insoluble? To 
me it seems the easiest of all our 
great problems to solve; the easiest 
for which to suggest constructive 
remedies. It requires nothing else 
than to imagine how the Savior would 
deal wit h it. He would know and He 
knew—no hate, no dislike, no prejudice of race or color. He would be 
swayed by no economic jealousy. He 
would go out among the colored as 
among all others. He would sit at 
their tables. He would break bread 
with them. He would suffer them all 
to come unto Hi m and He would give 
of everything He had to ease their 
pains, to bind up their wounds, to 
sooth, to purify and to uplift their 
spirits. 
SOUTHER N WHIT E ALLIE S 
L . M . FAVRO T 
IN conclusion, let me pay a tribute to the race for whose 
advancement I have the privilege of working. It is not 
possible to work wit h these people 
and not feel for them sympathy, admiration and respect. The sacrifices 
they are making for the education 
and enlightenment of their people, 
their kindly disposition and the sincere appreciation they show for the 
smallest service rendered them, their 
patience, the philosophical way they SOU L AN D STA R 183 
generally take discourtesy and 
brusque treatment, their cheerfulness 
even i n adversity—all of these things 
make it a source of never-ceasing 
wonder to me that for so many years 
I lived among these people and knew 
them not; that for so many years I 
caw in them only the faults that are 
bred of ignorance, depravity and neglect and not the inherent good qualities with which our Almighty Creator 
had endowed them. ' I. am grateful 
that my eyes have been opened, and 
that it is my privilege to help open 
the eyes of others in my state. An d 
may I say that it is in this work, it 
seems to me, that your organization 
can do the most lasting service to our 
colored people? Avoi d doing anything 
to encourage a spirit of resentment 
which may lead to crime, lawlessness 
and greater bitterness and distrust. 
Our thoughtful people deplore, and 
an increasing number resent, the 
shocking occurrences that all too frequently besmirch the good name of 
the South and of our State. You r efforts to prevent these outrages spring 
from righteous indignation and 
should be crowned with success. Base 
your appeal to those in authority on 
grounds that wil l arouse their indignation, as it has yours, and you'll get 
a response. We cannot and do not 
ask you to disregard the evils that exist—injustice, unfair discrimination 
and mob violence. We do urge you 
to recognize the serious aspects and 
innate difficulties of the problems that 
beset us, to help us with constructive 
suggestions and to give the colored 
people of the South some encouragement by bearing witness to our efforts in their behalf. 
THRE E HUNDRE D YEAR S 
THRE E hundred years ago this 
month a " Dutch man of 
Warre sold us twenty 
Negars." They were not 
slaves. They were stolen freemen. 
They were free in Africa ; they were 
free by the laws of Virginia . By 
force and fraud they and their children were gradually reduced to a 
slavery, the legality of which was not 
fully recognized for nearly a century 
after 1619. From their loins and the 
bodies of their fellows of after-years 
have sprung—counting both "white" 
and " black " — full twenty million 
souls. Those still visibly tinged with 
their blood are still enslaved—by compulsory ignorance, disfranchisement 
and public insult. In sack-cloth and 
ashes, then, we commemorate this 
day, lest we forget; lest a single drop 
of blood, a single moan of pain, a single bead of sweat, in all these three, 
long, endless centuries should drop 
into oblivion. 
Wh y must we remember? Is this 
but a counsel of Vengeance and 
Hate? God forbid! We must remember because if once the world forgets evil, evil is reborn; because if the 
suffering of the American Negro is 
once forgotten, then there is no guerdon, down to the last pulse of time, 
that Devils wil l not again enslave and 
maim and murder and oppress the 
weak and unfortunate. 
Behold, then, this month of mighty 
memories; celebrate it, Children of 
the Sun, in solemn song and silent 
march and grim thanksgiving. The 
Fourth Century dawns and through 
it, God guide our thrilling hands. 
SOUL AN D STAR 
C . BERTRAM JOHNSON 
SO oft from out the verge afar 
The dear dreams throng and throng; 
Sometimes I think my soul a star, 
And life its pulsed song. TH E BROTHERHOOD OF MA N A STOR Y 
E. LlEBOWITZ 
WE were seated in our charming garden, the five of us who so often gathered together for an afternoon's recreation. 
The five were: Madame Kadanska, the 
Polish lady, who lived in a hotel in the 
Champs-Elysees; Marcelline, Madame's 
little girl; Major Miron, an old friend; myself; and my own dear little Toto. 
His name was Jacques, hut Toto was one 
of the first words his bahy lips lisped. 
Major Miron held Marcelline on his knee, 
while Toto stood very near, wide-eyed, taking in the marvelous tales unfolded by the 
Major. 
Major Miron was an old traveller. The 
Orient was as familiar to him as our Paris 
was to us. 
Toto never seemed to tire of the mysterious wonders of India, and often begged the 
Major to tell him about the little brown 
boys who lived there. 
It was a beautiful day in spring. The 
fruit trees were in bloom, and the faint 
fragrance of the blossoms was wafted toward us when the gentle winds stirred the 
branches. 
Al l was pink, white and green. The tiny 
blades of grass made the ground beneath 
our feet tread like a velvet carpet. And 
the birds, ah,—the dear little creatures sang 
as if their throats would burst with song. 
"Ah , Madame Bianchon, this is a day for 
dreaming—a day for seeing visions; I feel 
in the mood." 
Madame Kadanska began singing softly 
"The Maiden's Wish," that enchanting 
Polish song of Chopin's. 
Hers was truly a wonderful voice, a voice 
that would charm thousands were they privileged to hear it; but Madame always smiled 
and said, "I save my voice for my friends; 
I could never sing to a cold, critical audience. Strangers take the life out of me. 
Ah , yes, I must save my voice for my 
friends." 
I begged Madame to sing the song again, 
for the melody delighted me. "An d since 
we haven't my miserable playing to spoil 
the beauty, I can better drink in the exquisite beauty of your singing," I said to her. 
I accompanied Madame when she sang 
in our salon, but my technique was not adequate, and many of her beautiful phrasings 
were marred by my miserable playing. Out 
in the open I could enjoy the round, fresh 
beauty of that voice, with no thought of 
the tricky little runs and trills that hopped 
up and often caught me unawares. Ma ­
184 TH E BROTHERHOO D O F MA N 185 
dame knew that I was an indifferent performer, but she always declared that I had 
the soul, which was more to be desired 
than mere technique; she said I followed 
well, and she asked no more than that. 
As she began singing the lines "Were I 
a birdling, there would rise my singing 
round thy charm'd soul," I noticed that 
the Major had stopped his story-telling to 
listen to the singing. When the last notes 
had died away, Toto clapped his hands and 
called to Madame, "That is so sweet, dear 
Madame Kadanska;" then turning quickly 
to the Major, I heard him say, "An d you 
say the little boy was like your own Toto?" 
"Yes, quite the same as you,—that is, if 
you will excuse his being brown; and let me 
see,—yes, his hair was black. Now yours 
is brown, yet not such a difference, after 
all; not such a difference, eh, Toto? 
"Yo u ask about his eyes? Why he had 
big brown eyes like yours, Toto; but since 
there were no Marionettes in India to make 
him hop, skip and jump up and down and 
laugh, his beautiful brown eyes were sad, 
Toto." 
I looked at Madame Kadanska and smiled, 
"The Major is happy once more; he is back 
i n India. He, too, is in the mood." 
"We are all in the mood today," she replied. "What is it that makes us so?" 
"I do not know," I ventured to remark, 
for Madame did not seem to be addressing 
me. She had the look in her eyes that I 
had seen often before when she would say, 
"I am dreaming of things unseen, dear 
Madame Bianchon." 
My friend was a beautiful woman,—very, 
very slender, and full of that grace so well 
known among Polish women. She had shining brown hair with natural waves that sent 
the glints flying when the sun played on it. 
But the most striking feature of Madame 
Kadanska was the wonderful light that 
flashed from her dark eyes. 
"Yes, we are in the mood today; come, let 
us try our little medium,—perhaps it will 
be kinder to you." And she looked at me 
with eyes that seemed to say, "I have lived 
and lived, through me shines the living 
soul." 
For years Madame Kadanska had been a 
disciple of the higher life. 
"Toto, dear," I called, "run get the board 
for mamma." 
 knew immediately that I was breaking 
into the Major's story, for he held up a 
warning finger, and said, "Now, Madame 
Bianchon, one minute. Toto must remain a 
little longer. The little East Indian boy 
doesn't want his teacher to come for the 
lesson today. The clouds are heavy and 
there is just one ray of sun shining through, 
and the little brown boy is standing at the 
door praying for the rain." 
"Of course, Toto may remain, Major 
Miron, since it is likely the rain will come 
at any minute now," I replied. The finger 
relaxed and his hand rested lightly on my 
boy's head. 
In a few minutes I heard the Major crying in a triumphant voice, "Ah , that little 
ray has gone in. The rain is coming gently, 
gently, Toto. Now look, my boy. It is coming in a regular shower. Thundering heavens! It is pouring now." Major Miron always related the greater part of his stories 
in terms of the present, and Toto never 
failed to respond in a like tone. 
"Hooray! Hooray! The teacher cannot 
come for the lesson today," Toto cried, 
jumping up and down in a frenzy of delight. 
"Now, Toto, the ouija board for mamma." 
He started toward the house, then gave a 
quick turn, and coming to my side said, 
"Mamma, I wish I were a little brown boy." 
As the curly head nestled under my arm 
we heard the strains of an old French song 
played on a street organ. 
"Hurry, Toto," called the Major. "I seem 
to hear the music of the Marionettes in the 
distance." 
Dear to the hearts of all French children are the Marionettes, the little puppets 
that make merry always. Whenever a child 
hears the cry, "The Marionettes are coming," nurses, big brothers and big sisters 
rush out with their little charges to see 
the sight that is ever wonderful to children; and to some grown-ups, too, for 
the Major has often confided to me that 
he has never outgrown this childish joy at 
the sight of the Marionettes. 
The favorite Marionette with children is 
the troubadour, who plucks his guitar and 
bows to the never-ending delight of his 
young audience. 
The puppets are just about a foot high. 
They slide instead of walking, as respectable human beings are wont to do. 
If there were such a thing as a 
Marionette being born, then he first came to life 
in far-off Egypt, for all their movements 
I186 
 I 
TH E CRISI S 
are angular. They bow, turn, kiss and 
kneel; sometimes they lose their balance 
and up in the air their pedal extremities 
go, adding much to the amusement of the 
children. 
And the music—there are the old French 
songs so dear to memory—the children have 
heard them from their cradles. 
"Now, Major, when the twilight comes, 
return with the children. And, Toto, no 
begging " I admonished. 
Through the gate the Major and the children go, Toto running ahead, then back 
again, catching the Major's hand, almost 
dragging him on. 
"Happy childhood, Madame Kadanska," 
I said to my friend. 
"Yes, happy childhood," she repeated. 
"Now that we are alone, let us try our 
little magic," I said. We placed the board 
and adjusted it, so there would be no tilting. Our fingers touched the little pointer 
lightly. Five minutes passed; the pointer 
remained still. 
"It does not respond quickly today," I 
ventured. "Or is it that I am impatient?" 
Madame made no reply, but gave me a 
warning look. The pointer was just beginning to move slowly. 
"Now, Madame Kadanska, you are pushing the pointer because of my impatience. 
Is it not so?" I asked. 
Again the warning look; her eyes seemed 
to say, "Yo u will break the spell." 
I began to watch the little pointer now 
with keen interest. A t first there was the 
slightest perceptible movement to and fro, 
just as if we were pushing it gently backward and forward. Gradually the movement increased. 
I begged Madame to begin asking questions, and to try and put me in touch with 
the force that always responded to her will. 
"Ar e you willing to talk today?" she 
asked. 
The pointer turned to the letters y-e-s. 
Madame Kadanska told me to ask questions, and find out whether I was to receive 
any communication. 
I eagerly addressed my remarks to the 
board, asking "Wil l you talk to me?" 
"Yes, " came the answer. 
"Do you know me?-" 
The pointer turned to the letters y-e-s. 
"How long have you known me," I asked. 
My heart was beating fast, for it was the 
first time the board had favored me with 
any communication whatever. Madame 
Kadanska, the ethereal one, as I playfully 
called her sometimes, lived in close touch 
with the great beyond. 
We waited anxiously, while the pointer 
spelled the words, "I have known you for 
more than a thousand years." 
"Where was it that you knew me?"
questioned, and in breathless wonder read 
the words "I N INDIA. " 
I became anxious to know if I had had 
many reincarnations, and on receiving the 
intelligence that I had already had two, I 
asked about my next. 
I cannot express to you the feeling that 
possessed me when these words formed 
themselves on the ouija board, "Live the 
life that is now yours, for you are one 
of the many who have been sent to teach 
"The Brotherhood of Man. " 
"The Brotherhood of Man, " I said to 
Madame Kadanska. "What can that mean? 
I do not understand." 
Madame's eyes were filled with tears. 
The spell was broken, the unseen force had 
left us; but there was something ineffably 
sweet singing in my heart—the Brotherhood 
of Man—I must think; I must learn. 
Madame Kadanska took my hand and 
said, "Yo u must think seriously of the message. The world needs awakening. It may 
not be given you to finish the work, but 
when the time comes, my dear friend, you 
must go." 
I felt that I could look to Madame for 
guidance, for she had been a great traveler. Every country of Europe was well 
known to her. It was she and the Major 
who had taught me so much about the 
Orient and its customs. The new world, 
too, had been included in her travels, and 
so through her I had become acquainted 
with the prejudices existing among the peoples of this world of ours. 
How could I have lived through the next 
few days without the remembrance of that 
last day in our garden? It had been such 
a happy day for me—and as the sun went 
down, I did not know that there would 
be many days before it would shine again. 
Madame Kadanska and I were gathering 
up our work-baskets, for the air was becoming a bit chilled. We had decided to 
wait on the upper balcony for the return of 
the Major and the children. 
Just as we were about to close the gate 
I heard the voice of Major Miron, calling TH E BROTHERHOO D O F MA N 187 
"Madame Kadanska, take dear Madame 
Bianchon into the house. Hurry! please." 
His voice was filled with anguish. I knew 
something dreadful must have happened— 
yet I did not once think of Toto. 
Madame Kadanska's sensitive nature 
knew immediately that the day was ending 
in tragedy. She drew me most tenderly 
into the house while the Major followed, 
looking as if years had suddenly settled 
upon him. 
Brokenly he told me how Toto, overjoyed 
at the sight of the Marionettes, ran ahead 
and started across the avenue. 
They had followed the Marionettes from 
the Champs-Elysees through the Avenue de 
la Grande Armee to the porte Maillot. At 
this point the Marionettes crossed to reach 
the crowds that were celebrating the Fete 
de Neuilly. 
Toto, in his eagerness, did not heed the 
approaching vehicles. He was bent on 
catching up with the Marionettes. 
Major Miron, realizing the danger, rushed 
forward frantically in an effort to save the 
child. 
The driver tugged at the reins, the horses 
reared; but the effort was useless—my boy 
lay crushed and scarcely breathing. 
Two nights we watched at the bedside of 
little Toto. There were times when I held 
my ear close to the little body to detect the 
breathing. 
"Madame, there is no hope," said the 
doctor; "a few hours, perhaps—then he 
will sleep." 
Some good spirit must have been with 
me in those trying hours, for I kept repeating the words of the poet de Musset, 
"Nothing can make us greater than a great, great 
grief"—and so I determined to strengthen 
the belief that was gradually beginning to 
grow within me—the belief that there is no 
death and that we return. 
I looked at the little figure lying so still 
on the bed. The pale face was made paler 
by the clusters of dark curls. 
I was afraid to embrace my darling, and 
so I let my fingers play gently with the 
shining curls. 
My touch must have sent some current 
through the unconscious frame, for Toto's 
cold hand clutched at my fingers and pulled 
me closer to him. 
"Mamma, dear mamma," he said, "I have 
been in a beautiful place, more lovely than 
our little garden. Flowers grew everywhere—and the trees—such tall, waving 
trees I never saw before. Lots of little boys 
like me were there, and they crowded around 
me and said, 'Stay with us.' 
"Mamma, I am going to leave you now; 
I must go there again." 
"And then, Toto—then?" I breathlessly 
questioned. 
"Then after a long time, I will come 
back here; but I will be a little brown boy, 
like the ones dear Major Miron tells me 
about. I am going to choose a country 
where there are lots and lots of brown boys 
living. I will be so—happy—I'll be a— 
little—brown—boy." 
The last words came almost as a whisper 
—the child's hand grew colder; I knew that 
my boy had gone to another world. 
It was about the seventh day after Toto 
had left me that I ventured to go into my 
garden. 
"Oh, God," I sighed; "if the mist would 
only clear away." I sat leaning wearily 
against the apple tree, and fell asleep. 
Immediately, so it seemed, and as if by 
magic, I entered a beautiful garden. There 
were palm trees as far as the eye could 
reach; flowers grew in profusion. 
Such a riot of colors, and blended as only 
the Master-hand could paint on the canvas 
of nature. As I stood gazing at all this 
beauty, my attention was attracted by peals 
of silvery laughter. 
I crept forward, almost afraid that the 
sound of my footsteps would betray my 
presence; afraid because I felt that I was 
a trespasser. What would the owners say 
to me? How could I explain my presence 
in this wonderful garden that bespoke of 
royalty? 
As these thoughts flitted through my 
mind some compelling force made me turn. 
There stood the owners of the voices that 
sent the silvery laughter ringing through 
the garden. 
What a picture they made standing among 
the flowers, each one more beautiful than 
the flowers. Again I beheld a riot of coloring. Al l were brown, such beautiful 
browns—red browns, yellow browns, creamy 
browns—who but an artist or a lover of 
beauty could appreciate and describe the 
wonderful shades of color, no two being 
the same? 
Their forms were slender and straight; 
their eyes soulful; their voices soft and. 
musical, 188 TH E CRISIS 
I attempted to make an apology for my 
intrusion, but with a gesture worthy of a 
prince, the one nearest me said, "Our garden is made beautiful for all people. Come 
with us. We have been sent to pluck the 
rarest flower in this garden." 
The boy who had spoken led me along a 
path bordered with beautiful flowers. 
"Surely," I said, "your flower is among 
these." 
"No, a few steps beyond." 
"Here it is," cried the others who had 
gone before us. 
Reaching them, my little guide stooped 
and plucked the bloom, then held it out 
to me. 
The flower wag unlike any in the garden 
—the petals were like the richest velvet, 
with a sheen of satin; the color was astonishing. It was as black as midnight—yet 
that blackness was most beautiful. 
"This is a wonderful bloom," I said to 
the boy. 
"Yes, " he replied; "flowers are like people 
—there are many colors among them. Al l 
are beautiful. Wouldn't it be dreadful if 
all were alike?" 
The child came closer to me and, pointing with a slender finger, said, "See, the 
seed lies here; shake the flower. There! Do 
you see it falling? Plant the seed, and 
from it will bloom the most beautiful flower 
that ever grew on earth." 
We had been walking toward the gate 
and as I reached it, I turned to ask the 
name of my wonderful flower. 
The soft voice said, "The flower is the 
Brotherhood of Man ; plant it all over the 
world, where it is needed most." 
With an almost defiant look, Madame 
Bianchon ended her strange narrative by 
saying, "Why should I not teach the 
Brotherhood of Man, when I believe that my boy, 
in years to come, will return as a member 
of a darker race? 
"Yo u deny the God you profess to love 
when you refuse to accept the flower I bring 
you to-night, 'The Brotherhood of Man.' " 
SHALL I SAY, "MY SON, YOU ARE BRANDED"? 
GEORGIA D. JOHNSON 
SHALL I say, "M y son, you are branded 
in this country's pageantry, 
Foully tethered, bound forever, and no 
forum makes you free?" 
Shall I mark the young light fading through 
your soul-enchanneled eye, 
As the dusky pall of shadows screen the 
highway of your sky? 
Or shall I with love prophetic bid you 
dauntlessly arise, 
Spurn the handicap that binds you, taking 
what the world denies? 
Bid you storm the sullen fortress built by 
prejudice and wrong, 
With a faith that shall not falter in your 
heart and on your tongue! National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored-People. 
TH E TENT H ANNIVERSARY 
It was a mighty meeting. In many 
ways it was the greatest assembly 
ever held by Negroes in the United States. 
There have been larger assemblies among 
churches and fraternities, and meetings 
more intense, like the Niagara Movement 
at Harper's Ferry; but never have so many 
Negroes from so many states met in such 
earnest and continuous conference. 
Two hundred and sixty-five delegates 
came to Cleveland, during the last week in 
June, from thirty-four states: 
Ohio 57 Nebraska 4 
New Yor k 18 Colorado 4 
Michigan
Georgia
Pennsylvania
 16 
 15 
 15 
New Jersey
West Virgini a
Florida
 4 
4 
4 
Illinois 13 Louisiana 4 
Alabama 13 Nort h Carolina 3 
Indiana 9 Massachusetts 3 
South Carolina 11 Marylan d 2 
Texa s 8 Rhode Island 2 
District of Columbia . . 8 Kansas 2 
Kentucky
Missour i
 8 
8 
Oklahoma
Iowa
 1 
1 
Tennessee 6 Delaware 1 
Arkansas 7 California 1 
Mississippi
Virgini a
 5 
5 
Oregon
Wisconsin
 1 
1 
In spirit and voice—even in oratory— 
the assembly represented the New Time. 
There was little perfervid oratory; there 
was much of the halting utterance of the 
timid but full speaker. There was less of 
the Panacea and the Phrase and more of 
determination, eagerness for fact and truth 
without embellishment. Nineteen sessions 
were held—indeed the meeting was almost 
one continuous session, from 3 o'clock 
Sunday afternoon, June 22, to 11 o'clock Saturday night, Jun
sions held from 11 to 11, with a hurried 
lunch at the Phyllis Wheatley or the Royal 
Inn, and a more leisurely, but never long, 
dinner. There was almost no time for social functions, and perhaps the one criticism of the meeting was the utter lack of 
any note of beauty—few songs, no orchestral music, no ceremonial of grace or color, 
save the simple bundle of flowers given Miss 
Ovington, Saturday night—little but the 
grim, earnest conference, lightened now and 
189 190 TH E CRISIS 
then by illustrative pleasantries. It was a 
strain—a keying-up of emotion and thought 
that left many exhausted, but uplifted with 
Vision. 
The dominant notes were two, FIGHT and 
VOTE. 
Some there were who were almost frightened at the recurrence of the word "FIGHT!" 
—at the reiteration of the idea. Some 
feared that it meant a doctrine of bloodshed and murder in mad retaliation. It did 
not. It meant simply determination to secure the right to vote, education and law 
and order for twelve million people, and to 
secure these at any cost. 
The total attendance at the meetings must 
have aggregated 10,000 persons. The 
greater meetings were at the Armory, to 
hear the final words, and at the Technical 
High School, to witness the bestowal, of 
the Spingarn Medal. Other night meetings 
would have been as large had there been 
space. Hundreds were turned away. The 
morning and afternoon conferences were 
largely attended and the interest sustained. 
The Spring Membership Drive was reported as still in progress. This drive began in March, when there was a membership of 172 branches and 45,370 members. 
The drive progressed as follows: 
Apri l 1ST Branche s 49,593 Member s 
Ma y :03 Branches 51,832 Member s 
.Tune 211 Branches 56,345 Member s 
Jul y (Probably) 75,000 Member s 
The Thursday night meeting of the 
Cleveland Conference ended in the presentation 
of pennants to those branches that had gone 
"over the top!" 
Membership Quot a Reported 
Beaumont 126 250 420 
Birmingham 80 COO 051 
Bloomington-Normal ... . 91 200 325 
Camden 42 150 156 
Charleston, W . V a Il l 350 405 
Cleveland 1,077 2,000 3,079 
Columbia 59 300 418 
Dallas 366 1,000 1,030 
Darlington 28 100 160 
Denve r 394 700 720 
Falls Churc h 90 250 261 
Flint 55 250 276 
Gran d Rapids 50 200 201 
Indianapolis 237 700 725 
Lansing 30 100 155 
Little Rock 102 300 457 
Louisvill e 1,325 2,500 3,010 
Mumfor d 170 200 2S2 
Omaha 158 500 745 
Ottumwa 41 160 182 
Petersburg 117 300 336 
Pine Bluff 105 250 295 
San Diego 63 350 354 
Selma SI 300 312 
Spokane 81 300 329 
Terr e Haut e 50 200 282 
Shreveport 189 400 415 
Thomasville 52 200 307 
Toledo 653 1,000 1,071 
Tuscaloosa 84 200 282 
Wilmington, N . C 60 200 215 
Of all the sessions none was more interesting than that at Oberlin—the freedom 
of the historic village, the beauty of the 
great chapel, with the gracious strains of 
"Aida " and the words of welcome of G. N. A. A. C. P. 191 
Frederick Wright, brought a certain 
solemnity and calm: 
"In 1861 came the attempt of the slaveholding states to break up the Union and 
fasten the chains of slavery still more 
tightly upon the subject race. Though the 
ostensible object of the North was not to 
abolish slavery, but to preserve the Union, 
it was clear to us here that if the North 
was successful, slavery must go down. The 
compromising element taunted us antislavery men with not being loyal to the 
Union, and that we must either put up or 
shut up. We did not shut up, but we did 
put up. I was one of the 100 students that 
volunteered at the first call and formed 
Company C, of the 7th Ohio Regiment. 
Before the war was ended, thirty-nine of that 
number were killed in battle, or died in 
prisons or hospitals and as many more were 
maimed for life. One hundred names of 
Oberlin students and citizens who gave their 
lives on the battlefield for the freedom of 
the slave may be found upon the monument 
that solicits the attention of all who pass 
along the corner of College and Professor 
Streets. Here it is in place to add that 
my classmate General G. W. Shurtleff 
formed the first colored regiment in Ohio 
and became its leader." 
The resolutions adopted by a committee 
of the conference representing each state 
were, in part, as follows: 
"Al l true Americans view with concern 
the efforts of discontented people to disrupt 
our government, and we warn the American 
people that the patience of even colored 
people can find its limit; that with poor 
schools, 'Jim-Crow' methods of travel, little or no justice in court or in things economic staring him in the face, while the 
colored man is called on to bear his part 
of the burden in taxation, in government 
loans, in civic gifts and in fighting the 
common foes of our government, we are inviting him to grasp the hands which the 
Bolsheviki, the I. W. W., and other kindred 
organizations held out to him. It cannot 
be expected that Negro leaders can forever 
hold out empty hope to a people deluded 
in toto. 
"We are deeply sensible of the campaign 
of lies that have been subtly and persistently directed against colored officers and 
men, particularly colored officers of the 
United States Army. We have facts to 
prove that in many instances the least 
trained among these men were put forward 
at all; that the Negro's enemies worked 
zealously to prove that the colored officer 
was a failure ... . 192 TH E CRISI S 
"We are aware of instances in which both 
officers and men were thrown into prison 
on the merest pretenses, or on charges which 
rightfully fell on the shoulders of white 
officers. We are also cognizant of the fact 
that the American colored soldiers brigaded 
with the French did not suffer for recognition through citations, war crosses and 
even advancement in rank, while the colored soldier's own white countrymen not 
only stole all possible opportunity for distinction from him, but actively sought to 
poison European and American public opinion against their brothers in black. 
"We demand Congressional investigation 
of the treatment of colored soldiers at home 
and abroad. The shameless and cunning 
manner in which these officers and men have 
been treated was not only discriminatory, 
but violative of the spirit of the American 
people towards men who were offering their 
lives for a great cause. We make this demand because the facts so evident to us 
cannot be hidden from all others, and to 
allow this to go unchallenged is to weaken 
national and military morale. 
"We are opposed to race segregation in 
the army and navy of the United States of 
America since it cheats our government of 
that which is best in discipline and spirit; 
but if that separation is provided by law, 
then we demand a full division in the new 
army to be provided for by the present 
Congress, officered from top to bottom by colored men 
"Federal aid to common school training 
is indispensable and imperative, but wherever separate schools for colored are compulsory, all federal appropriations must by 
law be conditioned on the strict division of 
the funds between the races, according to 
population and on colored people having 
representation on the boards that control 
colored schools 
"We demand such federal legislation as 
shall give the government at Washington, 
absolute control of the investigation of and 
punishment for lynching. This hideous barbarism is murder, and when supposedly civilized democratic states, with laws on their 
books to prevent or punish murder, openly 
declare that they are powerless to stop 
lynching, as declared several southern governors to our Association, they thereby confess that they are to that extent incapable 
of self-government and subject to this only 
remedy at hand. 
"We denounce the 'Jim-Crow' laws of the 
South as being illegal and unconstitutional 
in that such laws interfere with interstate traffic and deny to a large part of its 
loyal citizens equal rights guaranteed un­A 193 SONNET 
der the Constitution ; and we cal l upon the 
Congress of the Unite d States to exercise 
its powe r under the Commerc e clause of the 
Constitutio n to the end tha t all such laws 
Le abolished. 
"W e demand tha t the Congress take such 
action as wil l insur e to al l citizens, regardless of race, color, or creed, equal and unsegregated service and accommodation on 
railroa d and Pullma n cars. 
"We demand the enforcement of all 
Constitutional amendments without discrimination. Th e patience of the colored America n 
is sorely tried by the country's complacent 
acceptance of these curtailments of his 
rights. Th e countr y has recently called on 
us to perform unusua l duties; we demand 
tha t we have the usua l rights of America n 
citizens. 
"W e demand tha t the thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth amendments of the 
Constitution of the United States, which guarantee the citizenship of the colored 
American and his enjoyment of all the rights inherent therein and flowing therefrom, be 
recognized and enforced by the 
Government, in good faith. To this end we call 
on al l our colored voters i n the better civilized parts of the country to see tha t their 
representatives i n Congress live up to the 
demands made herein, or report the reasons why. " 
THE Fift h Spingar n Meda l wa s "award ­
ed to Archibal d H . Grimke , of Wash ­
ington, D . C. | fo r seventy years of distin ­
guished service to his country and his race 
—as Consu l to Sa n Domingo, as president 
of the America n Negr o Academy , as author 
and scholar, and especially as president of 
the District of Columbia Branch of the 
National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People, whic h under his leadership 
has become the safeguard of the rights of 
eleven millio n people at the capita l of the 
nation. " 
Mr . Grimk e was born at Charleston, S. C , 
in 1849. He was educated at Lincoln 
University and the Harvard Law School. 
AT the urgent invitatio n of the Atlanta , 
Ga. , Branch , backed by invitations 
from the Mayor, the Chambe r of Commerc e 
and Governo r Dorsey, the Conference 
recommended that the Directors choose 
Atlanta as the 1920 meeting place. 
AND so we came away—alon g the grey 
waters of the wide-thrown lake, above 
the thunde r of Niagara , and I remembered 
the day when i n fea r and hesitation the 
Niagar a Movemen t was born. I remembered 
the vague, uncertain birt h of the N . A . A . 
C. P. The n i n contrast I saw Cleveland— 
its crowds, its earnestness, its triumphan t 
sense of power; I remembered the faces of 
friends and the hand clasps of those who 
knew—I remembered and I wa s glad. 
SONNE T 
ALIC E DUNBAR-NELSO N 
1 HA D not thought of violets of late, 
The wild , shy kin d tha t sprin g beneath 
you r feet 
I n wistfu l Apri l days, when lovers mate 
An d wande r throug h the fields i n rapture s 
sweet. 
Th e thought of violets meant florists' shops, 
An d bows and pins, and perfumed papers 
fine; 
An d garis h lights, and mincin g littl e fops, 
An d cabarets and songs, and deadening 
wine . 
So fa r from sweet rea l things my thoughts 
had strayed, 
I had forgot wide fields, and clea r brown 
streams; 
The perfect loveliness tha t God has made,— 
Wil d violets shy and Heaven-mountin g 
dreams. 
An d now—unwittingly , you've made me 
dream 
O f violets, and m y soul's forgotten gleam. The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HIL L i n The 
Outlook: 
Thre e things there are tha t men wil l do, 
Leaders of men, beware ! 
You r callin g and election true 
Wil l shine, i f they have fait h tha t you 
Their stubborn purpose share. 
Men will see men as only men, 
0 masters, take ye heed! 
N o one shall hold the rights of ten, 
N o morta l be divine again , 
N o counsel, pact, or creed. 
Men will be bold to follow thought. 
O captains, ye shall find 
Th e peoples of the earth distraugh t 
B y being merely led and taught, 
Bu t now they have a mind . 
And men will share the wealth they make. 
To this of all attend. 
The worke r for the worker's sake 
Wil l prove his powe r to give and take, 
Tha t ancient greed ma y end. 
Bu t i n the ways where labor stalks 
Portentous wit h its load, 
The soul of God's great futur e talks, 
Th e genius of His purpose walks, 
An d there must lie you r road. 
* * * 
H . P . Vivia n says i n a review of Winfiel d 
H . Collins' "Trut h Abou t Lynchin g and 
the Negr o i n the South" : 
Mr . Collins' excuses fo r lynchin g are the 
familia r discredited ones. " A mode of pun ­
ishment, " he says, "tha t woul d be out of 
place as to the whit e ma n ma y well be 
suited to the Negro . Smallpo x is not to 
be treated as chicken-pox. Barbarou s crim ­
inals requir e barbarous laws. " Lynching , 
of course, is not a barbarous la w at all . Its 
barbarity—whic h is real—consists i n its 
complete negation of law. Bu t those who 
have deduced from the foregoing tha t Mr . 
Winfiel d Collin s is incapabl e of mora l in ­
dignatio n are wrong . Hea r him : 
"Le t some Negr o brut e guilt y of rape 
suffer the punishment he so richl y deserves at the hands of an outraged 
community, and one woul d think, i f he 
considered the bitte r censure from distant quarters, tha t the foundation of 
the government were being undermined, 
or tha t a poor lamb wa s set upon b y 
a pack of howlin g wolves, thirstin g fo r 
its blood, but not a wor d of commiseration fo r the famil y or the victim of 
the fiendish Negro's unbridle d bestiality. " 
Commen t on this outburst seems unnecessary. 
Bu t there ar e other "extenuatin g circumstances." Consider, a t the author's invitation, the fac t tha t the populatio n of certai n states is mor e tha n half Negro . An d 
tha t i n certai n parishe s and i n certai n other 
counties the Negr o populatio n is over 90 
percent of the whole. 
"Is it any wonde r tha t the whit e 
ma n think s i t necessary to strik e terro r into the soul of the possible or 
incipien t Negr o crimina l b y an y method 
tha t ma y cause him to stand i n fea r 
of an immediat e and dreadfu l death? " 
Writin g i n the yea r i n whic h a grea t 
war, described as a duel between 
Civilization and Its Enemy, was brought to a triumphan t conclusion, a citizen of the most 
advanced democracy of the day ca n write : 
"O f remedies fo r lynchin g I have 
none. O f proposed remedies, I have 
only to say tha t whic h seems i n an y wa y 
practicabl e migh t result i n unmerite d 
hardshi p to white s and an increase i n 
rape cases as wel l ... . Th e law sanctions persona l self-defense. Th e whit e 
ma n i n lynchin g a Negr o does it as a n 
indirec t act of self-defense against the 
Negr o crimina l as a race. " 
Thu s is the eterna l fitness of thing s nobly 
justified. 
A NEGRO COMMUNITY 
SETTLEMENT 
FEW people know of Washingto n Terrace , 
a suburb of Cincinnati , wher e two 
hundred Negr o familie s liv e together, wit h 
every facilit y fo r improvin g their industria l 
and educationa l status. Th e communit y ha s 
sprun g into existence throug h the wil l of 
a Cincinnat i woma n wh o wishe d to foun d 
a n industria l school fo r Negroes. A group 
of Cincinnati men, including J. G. 
Schmidlapp, Judge Worthington, Frank Jones, and 
Willis Kemper, wer e made guardian s of the 
fund. Th e Cincinnati , Ohio , Commercial 
Tribune says: 
I n 1914 Mr . Schmidlap p wen t to the convention of the National Housing 
Commission and upon his return took up the idea 
of buildin g a Negr o community , fo r he is 
a firm believe r tha t the Negr o can best develop himself whe n surrounded b y those of 
his own race. 
H e interested severa l Cincinnat i friends 
i n the proposed deal, forme d a stock company and started work on Washington 
Terrace. Thus it was that what has been 
194 TH E LOOKING GLASS 195 
called by experts the most perfect housing 
arrangemen t i n the worl d came to be a 
reality . 
Th e site chosen was a plot of seven acres 
i n tha t beautiful, wooded section of the city 
called "Blood y Run. " Beginnin g at Kerpe r 
Avenu e on Walnu t Hills, the property extends to the boundary line of Avondale . It 
woul d have been difficult to find a more suitable location tha n this littl e spot nestlin g 
amon g the hills. 
Th e houses are built i n rows, but to avoid 
monotony i n architectura l design they are 
so arrange d tha t each one stands out individually . Fo r instance, i n the group known 
as the annex there are two, four and eight 
apartmen t houses of the detached and semidetached type, so tha t the cheerless appearance of a straigh t row of houses is avoided. 
Wit h but few exceptions al l apartments 
have separate entrances, whic h is a great 
asset towar d the mora l side of housing because of the few points of contact it affords the tenants. Eac h flat has a bath and 
toilet and a separate wate r heater. Ever y 
room is mor e tha n two rooms deep, insurin g plenty of fresh air. 
It has been estimated by socia l workers 
tha t 90 pe r cent of the housekeeping woul d 
come up to a perfect grade, whil e about 8 
per cent woul d be considered adequate from 
a sanitar y standpoint. Onl y the remainin g 
2 pe r cent wer e found below the average 
durin g three years. 
Th e Terrac e provide s homes fo r 188 families. It is divided into fou r mai n groups— 
Washingto n Terrace , whic h contains seventy-eight flats; the Annex , whic h has thirty-eight; the Taft Lan e group of thirt y flats 
and the Kerpe r Avenu e group of forty-two 
form the community. 
Rentals are based on a 10 per cent, gross 
retur n from the investment. I n other 
words, fo r every $100 of capita l spent a 
renta l of $10 is expected annually . This 10 
pe r cent, is divided into three parts. A dividend of not more than 5 per cent, is paid on 
the origina l investment; 2 pe r cent, is allowed fo r depreciation and 3 per cent, is set 
aside to cover the cost of repairs, taxes, assessments, wate r and other incidentals. 
Durin g the three years tha t the corporation 
has been i n existence it has succeeded i n 
keeping withi n these limits and already i n 
the depreciation fund there is $41,000. * * * 
A n interestin g feature of the Terrac e is 
the co-operative grocery, whic h is the only 
one of its kin d to be found i n a Negr o communit y i n this country. 
It is financed and managed b y the compan y fo r the benefit of the community. 
Fres h meats, fruits, vegetables and other 
staples are provided a t marke t prices, and 
the sales of the store approximat e nearl y 
$2,500 a month. Thre e or fou r times a yea r 
stock is take n and a financial report submitted to the tenants. U p to this time five 
dividends of 3 pe r cent, have been declared 
and the money distributed amon g the purchasers. 
RACE MORTALITY 
W. F. GEPHART, of Washington 
University, says in his "Principles of 
Insurance" : 
"Th e hazard due to races ca n be determined wit h increasin g accuracy as the vita l 
statistics of races become more accurate. 
I n the Unite d States the vita l statistics 
of the registratio n are a show a highe r mortalit y among Negroe s tha n amon g whites. 
Th e causes fo r this condition are too well 
known to need description. Th e greate r 
ignoranc e of the Negr o race, not only as to 
sanitar y living , but also as to their correct 
age, adds another element to the norma l 
hazard. Some companies practicall y refuse 
'to accept Negroes. This is done i n various 
ways, such, fo r example , as not givin g the 
agent any commission fo r writin g the policy ; others discriminat e against them i n the 
examination. Man y states enacted laws 
after the Civi l Wa r requirin g companies to 
accept Negroes on the same basis as white s 
i n the belief tha t they were thereby enforcin g the spirit of the Fourteent h Amendment, 
but i n practic e such laws can easily be 
evaded." 
* * * 
O n the other hand, the editor of the 
Journal of the American Medical 
Association points out that the Negro is constitutionall y a "better physiologica l machine " 
tha n the whit e man. H e goes on to show 
that a race's resistance to disease is susceptible of most accurat e estimation because 
it can be considered on the basis of statistica l information . Th e Literary Digest quotes 
him as saying : 
" A peculiarl y valuabl e instance is afforded by the comparison of white men and 
Negroes in the United States Army. The 
numbers are sufficiently large to give some 
semblance of validit y to the deductions 
whic h they permit. Th e whit e and colored 
troops live unde r equally good sanitar y conditions, are examined wit h equal diagnosti c 
skill . A study of the sort indicated has recently been reported by Lieutenant-Colone l 
Lov e and Majo r Davenport, who have undertaken an analysis of mor e tha n half a mil ­
lio n admissions to sick report i n our Arm y 
includin g mor e tha n 15,000 fo r the colored 
troops. Fo r man y maladie s the morbidity -
rat e is the same i n the two races. Th e arm y 
officers have, however, ascertained from the 
statistics tha t the colored troops are rela ­
tivel y less resistant to diseases of the lungs 
and pleur a as well as to certai n genera l dis­196 TH E
eases, lik e tuberculosis and smallpox ; they 
are also muc h more frequently infected wit h 
venereal disease and suffer wide-spread complications of these diseases. Love and 
Davenport point out, on the other hand, that 
i n genera l the ski n not only on the surfac e 
of the body, but also tha t whic h is infolded 
to form the linin g of the mouth and nasopharynx , is muc h more resistant to microorganisms i n Negroe s tha n i n whit e men. 
Th e whit e ski n seems to be relativel y a degenerate ski n i n this respect. Furthermore , 
the nervous systems of the uninfected 
Negroes show fewer cases of 'instability' than 
those of whit e men. Thu s there is fa r less 
neurasthenia , there are fewer instances of 
psychopathi c states, and there is only half 
as much alcoholism i n colored as i n whit e 
troops. Nutritiona l disorders . . . are 
also less common among the Negroes. A s 
Lov e and Davenport describe the uninfected 
Negro , 'he seems to have more stable nerves, 
has better eyes, and metabolizes better. 
Thus, i n man y respects the uninfected colored troops show themselves to be constitutionall y better physiologica l machine s 
tha n the whit e men.' " 
CHANGES IN PSYCHOLOGY 
THE Unite d States, says the Chicago, 
111., Tribune, has a new type of black 
ma n to deal with . This type is developing 
a stron g social consciousness out of whic h 
aris e questionings and resentments. The 
pape r continues: 
Th e new type work s hard , grows steadily 
prosperous, and simultaneously wit h the 
realization of the wort h of its labor, is irke d 
by patronage, by those jokes about the razor, 
whic h some of us stil l thin k are droll, and 
by tha t lofty pettin g whic h some of us stil l 
believe colored men from 17 to 70 must like . 
The y do not. 
Al l this new Negr o psychology and new 
Negr o consciousness is as surel y a fac t and 
a factor i n the local situation as is the in ­
creasing numbe r of Negroe s i n our midst. 
It cannot be left out of the problem i f the 
problem is to be approached rationall y and 
humanely. It ma y seem lik e writin g all 
around the subject and not getting into it to 
harp on this theme of growin g social consciousness of the Negroe s as a race and the 
growin g sense of his persona l dignit y manifested by the Negr o as an individual—a 
sense not the less rea l because it often manifests itself i n surliness and rudeness. 
For several decades the enfranchised 
Negro sought patronage and liked it. Then 
he came to distrust and resent it. An d now 
the clear-headed representatives of the 
race take it wit h equanimit y and as it is 
meant—take it kindl y when it is meant kind ­
ly, but they don't lik e it the better fo r that. 
Th e returnin g colored soldiers are a bi g 
factor in , and bi g contributors to, this new 
Negr o consciousness. The y retur n wit h 
 CRISIS 
heads up, wit h a mor e acute sense of the 
har d conditions to whic h they wer e born, an d 
wit h a fresh determination , since they rightl y enough have been made muc h of, to make 
something of themselves. The y have been 
unde r disciplin e and the effect of discipline 
is dual. It both tames and makes a man , 
and i t has done both fo r thousands of these 
once irresponsibl e lads. 
Dr . Car y says tha t man y o f them have 
told him tha t they tir e and sicken of the 
banquets and dances give n them upon their 
return , and tha t they seek "somethin g lasting , something wort h while. " 
The phras e epitomizes the new aspiratio n 
of the new Negro . 
"Somethin g lasting , something wort h 
while. " 
SEGREGATION 
CHARLE S H . MOOR E write s i n the 
Greensboro, N . C , Daily News: 
I learned the othe r da y tha t W . J . Mears, 
one of ou r successful, prosperous, business 
Negr o men, was compelled to move from the 
quarters on East Washing-ton Street, where 
he had recently established himself, because 
some whit e people objected to his presence 
there i n such a capacity. 
From my acquaintance with William 
McAdoo, who owns the building, I am somewha t unwillin g to believe tha t he is volun ­
taril y i n favo r of such a procedure. Bu t as 
the problem is one of business and not sentiment wit h him, doubtless he wa s obliged to 
assume this attitude, unfortunately , toward s 
W . J. Mears because of outside pressure. 
I have been livin g i n Greensboro over 30 
years. Durin g this period, I have ha d the 
chance to note the change i n spiri t of friend ­
liness and harmon y on the part of some of 
the whit e people to one of indifference, an d 
even outrigh t antipath y to the Negr o citize n 
who has made good. 
Fro m a town tha t once enjoyed the enviabl e reputation of bein g the best i n the 
state, so fa r as the mutua l friendshi p of the 
two races is concerned, it has graduall y 
changed to one of uncertaint y and suspicio n 
i n the above respect. 
O f course, I admit there ar e some good 
and sympatheti c whit e friends stil l here, but 
apparentl y they are now regretfull y i n the 
minority . 
I ma y be mistaken , but i n tryin g to account fo r this unfortunat e situation, I am 
inclined to thin k tha t it is largel y due to the 
gradua l incomin g of a certain type of whit e 
ma n from elsewhere, wh o has take n up his 
residence here withi n recent years and to 
whom the sight of an intelligent, self-respecting, aspirin g and well-to-do Negr o ma n 
is more obnoxious than one of the opposite 
kind . 
* * # 
Th e Chicago, 111., Tribune publishes a 
lette r from Reginal d W . Harang : 
I n a recent issue Dwigh t Coope r proposes 
segregation as the only solution of the 
"Negro problem." He proposes that our legisla­TH E LOOKING GLASS 197 
tors—regardless of the colored vote and 
"throug h the recognition of some degree of 
racia l inequality"—establish a rule or law 
of segregation to protect the homes of our 
citizens. 
Letters such as his go fa r towar d creatin g 
troubl e between the two races and ar e an in ­
centive to bombings, such as have recently 
take n place against the homes of ou r people i n the Thir d Ward . 
I f the Negr o is marrin g the appearance 
of ou r "cit y beautiful, " then wh y sweep the 
dirt to the back door and leave it there? 
Wh y not suggest tha t laws be enacted to enforce cleanliness and to make al l people— 
no matte r wha t race—keep their homes and 
themselves i n such condition as to reflect 
credit on the state and city? 
Mr . Cooper proposes segregation. I won ­
der i f he wa s i n France ? Ther e wer e none 
"over there" who cried "segregate the 
Negro." In the battle-line there was no place 
too pretty and too "beautiful " to shove the 
brave black boys into when hell raged al l 
around and men, real red-blooded 
Americans, gave their lives, their all. 
Such men as Mr . Cooper should go back 
to Georgia , i f they wis h segregation such as 
he proposes. Dow n there, even though it defies al l the laws and the Constitutio n of 
the Unite d States, such things are permitted, but, than k God, the people of the Nort h 
are better educated to the needs of humanit y and are muc h broade r tha n those of the 
South. 
* * * 
Th e question of segregation is most 
throughout the country, fo r J , L . Whieldi n 
comments i n the Hartford , Conn., Times: 
Th e legislative curtai n of 1919 has been 
run g down. Voluminou s legislation has been 
handled and wil l go down i n Connecticut 
histor y as one tha t has had to deal wit h 
more petitions of a complicated natur e than 
any of its predecessors. O f course, wa r 
measures helped to increase the volume of 
its business. Some wis e and helpfu l legisla ­
tio n has been enacted tha t wil l be a credit 
to the state of Connecticut. O n the other 
hand, there ha s been some tha t has met and 
merits publi c disapproval. Ther e was one 
petition i n particula r tha t actuates me to 
cal l publi c attention to, and tha t wa s the 
Civi l Rights Bil l presented by Senator 
Leonard , of Ne w Haven , aimin g a t those 
who discriminat e against a class of citizens 
because of their color i n public places. 
This bil l wa s draw n by Attorne y George 
W . Crawford , of Ne w Haven , fostered by 
the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People, with signatures 
from al l over the State of Connecticut, 
reachin g into the thousands. A t tha t hearin g before the judiciar y committee stron g 
and forceful reasons were offered, not a 
wor d of protest was submitted and those i n 
charge felt reasonably sure tha t the bil l 
would be favorabl y reported withou t a dissenting vote from that committee. 
Contrary to expectations, the bill died in the 
committee's hands! I n the first place, it is 
all wron g tha t specia l legislation be enacted 
for the protection of the rights of any distinc t element of America n citizens, but we 
find it necessary to ask fo r relie f from the 
present conditions whic h subject every black 
person to the most humiliatin g position im ­
aginable. This bil l was a fac-simil e one to 
the bills tha t passed Ne w York , Massa ­
chusetts, Ne w Jerse y and Ohio legislatures. 
W e had confidence i n the legislative agents 
of this commonwealth tha t their views and 
inclinations measured up to the standard of 
an y state i n the unio n wit h regard to adequacy of he r laws as they affect he r entir e 
citizenship. . . . . . 
If the legislatur e had been i n control of 
the other party , we woul d have expected the 
passage of this bil l full y as much as we expected this legislature (very largely 
Republican) . We have appealed to the proper 
tribunal. The y i n repl y give every person 
engaging i n publi c business the inherent 
righ t to refuse, insult and assault. N o redress to those wh o suffer from such injuries. 
A blot on the fair name of the State of 
Connecticut. A reflection on the traditions for 
whic h she has stood. A repudiatio n of the 
principle s of the man y abolitionists from 
this state tha t fought fo r righ t and justice 
and a ful l measure of justic e meted out to 
every American . Th e righ t to life, liberty 
and the pursuit of happiness is the funda ­
menta l guarantee ; being denied libert y and 
happiness we must now tr y and look forwar d to be spared the other. 
* * * 
Finally, from the Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoman, note this version of "your money or 
you r life! " 
Hope fo r a $50,000 Negr o hospita l wa s 
given a setback yesterday when the city 
commissioners voted to take no action so 
long as Negr o citizens of Oklahoma Cit y 
attack the segregation ordinance. The 
Negroes' petition will remain in committee of 
the whole indefinitely i f the suit is not with ­
drawn . 
The petition askin g fo r the hospita l wit h 
a Negr o staff, as well as better sanitation ; 
more water, sewerage and lighting; a 
Negro health inspector and the improvement 
of Riversid e Park , wa s filed wit h the city 
almost simultaneously wit h the beginnin g 
of a suit i n federa l court on the segregation 
ordinance. 
"S o long as they attack our cit y laws and 
ordinances, we are not ver y much fo r them, " 
said Mayo r Walton . 
"I f they wil l all move into a segregated 
district, I woul d be willin g for them to have 
everythin g the whites have, " said Mar k 
Kesler, Commissione r of Publi c Safety. 
LYNCHING AND SOUTHERN 
WOMEN 
LYNCHIN G as first aid to the protection 
of Southern womanhood is heavil y 
scored by Herbert J. Seligma n i n the Na­198 TH E CRISIS 
tion. This write r says of the methods employed : 
The y have included i n the past two 
months a n org y of men and women about a 
dyin g huma n being whose legs slowl y burned 
as a rope strangled hi m and fifty bullets 
entered his body; they have included the 
murde r c f innocent men withou t trial ; they 
have included the invasio n of a hospita l by 
a mob, resultin g i n the death of a patient 
just operated upon ; they have included the 
forcibl e remova l from a railwa y ca r and 
the murde r of an innocent ma n whose leg 
had just been amputated i n the hospita l 
from whic h he was being transported. Fo r 
the benefit of those unfamilia r wit h the in ­
creasingl y popula r sport of "protectin g 
Southern womanhood " it should be noted 
that the objects of this sport are usuall y 
United States citizens of dark skin— 
Negroes. 
The Nation itself has a grave editoria l 
c n Mr . Seligman's articl e and its occasion. 
The conclusion reads: 
Wha t to do? Shal l the press remai n silent? Shal l we gloss over the lynchings, and 
pretend, i n happy-go-lucky America n way , 
tha t all's wel l i n the South? Shal l we merely dwell upon the fact tha t at bottom it is 
al l an economic problem? Tha t it is fa r 
from being one-sided? Tha t the South is 
deeply exasperated by the inefficiency of 
Negr o labor, more tha n ever noticeable just 
now because of the wa r developments? Fo r 
our part, though we recognize that funda ­
mentall y it is an economic problem, though 
we recognize how difficult is the lot of the 
whites, how plai n it is tha t the righ t is not 
a11 on one side, it seems to us the duty of 
patriotism to put the fact on record tha t the 
South lives over a volcano; tha t the prope r 
solution of the problem calls fo r all the 
statesmanship of the country. Is it not 
perfectly plai n tha t i f these colored citizens 
of ours are to be K u Kluxed , if all their 
politica l rights are always to be withhel d 
from them i f their economic status is un ­
relieved, if the country's deliberate neglect 
of their education is to continue—in short, 
if their bitte r unhappiness is still to be allowed to grew, they may, especially because 
of the emotionalism of their nature s become 
the easiest victims of those who would reform Americ a by force? Extremists, anarchists, preachers of sabotage and violence 
of every type wil l find man y recruits i f the 
Negroes' just grievances are not immediately put i n process of removal. Against 
-n y possibility of this, there ought to be 
immediate action—not later, when the mischief is cn. 
THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS 
THROUG H the medium of Mr . Willia m 
Monroe Trotte r every member of the 
Peace Conference, at Paris, has received a 
copy of a petition from the Negr o citizens 
of America . This petitio n asks the Leagu e 
of Nation s to assure al l citizens "ful l libert y 
i n the rights of democracy an d protection of 
lif e withou t distinctio n based on race, color 
or previous conditions. " Th e Pittsburgh , 
Pa. , Chronicle Telegraph says: 
It ma y be said b y unfriendl y critic s tha t 
fo r the Leagu e of Nation s to take cognizance of a purel y domestic and nationa l matte r of this kin d woul d be to depart fa r from 
its origina l purpose, whic h wa s limite d to 
the prevention of wa r amon g the nations. 
But , as has now been shown by the publica ­
tion of the ful l text of the covenant, the 
League's proponents are endeavoring greatl y to broaden its jurisdiction , the section relatin g to labo r conditions bein g a n illustra ­
tion i n point. Th e object of ou r Negr o citizens' petition is, of course, to direc t attention to the anomal y of a Leagu e of Nation s 
that, whil e professin g to mak e the worl d 
safe fo r democracy and insistin g on the 
righ t of self-determination of peoples, deliberately ignores the forced disfranchise ­
ment of the colored men of our Souther n 
States. t . % £ 
Th e Ne w Yor k Sun observes: 
It is as plai n as the nose on Uncl e Sam's 
face tha t i f the Leagu e of Nation s can take 
up the Iris h question i n the Britis h Isles it 
can take up the Negr o question i n America . 
It is as plai n as dayligh t tha t i f the representatives of one race can brin g its troubles 
to the Leagu e of Nations, the representa ­
tives of anothe r race can brin g its troubles 
to the same tribunal . An d it is as plai n as 
a pikestaff tha t i f the Leagu e of Nation s 
interferes i n the interna l affairs of one 
nation, nothin g on earth wil l stop it from 
interferin g i n the interna l affairs of anothe r 
nation. 
No w i f the Iris h question is loaded wit h 
dynamite , the Negr o question is loaded wit h 
TNT . Outside of Irelan d nobody questions 
the legalit y of the Kingdom's rul e i n that 
island, and inside of Irelan d a good man y 
persons do not question its legality , howevery muc h they object to i t as a politica l 
fact. Bu t inside the Unite d States and outside the Unite d States everybody knows tha t 
the politica l condition imposed on the Negr o 
i n the South is brutally , openly and completely illegal. Tha t condition is imposed, 
on the Negro in direct violation of the 
Constitution of the United States, and this violation of the Constitutio n is tolerated wit h 
the ful l knowledge and consen t of a large 
majorit y of the whit e populatio n of this 
country, Nort h or South. . . . 
I n the fa r flung Britis h Empir e there are 
million s and million s of black men man y of 
them educated and able students of publi c 
affairs. It is not inconceivabl e tha t amon g 
them are leaders who i n the event of the 
formatio n of the Leagu e of Nation s would 
utiliz e it of their own motion to stir up 
trouble for the United States over the 
Negro question. Men of the Month. 
TH E HONORABLE ARCHIBALD HENR Y GRIMKE, Fifth Spingarn Medalist 
199 200 TH E
A SPECIAL COUNSELLOR 
ROBER T BARCLA Y BARCU S wa s recently appointed Specia l Counsello r 
i n the office of the Attorne y Genera l of the 
State of Ohio. Mr . Barcu s wa s bor n i n 
Albemarl e County , Charlottesville , Va. , 
Marc h 6, 1878. H e received his education 
at the Jefferson Graded School, 
Charlottesville; Virginia Normal and Collegiate 
Institute, where he was graduated from the 
College Departmen t wit h the degree of A . 
B. ; and Howar d University , wher e he created a stir i n educationa l circles throug h 
his masterl y address delivered on commencement day, whic h attracted the attentio n of the Washington Post. H e wa s admitted to the Ba r i n Ohi o i n September, 
1905; i n 1913 he wa s admitted to wor k i n 
the U . S. Distric t Court, Souther n District. 
Mr . Barcu s wa s president and chairma n 
of the Sprin g Stree t Y . M . C. A . from 1911 
to 1916 and one of the organizers of the 
loca l branc h of the N . A . A . C. P . Th e 
Knights of Pythias elected him Grand 
Attorney for the Grand Lodge of the State 
fo r fou r consecutive terms; he is now Vice -
Gran d Chancello r of the Gran d Lodge of 
Ohio. 
A NEGR O VETERA N 
ON Jun e 27, 1919, Willia m H . Gilbert, 
know n as "Po p Gilbert, " completed 
thirty years' service for the U. S. 
Government. 
Mr . Gilbert enlisted as a privat e i n the 
Tent h U . S. Cavalr y and served for five 
years; i n 1889 he enrolled as a privat e i n 
Compan y G of the Twenty-fourt h U . S. 
Infantry , wher e he became corpora l and 
sergeant; and late r he served i n Compan y 
K of the Twenty-fift h U . S. Infantry . I n 
1898 he enlisted i n the Navy , where he has 
acted as second-class fireman, engine drive r 
and chie f wate r tender. 
Mr. Gilbert was born in 1879, at 
Spotsylvania County, Va. 
 CRISIS 
TH E NEGR O IN MEDICINE 
MR. U . CONRA D VINCENT , son of Dr . 
and Mrs. A . B . Vincent , wa s bor n 
January 5, 1892, at Shaw University, 
Raleigh, N. C, and received his preliminary 
education i n the publi c schools of the city ; 
late r he entered Sha w Universit y an d wa s 
graduated fro m the College Departmen t i n 
1913. I n September, 1914, he matriculate d 
a t the Medica l School of the Universit y of 
Pennsylvania , from whic h he wa s graduate d 
wit h honors i n June , 1918. 
Dr . Vincen t wa s appointed a n Intern e at 
Bellevu e Hospital , Ne w Yor k City , shortl y 
afte r his graduatio n and he enjoys the distinctio n of bein g the first Negr o physicia n 
to be so honored b y a whit e hospita l o f the 
Unite d States. I n September, 1918, he 
passed the examination s fo r license to prac ­
tise medicine i n the Stat e of Ne w York ; 
i n Octobe r he wa s appointed Lecture r i n 
Anatom y i n the Mills Trainin g School fo r 
Nurse s at Bellevu e Hospital , wher e he is 
also Senio r Interne Surgeo n i n the Divisio n 
of Urologica l Surger y and resident physician . 
DR. CHARLE S R. HUMBER T recently 
completed arrangements to wor k at 
the Rockefelle r Institute , Ne w Yor k City , 
whic h mark s anothe r step upwar d i n the 
histor y of his race. 
Dr . Humbert wa s bor n i n Darlington , S. 
C. H e graduated fro m hig h school i n 1907 
and i n tha t yea r entered Howar d University , 
from whic h he wa s graduate d i n 1911 an d 
i n 1915 received his medica l degree. I n 
1916 Dr. Humbert was appointed 
Assistant in the Laboratory of the Kansas City, 
Mo. , Genera l Hospital , wher e he wa s late r 
made pathologist of the Negr o Section. H e 
was also Syphilographer to the Social 
Disease Hospital for Colored Women and 
Pathologist fo r the Healt h Departmen t of 
Kansa s City . 
GEORGIA D .
THE hou r is bi g wit h sooth and sign , 
wit h erran t men at war, 
Whil e blood of alien, frien d and foe imbues 
the lands afar; 
 JOHNSO N 
An d we wit h sable faces pent move wit h 
the vanguar d line , 
Shod wit h a Fait h tha t Springtime keeps 
and al l the stars inshrine . 
POTENC Y R. B. BARCU S W. H . GILBER T 
DR. U. C. VINCEN T DR. C. R. HUMBER T 
201 The Horizon 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
MUSICA L AMERICA, issue of Jun e 21, 
says of the convention of the Ohio 
Musi c Teachers' Association : "A n event tha t 
lent particula r distinctio n to the convention 
was the givin g to Negr o singers of a n 
ontire evening and furnishin g them the soloist Henr y T. Burleigh , the composer of 
Ne w York , i n order to show just wha t the 
race has done fo r music . Th e program contained beautiful Negr o spirituals, sun g b y 
the Akro n Jubile e Singers' Chorus, directed 
by Jame s R. Jackso n wit h Mrs. Claudi a 
Coleman, accompanist, and also spirituals 
sun g by Mr . Burleigh. " 
C The Jun e issue of the Musical Observer 
publishes an interview on "Henry F. 
Gilbert, a Nationalist in Music," written by 
Mau d Cune y Hare . 
(I Henr y F . Gilbert's Overtur e on Negr o 
themes wa s one of the orchestra l pieces 
given on a program of All-America n Musi c 
selected by the Trustees of the America n 
Academ y at Rome , Italy, and give n at the 
Augusteu n Hall , at Rome . This overture 
when presented recently i n Paris, France , 
called fort h the pointed note on the Frenc h 
program, whic h states tha t man y American s 
deny tha t the Negr o themes ca n be made 
the foundation of a n America n School of 
Music , such as the Russia n folk-themes 
have heen the foundation of the nationa l 
school i n tha t country. 
(I On Jun e 10, at the Columbu s Avenu e A . 
M . E . Zio n Church , Boston, Mass. , a benefit 
concert wa s give n fo r the Dr . Lero y Bund y 
Re-tria l Fund . Th e voluntee r talent consisted of Willia m Richardson , baritone ; 
Mrs. Ell a Franc e Jones, soprano; Willia m 
Lawrenc e and Mau d Cune y Hare , pianists; 
R. Perciva l Parham , organist. A n interestin g feature wa s the playle t "Service, " written and directed b y Mrs. Eleano r Wallac e 
and Mrs. J . Ward o Brown , and students of 
the Emerso n School of Oratory . Th e play ­
let, distinctl y racial , showed technica l excellence and sincerit y of performance . 
C Th e America n Syncopated Orchestra , a n 
organizatio n of Negr o players and singers, 
VINCENT 
SAUNDERS 
conducted by Wil l Mario n Cook, is meetin g 
wit h success i n concert performances. 
(I Mrs. Fanni e R. Givens, of Louisville , 
Ky. , is formulatin g plan s to erect a $100,000 
Ar t Institut e fo r the development of Negr o 
artists. Howar d Universit y is sai d to have 
grante d a site on its campus fo r this purpose. 
(I Th e Musergi a Clu b of Louisville , Ky. , 
gave a concert on Jun e 12 a t Quin n Chapel, 
under the direction of G. M . McClellan . 
Th e soloists wer e Florenc e Col e Talbert, soprano, of Detroit, and Maria n Anderson , 
contralto, of Philadelphia . Mrs. Mildre d 
Bryant Jones, of Chicago, formerly 
Supervisor of Music in the colored schools of 
Louisville , wa s the accompanist. 
C Th e first concert of "Th e Burleig h Club " 
of Ne w Bedford , Mass. , wa s give n on Jun e 
25, unde r the direction of Mrs. Addi e R. 
Covel, who is also president of the Ne w 
Bedfor d Musica l Association . 
CI Th e Amphio n Glee Club , J. Henr y Lewis, 
Director, has given a "Summe r Concert " at 
the Florida Avenue Baptist Church, 
Washington, D. C. Grace Campbell, soprano, of 
Chicago, wa s the soloist. 
(I Maud Powell, the distinguished 
American violinist, cut short a California journey i n order to pla y fo r the colored Musi c 
School Settlement in . Ne w Yor k City , a t a 
concert at the Metropolita n Baptist Church . 
0 S. Coleridge-Taylor's cantata 
"Hiawatha" was rendered at the First 
Congregational Church, Washington, D. C, May 21, 
b y the Howar d Universit y Chora l Society, 
under the direction of Miss Lulu V. 
Childers. The soloists were Florence ColeTalbert, soprano; Roland W. Hayes, tenor; 
Willia m Simmons, of Ne w Yor k City , basso. 
G. Colored musician s and musi c lovers i n 
Seattle, have organized the Washingto n 
State Musical Association. Mrs. N. J. 
Asberry, of Tacoma, is president. 
(I Th e Cornhil l Company , Boston , Mass. , 
has added the wor k of anothe r Negr o autho r to its publications, "Th e Ban d of 
Gideon " b y the lat e Joseph S. Cotter, Jr. , 
wit h an introductio n b y Cal e Y . Rice . 
202 TH E HORIZON 203 
EDUCATIO N 
WE report the followin g additiona l 
graduate s fo r 1919 from leadin g 
whit e colleges: MASTER S O P ART : University 
of Pennsylvania, Jessie R. Fauset, Sadie T. 
Mossell ; University of Chicago, Lorain e G . 
Green ; Beloit College, W . L . Turner, who 
has been give n a n appointment by the 
Boar d of Foreig n Mission s of the M . E . 
Church; BACHELORS OF ART : Dickinson 
College (Pennsylvania), William Jefferson, 
Esther A. B. Popel—awarded scholastic honor 
and elected a member of the Phi Beta 
Kappa; Smith College (Massachusetts), Pearl 
A . Grigsby ; University of Illinois, Glady s R. 
Scott; Oberlin College, Araminta W. 
Anthony, Brownie C. Pierce, Virginia P. Powell; 
Indiana University, Jame s Briggs, Robert E . 
Skelton; Brown University, Vashti C. 
Maxwell—she wrote one of the senior class songs 
and was a regula r contributor to the Sepiad, 
the college magazine ; Denver University, 
Valaure z B . Spratlin—wa s elected by facult y to the honorar y Greek lette r fraternity , 
fo r hig h scholarship throughout fou r years, 
and a member of the Alpha Zeta Pi; 
Dubuque College, Sol Butler and Benjamin 
Butler; University of California, Belind a 
Daviso n and Stuart T. Davison . 
C Fro m .Columbi a University , Ne w Yor k 
City , Edn a M . Logwoo d is graduated from 
the artists' course i n music, wit h honors; 
from the Institut e of Musica l Art , Ne w 
Yor k City , comes Ceceli a Hubert, from the 
supervisor's course. 
G Ro y Wilkins, a colored graduat e of 
Mechani c Art s Hig h School, St. Paul , Minn. , 
has been president of the Literar y Society, 
tenor on the school quartette, editor of the 
camp dail y paper, and editor-in-chie f of 
the school magazine . 
C Thirty-seve n colored publi c schools have 
been established i n Louisian a since 1917, at 
an expenditur e of $66,517. 
G Dallas, Tex., has appropriate d $160,151 
to increase teachers' salaries, of whic h the 
Negroes, wh o form a fifth of the popula ­
tion, receive $8,800, distributed among 
eighty-eight teachers, at the rat e of $100 
increase each pe r annum. 
C Th e Genera l Educatio n Boar d has set 
aside $3,350 for training schools for 
Negroes in Kentucky for the fiscal year beginnin g Jul y 1. 
C Rev. Beverl y M . Ward , pastor of the 
Capita l Stree t Presbyteria n Church , and a 
membe r of the executive committee of the 
Harrisburg , Pa. , Branc h of the N . A . A . 
C. P. , has had the degree of Docto r of 
Divinity conferred on him by Lincoln 
University. 
G Maria n Brown , of Harrisburg , Pa. , 
graduate s from Shippensbur g State Norma l 
School, the winne r of the oratorica l prize . 
She was the only colored gir l i n a class of 
ninety-six. Immediately upon he r gradua ­
tion she was elected a teacher in the 
Harrisburg Public Schools. 
C Virgini a Theologica l Seminar y reports 
five college graduates, wit h Edwar d P . Hur t 
graduatin g Cum Laude, and twenty-five 
other graduates. A n administratio n build ­
ing , to cost $50,000, and a hospital, to cost 
$20,000, are to be erected durin g the current yea r a t this institution . A Departmen t 
of Negr o Histor y and Research wil l be in ­
augurated at the fal l session. 
G Th e Genera l Educatio n Boar d announces 
appropriations of $310,000 fo r Negr o 
schools—$205,000 fo r permanent improve ­
ments and $105,000 fo r curren t expenses. 
G Howar d Universit y has made the followin g changes i n its faculty : Dr. Emmet t 
J. Scott, Secretary-Treasurer; George Wm . 
Cook, forme r Secretary, to be Dea n of the 
School of Commerce and Finance ; Dr . E . 
L . Parks, forme r Treasurer, to be Dea n of 
Men ; Professor Kell y Miller, forme r Dea n 
of the College of Arts and Sciences, to be 
Dea n of the Junio r College and Professor 
of Sociology; Dr . A . L . Jackson , Hea d of 
the new Socia l Service Department; Dr . C. 
G . Woodson, Dea n of the School of Libera l 
Arts and Professor of History ; Dwigh t O. 
W . Holmes, Registra r and Professor i n the 
School of Education ; C. S. Syphax , forme r 
Dea n of the Academy , to be Professor of 
Mathematics; Miss Helen Hale Tuck, 
Acting Dean of Women and Instructor in 
Physical Education for Women; C. E. Lucas, 
Chie f Accountan t and Assistan t Treasurer; 
Edwar d Bowie , Chie f Cler k to the Registrar. 
Th e Academy has been abolished, and al l 
the secondary wor k of the old Commercia l 
College has been discontinued; a new department, the School of Commerce and 
Finance, with all college work, has been established. 
G Catherin e E . Sulliva n graduate s from the 
Commercial Department of Temple 
University with the award of a medal for bein g the first student to pass a final examina ­
tio n of 100 pe r cent i n stenography. 
G It has been found tha t examinatio n pa ­
pers, the basis of the test of 100 applicants 
from the Universit y of Nebraska , fo r denta l 204 TH E
licenses, were stolen fro m the Stat e Hous e 
and sold to the applicants. Ninety-eigh t 
students were found guilty ; of the two 
found not guilt y wa s the only Negr o i n 
the class, Joh n A . Singleton. Th e Denta l 
Boar d permitted Singleton and Flemin g to 
take the examination , whic h they passed 
wit h hig h averages, and they were complimented by the Attorne y Genera l and examiners. Al l other students were proscribed. 
(L Emil y E . Gross, Bachelo r of Arts , State 
Universit y of Iowa , '19, has been awarded 
a meda l from the Pilgri m Chapte r of the 
Daughters of the America n Revolutio n for 
havin g won the highest grade i n America n 
Histor y over an y other senior woma n at 
this university . 
C. The Baseball Team of Atlanta 
University won every game it played during the 
session just ended. 
C Mr . Mario n Austi n Alle n wa s graduated 
at the recent commencement from the 
Department of Dentistry of Harvard University. 
TH E WA R 
THE Burea u of Wa r Ris k Insuranc e at 
Washington, D. C, has added a 
Negro to its staff, Lieutenant Jay Williams 
Clifford, formerl y of the 367th "Buffalo " 
Infantry , to look after the interests of the 
400,000 Negr o soldiers and sailors, who 
carr y approximatel y $2,500,000,000 insurance. The Burea u is to be maintaine d as 
a permanent institutio n and it is hoped tha t 
every discharged soldier and sailo r wil l keep 
his insuranc e i n force. 
C Privat e Hira m J . McKinney , a Negr o 
soldier of Compan y H , 370th Infantry , has 
returned to Houston , Tex., the owner of the 
Croix de Guerre wit h palm, whic h was presented to him b y Genera l Petain . H e wa s 
a liaiso n runne r fo r his regiment and wo n 
the decoration October 12, when he carried a message fo r reinforcements from 
his regiment to headquarters and returned 
wit h the informatio n tha t reinforcements 
were forthcoming . A s a result of the message, St. Pierremon t wa s captured the nex t 
day. 
d It is reported tha t three American s wer e 
slai n and thirt y injured at Wincheste r 
Camp, London, in a fight with South 
African Negro soldiers. 
C Clarenc e R. Va n Allen , a Negr o Corpora l 
 CRISIS 
of Compan y L , 372d Infantry , wh o pu t out 
of action a Germa n machin e gun , killin g 
fou r of its crew and capturin g thre e others, and late r capture d a trenc h mortar, wa s 
decorated, Jul y 2, b y Genera l Edward s wit h 
the Medaille Militaire, the highest honor fo r 
heroism tha t Franc e confers on a n enlisted 
man . H e wa s formerl y a waite r a t a restauran t i n Boston , Mass. 
C Ther e are seven colored students i n the 
University of Paris and 125 in the 
American Expeditionary Force University, at 
Beaune ; there are colored students also at 
the Universitie s of Bordeaux , Toulouse , 
Londo n and Edinburgh , Oxfor d Universit y 
and most of the Post and Divisiona l schools. 
(I Benjami n F . Hubert is a colored member of the Arm y Educationa l Commission , 
with headquarters at the American 
Expeditionary Force University, Beaune, 
France . H e has genera l supervisio n of 
agricultura l instructio n to colored troops i n 
France . 
C O f 26,672 whit e soldiers from Kentuck y 
examined 10.40 pe r cent wer e found infected 
wit h intestina l worms; amon g 8,653 Negr o 
soldiers examined—6,948 from Kentucky , 
865 from Alabam a and 840 from Tennessee—1.1 pe r cent wer e infected wit h in ­
testina l worms, These me n wer e between 
the ages of 18 and 42, and soldiers on active 
service, presumabl y i n good health. 
G Fou r hundre d Negr o soldiers at Ne w 
Orleans, La. , have organized a Post of the 
America n Legion . Walte r S. Chinn , forme r 
Lieutenan t i n the Infantry , was elected 
president. 
INDUSTR Y 
TRUXTON , VA. , one of the twenty-fou r 
projects of the Unite d States Housin g 
Corporation , has been opened exclusivel y 
fo r Negroes. It wa s built primaril y as a 
wa r measure to ai d the Hampto n Road s 
Nava l Base . Th e 224 building s i n the town 
wil l not be sold immediatel y by the government, but wil l be rented fro m $16 to $18 
monthly. Truxto n covers ninet y acres and 
contains six store buildings. It ha s a Negr o 
Advisor y Commissio n unde r T. C. Irvin , 
Supervisor of Negro Economics for 
Virginia. 
(I Negr o migrants to Chicago , 111., ar e movin g towar d the automobil e manufacturin g 
centers of Michiga n and to industria l and 
agricultura l regions of the West—Missour i TH E 205 HORIZON 
Kansa s and Colorado. A few have gone to 
the Pacifi c Coast. Th e Chicago Urba n 
League reports tha t these Negroe s are migratin g at the rat e of mor e tha n a thousand 
a week. 
G Th e Interstate Associatio n of Negr o 
Trainme n of America , lookin g to the perfectin g of a unio n of al l unorganized colored employees of the railwa y lines of 
America , fo r their ful l protection i n work ­
in g conditions and wages, has been incorporated i n the Distric t of Columbia , followin g 
the completion of preliminar y plans inau ­
gurated a year ago. Attorney E. T. 
Harbour, of El Reno, Okla., is General 
Counsellor and organizer. 
C Sherman Lynch, a Negro boy of 
Edwards, Miss., joined the Farm Makers' Club 
i n the fal l of 1916. A s a result of his wor k 
last yea r he wa s able to deposit $100 i n 
the bank and wit h the money as a n initia l 
payment he has bought thirt y acres of lan d 
from his father, bargainin g fo r the trac t 
at $400. 
MEETING S 
MOR E than 1,000 colored persons i n 
Charleston, S. C , have held a celebratio n of the 300th anniversar y of the 
landin g of Negroe s i n America . Th e celebratio n set fort h Negr o America n progress 
and achievement i n pageant, pictures, musi c 
and speech. It was held unde r the auspices 
of the Unite d Colored Churches. 
C Th e Marylan d Co-operative Baptist Con ­
gress has held its nineteenth annua l session, and elected Rev. P . Carte r Neal , president. 
O Th e Gran d Lodge of Negr o Knights of 
Pythia s and the Gran d Court of Calanthe 
of Texas, me t i n Pythia n Templ e i n Dallas, 
Jun e 10, wit h 600 delegates i n attendance, 
representing a membership of 16,000. 
Gran d Chancello r W . S. Willis presided. 
C Th e fourt h annua l field-day fo r the colored pupils of the public schools of 
Baltimore, Md., has taken place on the football 
field at Drui d Hil l Park . Thirtee n schools, 
representing 1,200 participants, took part. 
Eleve n schools were represented b y fifty 
girls each i n folk-dancing . 
G Th e Lincol n Leagu e of America , havin g 
as its direc t object the securing of the ballot to the Negro , has been organized as the 
outgrowth of the National Negro 
Conference, held in New Orleans, La., June 16-17. 
A genera l convention of the league wil l be 
held i n Chicago , beginnin g September 16. 
G The West Virginia Negro Bar 
Association met June 7, at Huntington. It has 
forty-five members. J . M . Ellis, of Fayett e 
County , is president. 
G Th e ninety-ninth annua l session of the 
Ne w Yor k Conference of the A . M . E . 
Church , wit h a membership of seventy-six 
colored ministers, has closed a four-day convention, at the Metropolita n Church , Ne w 
York . 
C The second biennial .meeting of the 
Association for the Study of Negro Life and 
Histor y was held i n Washington , D . C , 
Jun e 16-17. Amon g the speakers were C . 
H . Tobias, o n "Negr o Welfar e i n the War" ; 
Professor W. T. B. Williams, On "The 
Loyalty of the Negro"; Monroe N. Work, on 
"Th e Negr o and Publi c Opinion" ; A . H . 
Grimke , on "Th e Negr o and Socia l Justice" ; 
Emmet t J. Scott, on "Di d the Negr o Soldie r 
Ge t a Squar e Deal" ; Ralp h W . Tyler, on 
"Th e Negr o as a Fighte r i n France. " 
C The Temporary Organization of the 
Initial Conference of Negro Musicians and 
Artists, which convened in Washington, D. C, 
durin g May , wil l hold a meeting i n Chicago, 
111., Jul y 29-31. Mrs. Maudell e Bousefield, 
4230 Champlai n Avenue , Chicago, is secretar y of the loca l organization. 
G The National Conference of Social 
Workers, which met in Atlantic City, N. J., included among its features "Th e Negr o i n 
Industry. " Ther e were 5,000 delegates 
present, fort y of whom were colored socia l 
workers. 
C The twenty-first annua l session of the 
Nationa l Medica l Associatio n wil l convene 
i n Newark , N . J. , August 26-29. 
G A united service of ten congregations of 
the Protestant Episcopa l Churc h i n the 
Diocese of Philadelphi a has been held at 
St. Mary's Church , wit h 500 Negroe s i n attendance. 
C Ther e were 515 Negroe s i n attendance 
at the training school for Community 
Workers in After the War Problems, held at 
Gammo n Theologica l Seminary , Februar y 
20 to Apri l 19, under the Nationa l Wa r 
Wor k Council. The y were ministers, teachers, physicians, farmers and business men 
from Alabama, Florida, Georgia, 
Mississippi, North and South Carolina and 
Tennessee. 
TH E CHURC H 
MR. T. E . DAVIS , recently an arm y 
chaplai n and formerl y a membe r of 
the Tent h Unite d States Cavalry , has been 206 TH E
selected by the Boar d of Mission s of the 
Zio n A . M . E . Churc h to go to Liberi a fo r 
missionar y work . 
G Rev. Dr . Elbert W . Moore , pastor of the 
Second Baptist Church , Columbus, Ohio, has 
resigned, following his appointment as 
Director of Work Among Negroes in the 
Unite d States fo r the America n Baptist 
Home Missionar y Society. His headquarters wil l be i n Pittsburgh . 
G Th e America n Bibl e Society reports a 
circulation of 10,166 Bibles, 14,074 
Testaments and 17,529 portions among 27,022 
colored familie s i n the Southern States durin g the past year. Th e Rev. J. P. Wragg , 
of Atlanta , Ga. , is i n charge of this work. 
SOCIA L PROGRES S 
THE Condon Bill , especially enacted to 
give Negroe s ful l privilege s i n theatres, hotels, restaurants and public places, 
passed the Legislatur e and has been signed 
by the Governo r at Michigan . 
C Leon C. Wheeler, the colored Athletic 
Director for Detroit, Mich., has received an 
appointment by the Civil Service 
Commission as Recreation Director. There were 
182 whit e persons who took the examina ­
tion, ninety-two of whom passed. Mr . 
Wheele r wa s the second highest applicant, 
averagin g 91 2/5 percent. He is twentyone years of age and a 1919 graduat e from 
the Universit y of Detroit. 
C The buildings of the Protestant Episcopa l 
Divinit y School, Philadelphia , Pa. , whic h 
wer e purchased by Merc y Hospita l Trainin g 
School fo r Nurse s have been dedicated to 
hospita l purposes. The ground covers six 
and one-half acres on Woodlan d Avenue , 
between Fiftiet h and Fifty-first Streets. 
Th e institutio n includes a one hundred bed 
hospital, win g fo r tubercula r patients and 
a home fo r nurses. It is owned and controlled by colored people. 
C Th e Governo r of West Virgini a has appointed two Negroe s as members of the 
Advisor y Council to the State Boar d of 
Education : Fran k Jackson , of Fairmount , 
and J. W . Robinson, of Nort h Fork . 
C On Jul y 1, the Manhatta n Branc h of the 
Y . W . C. A . opened its new dormitory , a 
remodeled five-story apartment house, at 
200 West 137th Street,- Ne w Yor k City . 
The hotel is near the new Y. W. C. A. 
Administration Building, which has cafeteria, 
gymnasium, swimming-poo l and club rooms. 
Ther e is accommodation fo r ninety-five women. Th e rates are $2.50 to $5,00 per week. 
 CRISIS 
C Th e five building s and plan t o f Unio n 
Protestan t Infirmary , on Divisio n Street, 
Baltimore , Md. , have been contracted fo r by 
Negr o citizens fo r a new hospital—Victor y 
Hospital—t o take the place of Providen t 
Hospital . Th e sum of $75,000 is needed— 
$50,000 fo r the purchas e of the propert y 
and $25,000 as a workin g capita l and reserve fo r emergencies. A conservative appraisa l of the building s and plan t indicate s 
tha t they ar e wort h $160,000. Th e new 
institutio n wil l have 125 beds, moder n 
wards, privat e and semi-privat e rooms. It 
wil l be managed by a board of nine trustees, five of whom are white and four 
Negroes from the Provident Hospital Trustee 
Board . 
G The State Tuberculosis Sanatorium 
Commission, Baltimore, Md., has secured fifty 
acres, adjacent to Endowoo d Hospital , for 
a hospita l fo r Negr o tuberculosis patients-. 
C On Jun e 15, at Detroit, Mich. , a fourteen-room settlement house fo r Negroe s wa s 
opened under the supervision of the 
Detroit Urban League. 
C Amon g the outstandin g stars named to 
represent Americ a i n the interallie d games 
at Paris, i n June , are Sol Butler, the Negr o 
sprinte r and broad jumpe r from Dubuque 
College. Th e team consists of fifty members. 
G O f the tota l numbe r of birth s reported 
for 1917 by the Census Bureau , 1,280,288, 
or 24.5 per 1,000, wer e of whit e infants 
and 73,504, or 25.8 pe r 1,000, were of colored infants. 
C O f the burnin g of the V irginia , at Smith's 
Point, Mrs. Mar y Bowling , of Norfolk , says 
of the Negr o cook, Fran k Shield : "Tha t 
Negr o came down throug h the flames to 
wher e I la y on the lowe r deck and picked 
me up and carrie d me back to the uppe r 
deck. Th e flames wer e gettin g close to us 
when he jumpe d overboard and hun g on to 
a raft fo r awhile , I can't say how long 
after when he and anothe r Negro , Be n 
Collins, put me aboard one of the life ­
boats." 
C The Board of Public Safety at 
Indianapolis, Ind., has promoted two Negro policemen to the ran k of Detective Sergeant— 
George Sneed and Edwar d Fraub—an d 
Joshu a Spears to Human e Sergeant. 
C I n Newark , N . J. , there is a statue of 
Abraha m Lincol n and there is a littl e Ne ­
gro bootblack who dail y visits this shrine 
to keep the dust from Lincoln's shoes. TH E HORIZON 207 
C A t Harrisburg , Pa. , The Gear y Equa l 
Rights Bill , according to Negroe s equal 
rights i n hotels, restaurants and theatres, 
was defeated i n the Hous e by a 89 to 45 
vote. 
(I The Distric t Attorne y of Ne w Yor k 
Count y has ordered Marcu s Garvey , head 
of the "Universal Negro Improvement 
Association" and of the "African Communities 
League " to cease collecting funds fo r the 
"Blac k Sta r Line, " advertised as " a fleet 
of steamships to trade i n the interest of 
the colored race. " Garve y is said to have 
collected over $3,000 and spent it mostly 
i n "expenses." 
PERSONA L 
ONE-TENT H of the millio n dolla r estate 
of the late Madame C. J. Walker, the 
Negr o hair culturist, is bequeathed to charity. Among institutional bequests are 
Tuskegee Institute, $2,000; Daytona Normal and 
Industria l Institute, Manassa s Industria l 
School, Ol d Folks' Home at Indianapolis, 
Ol d Folks' Home at St. Louis, and Hayne s 
Institute, $5,000 each; Charlott e HawkinsBrow n Institute , $1,000; Sojourne r Trut h 
House, Ne w Yor k City , $500; Wilberforc e 
University , $500; Musi c School Settlement, 
New York City, $600; Y. W. C. A., 
Louisville, Ky., $500; and the Old Folks' Home 
at Pittsburgh , $500. Th e bulk of the estate 
is bequeathed to he r daughter, Leli a Walke r 
Robinson, wh o succeeds the late Madame 
Walke r as president of the firm. Since the 
death of he r mother, Mrs. Robinson has 
been marrie d to Dr. Wile y M . Wilson , a 
graduat e of Howar d Universit y Medica l 
School. 
C Marjori e Grove s Robinson, who died recently i n Asbur y Park , N . J. , wa s a musician of rare ability. She was born in 
Boston, Mass., and educated in the local public 
schools. She was a graduat e of the Ne w 
Englan d Conservator y of Musi c and had 
been i n charge of the musi c departments of 
Livingston e College i n Salisbury , N . C , and 
of the State College i n Orangeburg , S. C. 
She ha d served as organist i n Charle s Street 
Church, Boston, the Fifteenth Street 
Presbyterian Church, Washington, D. C, and 
the Episcopa l Church , i n Asbur y Park , N . J . 
C Th e claim of Enoc h J . Davis, a Negr o 
teamster, to a homestead titl e on seventeen 
acres i n the business section of Natchez , 
Miss. , ha s been allowed and notification of 
the allowanc e has been sent from the Unite d 
States Lan d Office, at Jackson . The tota l 
value of this property runs into the millions. 
GHETT O 
THE Louisvill e and Nashvill e Railroa d 
Company has been ordered by 
Director General Hines, of the Railroad 
Administration, to provide an entire coach on each 
through passenger train , runnin g between 
Louisvill e and Nashville , fo r the accommodation of colored passengers. Heretofor e 
the Louisvill e and Nashvill e has provided 
only a half coach fo r Negroes. 
C Separat e posts fo r white s and Negroe s 
i n the America n Legio n of Tennessee has 
been decided. Colone l Roane Warring , of 
Memphis, presided as chairman . Bot h the 
whit e and Negr o posts wil l have equal representation i n the state meeting, the basis 
being one delegate and one alternate fo r 
each post, wit h one delegate and one alternate fo r every fifty members. 
(I Because the recent convention of the 
Virginia Federation of Labor seated a 
Negro, W. C. Page, as a member of its executive committee, 2,000 union men of 
Richmond, Va., have withdrawn from the state 
body. 
CRIM E 
THE Southern Sociologica l Congress i n 
session at Knoxville , Tenn., passed 
the followin g resolution: "W e strongly condemn lynchings and mob rule, whic h are 
both un-America n and subversive of law 
and order. 
"W e urge the immediat e exercise of all 
possible state and federa l powe r to put a 
speedy end to these outrages throughout the 
country. " 
d The followin g lynchings have taken place 
since our last record : 
Canea, Sonora, May 22, A. Alcavar 
(Mexican) ; hanged as bandit. 
Milan , S. C , Ma y 24, Was h Horn ; hanged 
for murder. 
Lamar, Mo. , Ma y 28, Ja y Lync h (white ) ; 
hanged for murder. 
Abbeville , S. C , Jun e 7, Ma x Smith ; shot 
for woundin g sheriff. 
Sta r City , Ark. , June 13, Clyd e Ellison ; 
hanged for attackin g girl . 
Ellisville , Miss. , Jun e 26, Joh n Hartfield ; 
burned fo r assaultin g a woman . 
Pag e 208 contains reprints from the New 
Orleans States and the Jackson (Miss.) 
Daily News, Jun e 26, 1919, showin g prepa ­
rations fo r the lynchin g of Joh n Hartfiel d at 
Ellisville , Miss. 208 TH E CRISIS 
(Reprinted from the NEW ORLEANS STATES) 
3,000 WILL BURN NEGRO 
Kaiser Under Stronger Guard Following Escape Of Crown Prince 
Frank Simond s 
Write s Fo r States NE W ORLEAN S STATE S 
VOL 39 NO 177 NEW ORLEANS, LA THURSDAY. JUNE 26, »S19 fUttBWSS^mS 
(Reprinted from the JACKSON DAILY NEWS) 
JOH N HARTFIELD WILL B E 
LYNCHED B Y ELLISVILLE MO B 
A T 5 O'CLOCK THIS AFTERNOO N 
Governor Bilb o Says H e Is Powerless to Prevent It— 
Thousands of People Ai*e Flockin g Into Ellisvill e to 
Atten d the Evenr—Sheriff and Authoritie s Ar e Powerless to Prevent If. 
HATTIESBURG , June 26.—John Hartfield, the negro 
alleged to have assaulted an Ellisville, young woman, has 
been taken to Ellisville and is guarded by officers in the office 
of Dr. Carter in that city. He is wounded in the shoulder hut 
not seriously. The officers have agreed to turn him over to 
the people of the city at 4 o'clock this afternoon when it is 
expected he will be burned. The negro is said to have made 
a partial confession. 
GOV . BILB O SAY S 
HI : I S POWERLESS . 
Whe n Gov . Bilb o wa s show n the 
abov e dispatc h an d aske d wha t 
action , if any , he intende d to tak e 
to preven t the affair, he said : 
" I a m powerless to preven t it. 
vWe hav e gun s fo r stat e militia , 
\but no men . It is impossibl e to 
Sen d troop s to the scene fo r the 
obvious reaso n tha t we hav e no 
troops. 
Several days ago. Participating 
fo r the lynchin g ha s no w bee n fixed 
fo r five p. m. 
A committe e o f Ellisvill e citizen s ha s 
bee n appointe d to mak e the necessar y 
arrangements fo r the event, an d the 
mo b is pledge d to ac t i n conformit y 
wit h thes e arrangements. 
Rev . L . G . Gates, pasto r o f the Firs t 
Baptist churc h of Laurel , left her e a t 
one o'cloc k fo r Ellisvill e to entrea t the 
mo b to use discretion . 
THOUSAND S GOING TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 209 
Medical College of Howard University 
Next Session Opens October 1, 1919 
ADMISSION Candidates for admission must be graduates of approved Colleges or Scientific Schools 
with two years of instruction, including laboratory work, in physics, chemistry and biology, 
English, mathematics and French or German, or graduates of recognized high schools with 
two years of instruction, including laboratory work, in physics, chemistry and biology, English, mathematics and French or German. 
INSTRUCTION The course of instruction occupies four years, and especial emphasis is laid upon practical work in the laboratories, in the wards of the Freedman's Hospital and in the Dispensary, 
Full corps of instructors, well equipped laboratories, unexcelled hospital facilities, 
The Medical College is rated in Glass A by the Council on Medical Education of the 
American Medical Association and is a member of the Association of American Medical Colleges, Recognized by the Conjoint Board of England. 
TH E DENTAL COLLEGE 
Requires for admission the completion of a recognized four-year high school course. 
The course of instruction occupies four years. Unexcelled facilities for practical work. 
TH E PHARMACEUTICAL COLLEGE 
Requires for admission the completion of a recognized four-year high school course. 
The course of instruction occupies three years and leads to the degree of Pharmaceutical 
Chemist. 
The annual announcement, application blanks and additional information concerning 
either course may be obtained by addressing 
WILLIA M C . McNEILL , Secretary of the School of Medicine 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y 
Fifth and W Streets, N. W. WASHINGTON, D. C. 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY Morgan College and Branches JOHN 0. SPENCER, Ph.D., President 
WILLIAM PICKENS, Litt.D., Vice-President MANUA L TRAININ G AND MORGAN COLLEGE, Baltimore, Md. 
LOCATION—I n grea t colleg e tow n betwee n 
the Nort h an d South . 
POLICY—Co-educational . INDUSTRIA L SCHOO L COURSES—Fou r years, appropriat e degrees. 
Preparatio n fo r professiona l study . Advance d FOR COLORE D YOUT H education . Graduate s certificate d fo r elemen ­
tar y an d hig h schoo l teachin g i n the State . 
FACULTY —Colleg e an d universit y traine d BORDENTOWN , N . J . me n an d women . 
NE W SITE— Fort y acre s o f most beautifu l 
A high institution for the training of scenery , stream , hil l an d forest. 
colored youth. Excellent equipment, TERMS ——Ver y reasonable . 
INFORMATION—Address Morga n College , thorough instruction, wholesome sur­ Baltimore , Md . 
roundings. Academic training for all MORGAN ACADEMY , Baltimore, Md. 
students. . LOCATION—I n the suburb s o f Baltimor e o n 
a beautifu l campus. Healthfu l surroundings. Courses in carpentry, agriculture and DORMITORIES—Equippe d an d supervised . 
trades for boys. Ca n car e fo r 80 students. 
TERMS —Ver y moderate . Courses in domestic science and do­ PRINCIPAL—Le e M . McCoy , A.M . 
mestic art for girls. 
PRINCESS ANN E ACADEMY , A new trades building, thoroughly Princess Anne, Md. equipped. (Eastern Branch of Maryland State College 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and of Agriculture.) 
modernl LOCATION—Somerse t County , famou s easter n y equipped. shor e o f Maryland . Summer Courses for students July 1— COURSES—Preparatory , normal , industrial , 
August 17, I9J9­ domestic , music . 
DORMITORIES—Carefull y supervised ; fur­ Terms reasonable. nished . Fall term begins September 10, 1919­ TERMS —Fre e tuitio n ; othe r expense s moderate . 
PRINCIPAL— Thoma s H. Kiah , A.M . Fo r information address 
All Schools Open September 29, 1919 W . R. VALENTINE, Principal Dormitories Open Sept. 27, 1919 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 210 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
A COLLEG E that 
ha s its students devot e on e hal f their time 
to actua l usefu l wor k is 
s o i n lin e wit h commo n 
sense that w e ar e amaze d 
tha t the ide a ha d to be 
pu t i n executio n b y a n 
ex-slav e as a life-save r 
fo r hi s disfranchise d 
race . Ou r grea t discov ­
erie s ar e alway s accidents: we wor k fo r on e 
thin g an d get another. 
I expec t tha t the da y wil l 
come , an d ere long , whe n 
the great universitie s o f 
the worl d wil l hav e to 
put the Tuskege e Ide a 
int o executio n i n orde r 
to sav e themselve s fro m 
bein g distance d by the 
Colore d Race . 
—ELBER T HUBBARD , 
I n " A Littl e Journe y to 
Tuskegee. " 
Is There a Deserving Young 
Man or Young Woman in Your 
Community who needs a 
Chance? 
If so perhaps Tuskegee Institute offers the very 
opportunity whic h he wants. 
Tuskege e is not onl y a school. It is an Institu ­
tion and an Influence. 
It helps the worth y student to help himself. 
Locatio n unsurpassed for healthfulness. Fort y 
trades and industries for youn g men and women . 
Excellen t Literar y and Norma l Course . Smith -
Hughe s Vocationa l Course s for advanced Students. 
Home Economics, Agricultur e Industries 
Tuskegee Institute is no place for sluggards. 
Fro m risin g bell to taps, there is a full program— 
drills, class rooms, shops, farm, etc. 
Maybe your boy needs just the sort of training 
which Tuskegee offers 
Writ e for Catalo g and Information . 
ROBER T R. MOTON . Principal 
Tuskegee Institute, Alabama 
1875 STAT E 1919 
AGRICULTURA L AN D MECHANICA L 
COLLEG E FO R NEGROE S 
NORMAL, ALABAMA 
A COMBINATION HAR D T O BEA T 
A Thorough English Education Combined with a Trade 
WHA T TRAD E WOULD YO U LIK E T O TAKE ? 
Trade s for Boys, 12 Trade s fo r Girls , 7 Trade s fo r bot h Sexes, 2 SUMMARY OF OUR GRADUATES—1875-1919 
Department of Academics 1217 
Department of Agriculture 11 8 
Department of Household Economics 704 
Department of Mechanic Arts 227 
WHA 226 6T THE Y AR E DOING
Principals of district schools 163 Editors and Journalists 8 
Teachers in rural schools 296 Bookkeepers '.'.*'.' 15 
Principals in secondary or high schools.. 24 TJ. S. Farm Demonstrators.......... 2 
Teachers in grammar or high schools 90 Undertakers and Embalmers.........' . '. 6 
Doctors 4 1 Contractors and Builders 8 
Lawyers J U. S. Bureau of Education 1 
Dentists ° Farmers 340 
Pharmacists J Housekeepers 498 
Druggists 1 0 Dead and unaccounted for 398 
Working at trades 302 " 
Bankers total 
U. S. Government Service 38 10t a ' .• 2266 
Jeanes teachers 7 
Directors of book establishments 2 Soldiers in the Great War 236 
STATE AND UNITED STATES APPROPRIATIONS 
Property consists of 182 acres of land. 20 buildings for all purposes, live stock and general 
equipment valued at $202,000. Send for catalog today. 
WALTE R S. BUCHANAN , President. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 211 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FO R YOU R GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro GirU , Daytona, Fla . 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, tine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal. Vocational. Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , - - Principal. 
TALLADEGA COLLEGE 
TALLADEGA , ALABAM A 
Founded in 1867, for the training of Negro Leaders. 
Beautiful and healthful location. First class equipment. 
A Theological Seminary. College courses leading to the A . B. degree — Classics, 
Science, Education, Social Service, Music. Manual training for both sexes. Large 
attention given to debating and public speaking. Nurse Training. Agriculture. 
Graduates enter professional courses in the best Northern Universities. Alabama 
grants first grade teachers' certificates to graduates in Education. 
The product of the College noted for fine character and efficient service. 
Rev. FREDERIC K A. SUMNER , President 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y 
WASHINGTON, D. C. 
Collegiate and Professional Schools JUNIOR COLLEGE leading to Schools of Lib­ eral Arts, Education, Journalism, or Com­ merce and Finance four year course, giving degree, A.B. or S.B.; A.B. or S.B. in Edu­ cation; S.B. in Journalism; S.B. in Com­ merce. SCHOOL OF APPLIED SCIENCE, four year course, giving degree, S.B, in C.E. , S.B. in E.E. , S.B. in M.E.. S.B. in Arch., S.B. in Agrl., or S.B. in H.E 
SCHOOL OF MUSIC, four year course, giving degree of Mus.B. 
SCHOOL OF RELIGION, three year course, giving degree of B.D. (Also diploma and correspondence courses.) 
SCHOOL OF LAW , three year evening 
course, giving degTee of LL.B. 
SCHOOL OF MEDICINE, including Medical, Dental and Pharmaceutical Colleges. Four year course for Medical and Dental stu­ dents: three years for Pharmaceutical. Following degrees given: M.D.. D.D.S., Phar.C. 
For Catalog and Information Write— 
REGISTRAR DWIGHT 0 . W. HOLMES 
Howard University, Washington, D. C. 
Mentio n
Learn the Auto and Tractor Business In from Eight to Twelve Weeks at the 
Prairie View State Normal 
and Industrial College PRAIRIE VIEW, TEXA S 
For full information, address 
W. P. TERRELL , SUPT. MECH. DEPT. 
Prairie View, Texas 
ST. MARY' S SCHOOL An Episcopal boarding school for girls, under the direction of the sisters of St. Mary. Address: TH E SI3TER-IN-CHARGE, 6138 Germantown Avenue, Philadelphia, Pa. 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTED All Races Prepare.i n the best schoo l o f its kin d i n the State , 
Sub j ects 
Shorthand , Typewriting , Bookkeeping , English , Pen ­
manship , Civi l Servic e Training , an d SPANISH . 
COMMERCIA L CLAS S 
Leno x Communit y Center—a t 
PUBLIC SCHOOL 89 Lenox Avenue and 136th St., New York City, 
Open All Year—Four Evenings Weekly. 
Fit ? W . Mottley , President . . 
 TH E CRISIS , 212 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
MERC Y HOSPITA L and SCHOO L FO R NURSES "The Most Beautiful Spot in Philadelphia" 
O n account of movin g into its new and muc h large r quarters is able to admit at once 
into its Trainin g Schoo l several youn g wome n wh o are qualified. 
For information address: 
Superintendent of Nurse s 50th Street and Woodlan d Avenue , Philadelphia , Pa . 
Bell Phone Spruce 1924 30-Day System position 
Derrick 
Shorthand School Chads' Building 
1435 Chestnut Street 
PHILADELPHI A 
Enroll Immediately to Hold Place 
in Class 
Send for Enrollment Blank and full information 
Day and Evening Classes 
NOTE—We are already enrolling Summer 
Students and would advise all who desire 
to take Special Summer Course to send in 
application A T ONCE as places will be at 
a premium. 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUTE 
1827 S. 17th St., PHILADELPHIA , PA. 
Shorthand Typewriting Bookkeeping 
3-month and 8-month Courses JO B WORK — Le t us typewrite an d multigrap h your 
letters. Hue . or several thousan d Is easy for us. 
W e duplieat e handwritin g an d drawings. 
Edwar d T . Duncan . President. 
ABC EMPLOYMENT AGENCY WOMEN , MEN , BOYS , GIRL S 
JOBS—GOOD JOBS AR E WAITIN G FO R YO U 
Phones: Open 
Drexel 98, 194, 1281 Evenings 
4702 S. State St. Chicago, 111. 
Teachers, Professional Nurses, 
Stenographers 
an d person s otherwis e traine d i n business an d the 
profession s wil l fin d ou r agenc y a n active , importan t 
mediu m i n bringin g yo u i n touc h wit h bette r position s 
an d highe r salaries. 
SYSTEM SERVICE AGENCY, 
Dept. "E, " 71 W. 99th St., New York City 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS. Dignified Work 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TAINING SCHOO L FO R NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincol n Hospita l and Hom e 
New York City 
HAL E INFIRMAR Y AN D NURS E TRAININ G 
SCHOOL , 325 Lak e Street, Montgomery , Ala . 
Offers to Hig h School graduates and young women of higher education and good moral character, between the ages of 18 and 35, a three years' course in the profession of nurs­ ing. For further information apply to the Superintendent enclosing a stamp. 
Atlanta University Studies of the Negro Problems 
20 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y II ATLANTA , GA . 
TH E NEGRO IN AMERICA N HISTORY Contains 296 Pages, 35 Chapters, Historical and Biographical, 17 Ful l Page Illustrations Printed o n Fine Antique Book , Boun d in Ful l Green Extr a Cloth, Gold Title on Front Cover and Shelf Back. Price, net $1.25. Postage Prepaid $1.40. Order through any bookseller or direct from the author. Address 
JOH N W. CROMWEL L 
1439 Swann St. Washington, D. C 
BUSTS O F 
Booker T . Washington, 
Fred Douglass , Paul 
Lawrenc e Dunbar , 
Bishop Richard Allen. 
$1.50 each. Th e 4 busts lor $5.00 
Agents wanted. Sen d at once . 
The Isaac Hathaway Art 
Company 
718 S. HICKOR Y STREET PINE BLUFF , ARK . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 213 
Reconstructio n 
Wa r — and its aftermath—has 
opened the eyes of our people. They 
are now seeing and thinking straight. 
They now demand of individuals and 
enterprises seeking their patronage 
and support, performance rather than 
glittering promises. They also demand evidences of stability in such 
enterprises and experience on the part 
of those conducting them. 
The management of the Southern 
Ai d Society of Virginia , Inc., rejoices 
to see this day—They have labored, 
in season and out, for 26 years to 
help to bring about just such improvement in our business relationships. 
The Southern Ai d Society of Vir ­
ginia, Inc., has always issued a superior contract—The only one guaranteeing payments for Sickness and Accidents each week of every year and 
an undiminished Death Claim after 
death. 
To-day it challenges the country to 
show a better record—than the following—for an institution confining 
its business to its Home State. 
26 years of satisfying service to policy-holders. 
$30,000.00 Capital Stock, fully paid in. 
$50,000.00 Federal, State & City Bonds. 
$50,000.00 1st Lien Mortgages—Loans to our people tc 
secure good homes in desirable locations. 
$100,000.00 Cash in Banks. 
$150,000.00 Real Estate—Free from all encumbrances. 
We invite the scrutiny of the reconstruction attitude of the insuring public. 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VA., Inc. 
Home Office: 527 N. SECOND ST., RICHMOND, VA. 
District Offices and Agencies Throughout the State 
A . D. PRICE , Pres. B. L . JORDAN , Sec. W. A. JORDAN , Asst. Sec. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 214 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
SCOTT'S OFFICIAL HISTORY 
"of the American Negro's Part in the World War " 
SCOTT' S HISTOR Y O F "TH E AMERICA N NEGRO' S PAR T 
I N TH E WORL D WAR"—prepare d b y Emmet t J . Scott , 
Specia l Assistan t to the Secretar y o f War , an d collaboratin g 
agencie s tha t assur e authenticit y an d ful l detail , includin g the 
organizatio n an d trainin g o f Negr o militar y units, an d a com ­
plet e recor d o f their servic e i n Camp s an d o n Battlefields; the 
wor k o f civi c auxiliaries, etc., etc. N o scissors an d past e pot 
"inserts, " bu t a Histor y freshl y writte n fro m first to last page . 
Dr . Scot t has ha d the co-operatio n o f the followin g collabora ­
tors: 
CARTE R G . WOODSON , Directo r o f Research , Associatio n 
fo r th e Stud y o f Negr o Lif e an d History , Incorporated ; 
RALP H W . TYLER , Accredite d Representativ e o f th e Com ­
mitte e o n Publi c Information , wh o accompanie d th e Colore d 
troop s t o th e Wa r Front s i n France ; 
WILLIA M ANTHON Y AERY , Publicatio n Secretary , Hamp ­
to n Norma l an d Agricultura l Institute ; 
MONRO E N . WORK , Director , Division - o f Record s an d 
Research , Tuskege e Norma l an d Industria l Institute ; 
MRS . ALIC E DUNBA R NELSO N (formerl y Mrs . Pau l Law ­
renc e Dunbar) , a leade r i n mobilizin g th e colore d wome n o f 
th e Countr y fo r Wa r Wor k unde r th e auspice s o f th e Women' s 
Committee , Counci l o f Nationa l Defense ; 
MIS S EV A D . BOWLES , Executiv e Secretar y i n charg e o f 
th e Colore d wor k o f th e Youn g Women' s Christia n Asso ­
Emmet t J . Scott , ciatio n ; 
A.M. , L.L.D . LIEUT . T . T THOMPSON , Historian , wh o accompanie d th e 
famou s 92 d Division , U . S. A. , t o France . 
AGENT S WANTE D Mak e $8.0 0 t o $20.0 0 pe r day—righ t now—sellin g Scott's Officia l Histor y 
best book , biggest seller , quickes t money-make r fo r liv e agents. B e first i n you r territor y 
an d ge t th e orders. W e pa y yo u highes t commissions . 
TRE E Writ e toda y fo r fre e outfit , includin g agent's sampl e hoo k an d ful l instructions , Sen d 
25 c t o prepa y postage . 
NEGRO HISTORICAL PUBLISHING COMPANY P . O. DRAWE R 1821 , WASHINGTON , D . C. 
Inform yourself as to 
KELL Y MILLER'S THE EXODUS OF THE 
NEGROES Race Statesmanship 
By reading Exhibited in Two Great Pamphlets 
Dr. Carter G. Woodson's 1. "Th e Negr o i n the Ne w Re ­
construction. " Considere d the most 
A CENTURY OF NEGRO powerful plea that has yet come from 
the author's pen. 10 cents. 
MIGRATION 2 . "Th e Disgrac e of Democracy. " 
Pronounce d in Europ e and Americ a 220 Pages Price $1.10 as one of the most strikin g literary 
documents produced b y the Worl d This book is unique in that it is the War . 10 cents. first and only scientific treatise in 
this field. It undertakes to explain 
why the Negroes have migrated, Agents wante d everywhere . Rate s where they have gone and what they to agents 5 cents a copy. Ad d 10 % 
have done. to bil l to cove r postage. 
Agents wanted everywhere. 
Address Send all orders to the author 
KELL Y MILLER 
1216 You Street, N. W. Howard University Washington, D . C. 
Washington, D. C. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 215 
TH E MOS T ATTRACTIV E 
LOT OFFER EVER MADE ! 
IDEAL BUILDING LOTS, improved and developed, with 
FRUIT TREES PLANTED ON THEM, in 
Beautiful ORCHARDVILLE 
FOR 
ONLY $4 9 TH E LOT S AR E GOIN G VER Y FAS T AN D 
OU R LIS T O F LOT-OWNER S ALREAD Y IN ­
CLUDE S A GREA T MAN Y PEOPL E FRO M 
AL L OVE R TH E COUNTRY . TH E DEMAN D 
I S STIL L INCREASIN G AN D THOS E WH O 
INTEN D T O SECUR E LOT S SHOUL D AC T 
IMMEDIATELY . 
Orchardvill e is locate d i n a high-grad e fruit-grow ­
in g regio n an d is to be develope d alon g entirel y 
ne w line s int o a BEAUTIFU L FRUI T CIT Y 
tha t wil l be the onl y on e o f its kin d i n the 
country . 
Unlik e othe r lo t offers, wher e the purchasers ar e 
left t o develo p their lots themselves, W E D O 
THA T FO R YO U AN D PLAN T FIV E HIG H 
GRAD E FRUI T TREE S O N EAC H LOT , as 
wel l as A BEAUTIFU L SHAD E TREE , .an d w e 
tak e car e o f th e propert y an d tree s fo r FOU R 
YEAR S WITHOU T EXTR A COST . Whe n the 
frui t tree s ar e i n commercia l bearin g the y shoul d 
ear n yo u EXCELLEN T YEARL Y RETURN S on 
you r investmen t WITHOU T AN Y EFFOR T O N 
YOU R PART . 
5 0 ON VERY 
= EASY TERMS 
Th e lots ar e size d 30 x 144 Fee t an d hav e plent y 
o f roo m fo r a house , garden , chicke n yard , shed , 
etc., beside s the frui t tree s tha t w e wil l plan t 
an d tak e car e o f o n eac h lot. EAC H LO T I S 
GUARANTEE D T O B E HIG H AN D DR Y 
UNDE R A MONEY-BAC K GUARANTEE , AN D 
TH E CONTRAC T YO U GE T GIVE S YO U 
JUS T TH E PROTECTIO N YO U MIGH T 
WANT . 
Th e pric e o f the lots, as state d above , is onl y 
$49.50 each , an d th e terms ar e onl y $3.0 0 a month , 
(Smalle r terms when mor e than on e lo t is purchased.) N O INTEREST . 
Bear In mind that TH E NUMBE R O r LOTS IS LIMIT­ E D and that it la a case of FIRST COME—FIRST SERVED . We have a BEAUTIFU L CIRCULAR that gives you all the details of this offer, also a BEAUTI­ FU L BOOKLET containing several views and TESTI­ MONIAL LETTERS , all of which you wil l find very interesting. Send for a copy of each TODAY. Simply write your name and address on the coupon attached below, mail it to us NOW. and as soon as we receive it we will send you the circular and booklet hv return mail. 
MAIL TH E COUPON RIGHT AWA Y I 
ADDRES S 
THE SWAN-ARENSON REALTY & DEVELOPMENT CO. 19 SO. L A SALL E STREE T CHICAGO , ILL. WRITE PLAINLY 
TH E SWAN-ARENSO N REALT Y & DEVELOPMEN T CO , 
Chicago , HI . 
Dat e , 1919. 
Gentlemen : — 
I a m intereste d i n you r Orchardvill e offe r an d woul d b e gla d t o receiv e a cop y o f you r 
circula r an d bookle t withou t an y obligatio n t o me . 
Name 
Address 
Tow n Stat e 
C . 8-19 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS. 216 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
WHICH OF THESE SUITS DO YOU WANT? Here' s th e Bigges t Tailorin g Offe r eve r made . Stylis h perfect-fittin g suits 
SEND mad e t o you r individua l measure , o f th e season's choicest sil k decorate d SEND 
NO weaves, silk-strip e fabrics , gold-mixe d worsteds, an d importe d dress cloths, NO 
MONEY guarantee d t o pleas e yo u completely , o r Mone y Back . Writ e fo r fre e MONEY 
sample s to-day , an d pic k th e on e yo u lik e best , at : 
$ 12 85 21 95 25 90 895 15 48 
DRESS UP AN D MAK E BIG MONE Y I f yo u car e t o se e th e BIGGES T VALUE S I N TAILORING , i f yo u 
car e t o se e th e choicest up-to-dat e patterns, i f yo u car e t o mak e a 
bi g saving 1, writ e u s to-day , an d w e wil l sen d you , entirel y free , 
ou r fine tailorin g boo k wit h clot h sample s o f importe d an d domesti c weave s i n thos e rich , stylis h patterns, no w wor n b y dress y 
me n an d youn g men . Don' t thin k o f placin g a n orde r fo r ne w 
clothe s anywher e befor e yo u se e this boo k o f surprisin g tailorin g 
values. 
YOU SAVE from 3 0 to 5 0 PER CEN T That' s wha t you r savin g amount s t o whe n yo u orde r 
clothe s o f us. An d ours is genuin e hand-tailorin g ex ­
pertly-done , beautifu l work . Ever y garmen t tailore d 
strictl y t o individua l measure , an d guarantee d t o satisf y 
an d pleas e yo u completely , o r ful l purchas e pric e cheerfull y returned . W e Wil l No t Kee p On e Penn y O f You r 
Money , Unles s Yo u Ar e WELL-PLEASED , thu s leavin g i t 
t o eac h custome r t o judg e whethe r th e clothe s ordere d 
o f u s ar e th e best-wearing , th e most satisfactor y garment s 
yo u eve r wore . 
NO EXTR A CHARGES-POSTAG E 
PAID Whe n yo u orde r o f us yo u pa y N o Extr a Charge s o f an y 
kind . Whethe r yo u prefe r a conservative , o r a fanc y 
novelt y style , th e pric e is alway s th e same . N o matte r 
ho w tal l o r stou t yo u are , ther e ar e N o Extr a Charge s 
o f an y kind , an d ever y orde r is sen t postag e paid . 
THIS BEAUTIFU L PLATE D 
GOLD -
PIN FRE E T o mak e certai n yo u wil l tel l others abou t us, 
w e wil l giv e yo u absolutel y FREE , wit h you r 
first order, this handsom e Gold-plate d PIN . 
Ther e is no advertisin g o n this Pin . Yo u wil l 
oe prou d t o wea r it . You r friend s wil l as k 
yo u wha t this beautifu l emble m stand s for—an d 
this wil l remin d yo u t o recommen d OU R 
STYLIS H TAILORIN G t o them . 
CASH PROFITS FOR SPARE-TIME WORK 
Togethe r wit h ou r fre e samples, w e wil l sen d yo u als o ful l informatio n o f ho w yo u ca n ear n 
a lo t o f extr a mone y b y sendin g orders fo r you r relative s an d friends. Yo u wil l b e surprise d 
wha t a rea l money-makin g opportunit y this mean s to you , eve n i f yo u ca n spar e onl y a fe w 
hours fo r this work . Orders com e eas y whe n yo u ca n sho w tailorin g value s lik e ours. Th e 
bi g savin g ca n b e see n a t a glance . Som e o f ou r agents mak e fro m $25.0 0 t o $50.0 0 a week , 
others a s hig h a s $75.00 . Mr . Wil l J . Davis , o f Nort h Carolin a writes : "Order s ar e eas y t o 
get , I mad e $16.6 9 i n thre e hours. " That' s nic e mone y fo r thre e hours ' work , an d w e hav e 
thousand s o f simila r letters, al l tellin g th e sam e pleasing , satisfyin g story . Yo u wil l fin d th e 
wor k eas y an d pleasant , n o experienc e needed , nothin g a t al l t o learn , nothin g t o study . Sen d 
us you r name—sen d i t to-day—now—whil e th e whol e matte r is fres h i n you r mind , an d ge t 
complet e boo k o f fashion s wit h fre e clot h sample s an d ful l information . Addres s 
CHICAG O TAILOR S ASSOCIATIO N 
515-521 So. Franklin Street Dept. P-572 Chicago 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 217 
Pace and Handy Popular Songs 
Everybody knows 
" A Good Man Is Hard to Find " 
But 
Yo u can find a copy wherever music is sold. 
Get one today and try it on your piano 
or phonograph. "It's Great " and wil l 
continue to ring in your ears. 
Ou r catalog contains the very best "Blues " 
and novelty songs and ballads 
and these are 
OU R BIGGEST BROADWA Y SUCCESSE S 
" A Good Man is Hard to Find" "Lonesome Roa d Blues" 
"I'm Dying Wit h the Worried "St. Louis Blues" 
Blues" "Though We're Miles and Miles Remember and Be Careful Every Apart" 
"Sweet Child" "Ringtail Blues" 
"Satan, I'm Here" "Shake, Rattle and Roll" 
"The Wa y to Keep a Good Man" "Hail to the Spirit of Freedom" 
Thi s Musi c o n sal e a t Woolworth , Kress , Kresge , Kraft , McCrory , Willne r an d 
Metropolita n 6 an d 10c stores. 
"St. Louis Blues" 
The most popular "Blues" song published. 
Hear it and satisfy 
yourself. 
FREE Our latest catalog of the 
kind of music you want. 
Certainly YO U may have one! 
Write TODAY . 
Our music can be had on all phonograph 
records and player rolls. 
Music for sale wherever music is sold, or 
write direct to 
PACE and HANDY MUSIC CO., Inc. (The Home of the Blues) 
1547 BROADWA Y NEW YOR K CIT Y 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 218 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
A state superviso r o f schools FLORENCE COLE-TALBER T TEACHERS write s us: "Wil l yo u kindl y 
furnis h m e a larc e list o f teachers fo r ou r schools 
fo r the nex t year ? I ca n hav e the m appointe d at once . Soprano 
" She has one of the best voices that God has given her race."—Los Angeles Times. W e nee d the m fo r al l type s o f schools, bu t primaril y 
" Special praise must be given Mrs. Florence Talbert fo r rura l schools. " 
who beside her natural gift has already reached a high plane W e als o hav e immediat e calls fo r teachers o f auto- of professional accuracy."—Herman Devriea In Chicago Amer­ mechanics, carpentry , painting , agriculture , Spanis h ican. an d French . Engagements accepted for Concerts, Recitals. Oratorio. Mrs. Talbert will make her first tour of the southern states TIL E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
beginning September first at Arkansas. Write for date now. 140 3 Ne w Yor k Avenu e Washington , D . C 659 Twenty-eighth Street, Detroit, Mich. 
LULA ROBINSON-JONES The Colored Teachers' Bureau Wil l Hel p Yo u Ge t a Bette r Payin g Position . Soprano REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TERM S 
Available for Concerts Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau Telephone 6393 Momingside Bo x 22 , Wilberforoe , O . 126 W . 134t h Stree t Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Teachers Wanted 
CLEOT A In a secondary school with high standards the following J. COLLINS teachers are needed: 
Bible and Social Service. 
Soprano English and French. Shorthand and Expert Bookkeeper. Domestic Science and Arts. Sh e ha s a ver y lovel y lyri c sopran o voic e Dressmaking, Tailoring and Millinery Matron. 
o f beautifu l qualit y an d sing s song s wit h School north of Mason and Dixon Line. Only capable, 
styl e an d intelligence . He r recital s ar e ver y cultured, experienced, Christian women need apply. 
interesting. — Address. Secondary School, care of The Crisis. 
LIL A ROBESO N Would you like to know why the Negro and Caucasian 
are mixing i n spite of prejudice ? Then, read Of the Metropolitan Optra Company of New York 
" As Nature Leads." by J. A. Rogers, author of " From 103 W . 143 d St. , Ne w Yor k Cit y Superman to Man." Undoubtedly the most fearless analysis of the Negro-Caucasian situation by any author. The writer penetrates to the very heart of the subject and In a style bubbling with vigor he puts In the clearest language thoughts of your innermost consciousness. Arguments supported by the world's greatest scientists and philosophers. Easily read. Clarence Cameron White A book you will read and re-read and give to your friends. 
Price. $1.25; by mail, $1.35. Agents wanted. Dept. A, Hayes Book Store. 3640 State Street. Chicago, III. 
VIOLINIST 
"Critic s ar e on e i n their 
hig h estimat e o f the splendi d Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia attainments o f Clarenc e 
Camero n Whit e an d his Con ­ For all Lodge and Church Societies 
cert appearanc e i n you r cit y 
mean s the musical event o f CENTRA L REGALIA CO. the season. " Fo r term s an d date s address JOS . L . JONES , Pre. . 
N . E. Cor. 8th and Plum Stt., Cincinnati, Ohio 616 COLUMBUS AVENUE BOSTON, MASS. 
Rolan Telephone, Baring lit* d W. Hayes Phonograph Records 3 Warwic k St. , Boston , Mass. ISADOR E MARTI N Recitals , Concerts, Oratorio , Oper a 
Boohing Engagements for Continental Tour Real Estate and Insurance Season 1919-1920 Notary Public Mortgages Management : M . J . Minor , 2 Mill s St. , 
Roxbury , Mass . 6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Centra l 266 "Stand by the Yanks" Telephones: Mai n 220 
A patrioti c son g b y Nanni e G . Board . Effectivel y HARR Y E . DAVI S 
use d b y Wa r Cam p Communit y Centers an d i n othe r ATTORNEY-AT-LA W NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
place s wher e patrioti c song s ar c o f service . Orde r 202-206 Engineers Buildin g Cleveland , Ohi o 
fro m Krausgil l Musi c Company , 309 Walnu t St. , BROW N S. SMIT H Louisville , Ky. , o r fro m the composer, 1224 W . Chestnu t St. , Louisville , Ky . ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
Offices: Suit e 802 Syke s Bloc k 
Nea r Thir d an d Hennepi n 
Minneapoli s Minn . 
Tel . 3437 For t Hil l Cabl e Address , Epbe n 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
84 Schoo l Stree t Bosto n Mass . 
Telephon e Connectio n My course in Penmanship Bookkeeping, and Shorthand 
through the ma<l will prepare you for the position: worth W . Ashbi e Hawkin s Georg e W . F . McMeche n 
while. Write for information. HAWKIN S and McMECHE N 
A ATTORNEY-AT-LA W . D. Nolley, M. Pen., 519 Michigan Ave., Buffalo N.Y. 21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore , Md . 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 219 
Agents wanted everywhere to supply the big 
demand for our high grade Calling Cards. 
Most fashionable styles of cards for ladies 
or gentlemen, 100 for 50 cents. No extra 
charge for address. Light, pleasant, and very 
profitable spare time work. Outfit furnished. 
Prompt and dependable service. All orders 
sent postpaid. Write for samples and terms. 
Address: The House of Chowning 
Indianapolis, Ind. 
100 0 AGENTS WANTE D 
A New Photo Sensation 
Jus t sen d u s an y Phot o o f yourself , frien d 
o r relativ e an d ge t a Beautifu l Lif e Siz e 
Medallio n Photo . W e retur n th e original . 
Thes e Medallion s mus t b e see n t o b e ap ­
preciated . Sampl e Photo s wit h agent's sell ­
in g Instructions, 60c . Photo s o f Madam e 
Walker . W e giv e lowes t term s o n NegT O 
Wa r Histories , Pos t Card s an d Pictures . 
Writ e fo r agent's terms. 
BETHEL AR T CO. 
97 South Street JAMAICA , N . Y . 
Mentio n THE CRISIS . 220 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
You r Gold Tooth Polished 
Your Whit e Teeth Bleached 
By Using Dr. WELTERS ' Antiseptic 
TOOT H POWDER— Absolutely Free From Grit & Acid 
And Prevents Decay 
Ask your druggist. If he hasn't got it, ask him to 
order it for you. Send 27 Cents i n Stamps 
for a full size package. 
The E. A. Welters' Tooth Powder Co., Inc. 
410 BROA D ST. JACKSONVILLE , FLA . 
Agents and Distributors Wanted 
The Largest and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation Owned and 
Controlled by Negroes in the United States 
Not an Ordinary Dentifrice hut a Scientific Preparation Specially Prepared for Polishing "GOLD" 
in the Mouth, "BLEACHING" the Teeth and Preventing Decay. 
Patents secured on easy terms Write for particulars. 
JOS . H . STEWART , Attorney-at-Law, 
494 Louisian a Ave. . N . W. , Washington , D . C . 
FREE FASHIO N BOO K MAILE D 
UPO N REQUES T 
Rea l Huma n Hai r Al l ou r wig s ar e 
han d mad e an d 
strictl y to order, 
fro m make r to 
wearer. 
WIGS , Tran s 
formations, switch ­
es, an d Braid s an d 
al l othe r article s o f 
hair goods. 
No. 604—Price $10.50 
W e carr y the largest selectio n o f Hai r Dressers' Tools. 
The celebrated Mme. Baum's Preparations 
whic h make s th e ski n velvetlike , th e hai r 
silklike . 
Mme.Baum'sMail Order House P . O . BO X 145 , 
Penn . Termina l Station , Ne w Yor k City . 
Whe n writing , mentio n this paper. 
MAK E MONE Y 
Selling THE CHALLENGE 
The World's Great Negro Magazine 
It Fears Only God Write For Terms 
2305 7th Avenue, New York City 
Do You Favor Education? Joi n the U . S . S . Literar y — schoo l fo r th e masses. 
Instructive , entertaining , non-secret , non-sectarian . 
Intellectua l an d socia l uplift . Neede d b y everybod y 
everywhere . Addres s Nationa l Literar y Association , 
1230 Yo u St. , N . W. , Washington , D . C . 
Dolls - Dolls ­
Hig h grad e colore d dolls tha t yo u ca n depen d o n i n 
natura l brow n colors at reasonabl e prices—als o beau ­
tifu l Negr o calendars wit h colore d childre n fo r a 
subject. Thes e calendars come i n a grea t numbe r o f 
subjects. W e ar e no w makin g the m u p fo r th e trad e 
als o fo r hom e use . Ou r agents ar e doin g wel l sellin g 
thes e goods. Sen d fo r proo f an d get starte d t o makin g 
goo d money . Reliabl e sellin g agents wanted . 
All our aoods are sold on their merits. 
OTIS H. GADSDEN 
63 Park Row New York Cit y 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS. Dignified Work 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 221 
HOTEL DALE 
CAP E MAY . N . J . 
Comfort and Elegance without Extravagance 
This Magnificent Hotel, Located in 
the Heart of the Most Beautiful 
Seashore Resort in the World, 
is replete with every modern improvement, 
superlative in construction, appointments, service and refined patronage. Orchestra daily, 
garage, bath houses, tennis, etc., on premises. 
Special attention given to ladies and children 
Send for booklet. 
E . W. DALE . Owner 
FEET 
Sore and Tender ANTISEPTIC FOO T POWDER, relieving excessive perspiration AN D 
offensive odors. 
Price 50 cents. B Y MALL 80 EENTS. 
DR . WILLIA M J . CARTER , Foot Specialist 
167 WAST iseth ST . NE W YOR K CITY . 
Earn $35.to WEEKL Y 
AL L OR SPAR E TIME 
Tub 
Guaranteed 
For Ten Years 
You—yourself—can positivel y mak e $35 t o $100 a week. I wan t men , hustling , energetic* ambitiou s fellows, anxiouB to mak e money , wh o ar e willin g t o wor k wit h me- No t fo r me , bat withme . Ax e yo u tha t kind ? I wan t yo u toadvertise.sej l an d anDoint local agentB fo r th e biggest, most sensationa l selle r i n 50 years-th e ROBINSO N FOLDIN G BAT H TUB . Demon ­ stratlnff Tu b Furnished . Here's a n absolutely new inventio n —nothin g lik e it . Make s instan t appeal. Sells easily. GiveB every hom e a modern , up-to-date bathroom i n an y part of th e house . N o plumbing , n o water-works needed. Fold s i n smal l roll , hand y as umbrella . Self-emptying , positivel y unleakable . Absolutel y guarantee d fo r 10 years. Bemember, full y 70 pe r cen t o f home s hav e n o bat h rooms. 
Sensational Sales Successes Tw o sale , a da y mean s S300 a month . Breeze , o f Idaho , mad e 
$400 profit i n 30 days. Bev . Ott o Schulze , Mo. , got 11600 t o date. 
Bnrkholder , Mont, , orders $1072 i n 17 days. Hamlinton , o f 
Wyo. , mad e $60 first tw o dare. Hundred s lik e that. Pleasant, 
permanent, fascinatin g work . Writ e a post card . Le t me 
writ e yo n alon g letter. N o experienc e needed, n o oapital. 
Yon r credi t is good i f yo n mea n business. Bu t yo u must be 
ambitious, yo u must wan t t o mak e money . Tha t s all . Writ e 
a postcar d now. • I wan t t o pay yo u $35 t o $100 every week, - • 
H . S. Robinson, Pres. Th e Robinson Cabine t Mfg . Co . 
4976 Factorie s Buildin g Toledo . Ohi o 
Ope n Jan e 20th . Close d Septembe r 10t h 
THE OCEAN HOUSE 
Sea Isle City. N. J . Thi s hote l 1B righ t o n th e ocea n front . I t 
ha s wid e porches, larg e conservator y dinin g 
roo m wher e on e ha s a beautifu l vie w o f th e 
ocea n whil e dining . Ever y roo m open s o n 
th e ocean . Specia l rate s fo r July . Mrs . 
Luc y Lee , proprietor , 5 Plai n St. , Elmhurst , 
L . I . Addres s afte r Jun e 1st, Ocea n House , 
Se a Isl e City , N . J . Bel l telephon e con ­
nection . 
Mrs. M . WATSON RUDD, 154 Wes t 131st St . Ne w Yor k Cit y 
ha s place d upo n the marke t he r ne w 
ROSE NINON NUFEET POWDER It is especiall y recommende d fo r soldiers, clerks, rail ­
roa d an d factor y employees, dancers an d al l person s 
wh o ar e require d t o stan d o r wal k t o an y extent . 
Ae-ents Wanted—Writ e FO R particulars . 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
Beautiful IdewiId The most wonderfully Ideal spot where young and 
old cast aside for the time all the cares and worries 
of their strenuous, nerve-racking routine lives AN D 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature In all her wondrous glory. The waters of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly 
teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
Do you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting ? 
Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries 7 
Do you want a place TO go where you can build up 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency? 
Do you enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, 
progressive people of the day—people who do things? 
Do you believe ID progress and D O you want TO 
have a part in one of the most progressive move- . 
ments of the time? Surelyl 
Then you will be interested in, and want TO 
own a lot of your own In Beautiful Idlewlld, . 
Michigan. If you act at once you can se­
•••'ire a beautiful lot for only $30.00 each; 
$6.00 cash; $1.00 per week. When your 
payments are completed the lot will be 
transferred to you by an absolute 
warranty deed with abstract showing clear title. 
Good live energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 1110 Hartford Bldg 
So. Dearborn St 
001010,111 
MENTIO N THE CRISIS . 222 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
KELL Y MILLER'S HISTORY OF 
TH E NEGRO IN TH E WORLD WA R 
New Book Published July 19th, 1919 
TH E KELL Y MILLE R HISTOR Y O F TH E WORL D WA R is all that the 
title can possibly mean. The author takes up the Great Conflict, following it step 
by step through the thirty excellent chapters, including the Terms of the Armistice , 
and General Pershing's full report to the Wa r Department, attd gives us the only 
condensed Histor y of the Great Wa r that is fair to the Negro Race. 
The Negro's Wa r for Democratization—He braces Himself and Claims to be the 
Champion of Democracy—Enters the Aren a of Combat! Th e German Indigent— 
The South Sensitive—The Nort h Quizzical—The Whol e Worl d Hesitant. 
The Negro in the Navy 
Mor e than fifty pages of the Boo k devoted to the ACHIEVEMENT S O F 
TH E NEGR O I N TH E AMERICA N 
NAVY— Guardin g the Trans-Atlanti c 
Rout e to France—Battlin g the Submarin e 
Peril—Th e Best Sailors in any Nav y i n 
the World—Makin g a Nav y in Thre e 
Month s from Negr o Stevedores and 
Laborers—Wonderful Accomplishments of 
700 Pages. 
50 Pages of Negro Soldiers.
Pages of other appropriate and
teresting pictures. 
 50 
 InOu r Negr o Yeome n and Yeowomen . 
AGENTS WANTE D 
The Book is a RECOR D BREAKE R ! 
Send 25 cents for a prospectus—It wil l be the best investment yo u ever 
made—Grasp the Opportunit y of Makin g Mone y faster than yo u have ever done 
before! 
Ou r agents are sending us thousands of. orders weekly—There wil l be A MIL ­
LIO N copies of the book sold during the next six months and A MILLIO N DOL ­
LAR S profit made by agents—Are you going to get your share? Man y Agents 
are leaving high salaried positions to canvass! 
W e will quote you agent's prices that wil l surprise you—Ou r agents consider a 
day lost when they fail to make at least $10—Get i n touch wit h us and let us tell 
you about our liberal terms, large profits and free book offers. 
The Negro Turns the Tide at Chateau Thierry—He Helps Hur l Back the Horde s 
of the Hun—Win s His Place and Right to a Voic e i n the Affairs of Mankin d against 
Prejudice, Ridicule, Race Hatred and almost Insurmountable Obstacles! 
Kell y Miller, Dean of Howar d University, residing in Washington, D . C , the 
friend of Government officials i n the Nationa l Capital, is the best prepared Negr o 
to give a complete record of what the soldiers and sailors of his race have accomplished i n the Worl d Wa r for Huma n Rights. It is the most satisfactory and im ­
partial Wa r History yet written. 
Th e book is boun d i n durable cloth, wit h substantia l head band, pric e $2.50 . 
I n full Kerotol Morocco (similar to cut) $3.25 . Cop y mailed to any address upo n 
receipt of the price. Satisfaction guaranteed or mone y refunded. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO. 
523 gth St., WASHINGTON , D. C. 44 3 South Dearborn St., Chicago, 111. 
[Address the nearer Office') The Largest Publishers of special books for Negroes. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS The Brownies' Book 
Announcement is made of the 
publication beginning in 
November 
of a Monthly 
Magazine for Children 
DESIGNED FOR ALL CHILDREN, 
BUT ESPECIALL Y FOR OURS. 
It will be a thing of Joy and Beauty, dealing in 
Happiness, Laughter and Emulation, and designed 
especially for Kiddies from Six to Sixteen. 
It will seek to teach Universal Love and Brotherhood for all little folk—black and brown and yellow 
and white. 
Of course, pictures, puzzles, stories, letters from 
little ones, clubs, games and oh—everything! 
One Dollar a year Ten Cents a copy 
W. E. B. DuBois, Editor 
A. G. Dill, Business Manager 
ADDRESS: 
The Brownies' Book, 2 W. 13th Street, New York City NILE QUEEN 
FOR HAIR AND SKIN 
THE NEW WONDER PREPARATIONS 
Compounded from original old Egyptian Formulas. 
Perfected by the KASHMI R CHEMICA L CO. Laboratories. 
Even Better Than KASHMI R 
FRE E New NIL E QUEE N Beauty Book FRE E 
Just off the press. 
Don't miss it. Send for your copy today. 
KASHMIR CHEMICA L CO. 
312 So. Clar k St. 
Dept. K., Chicago, Ill. 
AGENTS WANTED 