The CRISIS 
Christmas 1921 
ONE DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R FIFTEE N CENTS A COPY Turning Hard Times 
into Prosperous Times Th e year 1921 wil l ever be remembered as the period of "America's Hardest Times " following- the World's War . Conditions would be worse than now wer e it not fo r the Herculea n 
efforts of those determined spirits who are forcing- the wheels of progress to continue to revolve. TH E SOUTHER N AI D SOCIET Y O F VA „ INC. , is proud to be numbered among- those 
who are tryin g to keep the Doo r of Opportunit y open. Th e cut below shows the new 
$200,000.00 four-story and basement modern fireproof buildin g erected b y the Society at 7th 
and Te a Streets. N W. , Washington , D . C , to help turn Har d Time s into Prosperous Times, 
No t only does the Superio r Polic y of Protection, issued b y the Society, keep the wolf 
from the door of al l Southern Ai d Policyholder s but its policy of constructing modern office 
buildings, in the various cities where it operates, make s it possible for our professiona l and 
business interests to have suitable quarters—like the best ha d by othe r races—i n whic h to 
display thei r talents and wares and to do bette r business. Therefor e b y its Insuranc e Polic y 
and, as well, by its Business Polic y the Society is dail y helpin g to tur n Har d Time s into 
Prosperous Times. 
SOUTHER N AID SOCIETY O F VIRGINIA, INC. Home Office: 527 N . Second Street, RICHMOND , VA . 
District Offices and Agencies in Virginia and 
the District of Columbia 
Insures Against Sickness, Accidents and Deaths 
J . T. CARTER . PRES . B. L . JORDAN , SECTY . W . A . JORDAN , ASST . SECTY . TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO B TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CON ­
DUCTE D B Y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS ; JESSI E REDMO N FAUSET , LITERAR Y EDITOR ; 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINES S MANAGER . 
Vol. 23-No. 2 DECEMBER , 1921 Whol e No . 134 
PICTURES Page 
COVER . REPRODUCTIO N O F TH E PLAQU E "TH E THRE E KINGS. " By 
Met a Warric k Fuller. 
CELEBRATIN G TH E BIRT H O F DESSALINE S IN HAIT I 61 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 79 
ARTICLES 
BUYER S O F DREAMS . A Story. Ethe l M . Caution 59 
WHA T EUROP E THOUGH T O F TH E PAN-AFRICA N CONGRESS . Jessie 
Fauset 60 
PAN-AFRICA N DELEGATE S 68 
TH E INTERNATIONA L BUREA U O F LABO R O F TH E LEAGU E O F NA ­
TION S 69 
TH E ARKANSA S PEON S 72 
KUTTAN , TH E SOUL . A Poem. Corali e Howar d Hama n 76 
TH E VIRGI N O F GUADALUPE . Langston Hughes 77 
DEPARTMENTS 
OPINIO N 53 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D 
PEOPL E 71 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 77 
TH E HORIZO N 80 
THE CRISIS FOR 1922 W e plan striking fiction of Negro life, stories with pictures of Negro economic development, 
studies of present conditions in America , the West Indies and Africa . 
FIFTEE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Th e date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entere d as second class matte r Novembe r 2, 1910, at the post office at Ne w York , Ne w 
York , unde r the Ac t of Marc h 3, 1879. 50 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it it young in history, the Institution feel s a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Sciences The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
TER M OPENED SEPTEMBER 21, 1920 
For farther information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manua l Training & Industrial School 
FO R COLORE D YOUT H 
BORDENTOWN , N . J . 
A high Institution for the training of colored 
youth. Excellent equipment, thorough Instruction, 
wholesome surroundings. Academic training, tor nil 
students. 
Courses In carpentry, agriculture and trades for boys. 
Including auto repairing. 
Courses In domestic science and domestic art for 
girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and modernly 
equipped. 
Terms reasonable. 
Fall term opens September 15, 1921. 
For Information address 
W . R . VALENTINE , Principal 
Wiley University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana. Arkansas and Okla ­
homa State Boards of Education. Har ­
vard, Boston University, University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented on its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session igio-ig20. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W . DOGAN , Presiden t 
LINCOLN UNIVERSITY 
Pioneer in Collegiate and 
Theological Education 
Lincoln Me n are Leader s in the various 
professions in Fort y States. 
Th e College is ranked in Class I. by the 
America n Medica l Association. 
Address: 
Joh n B. Kendall , D.D., Lincol n University , 
Cheste r County , Penna . 
Cheyney Training School For 
Teachers 
Cheyney, Pa. 
Mad e i n 1920 an accredited SUt e Norma l School, 
offering, in addition to the regular Norma l Cours e of 
two years, professional three year courses i n Hom e 
Economics and Shop Work . A diploma from any of 
these courses make a graduate eligible to teach in 
the public schools of Pennsylvania. A three-year 
Hig h School. Cours e is offered to all who have completed the eighth grammar grade. 
Sena application not, for fall term opening September 
20th, 1921. 
Fo r further particulars and catalog, write 
LESLIE PINCKNEY HILL, Principal, 
Cheyney, Pa . 
THERE WILL BE NO SUMMER SCHOOL FOR 1921 
Mention T n Cunt . TH E 51 CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. Th e courses of study include Hig h School, 
Normal School and College. Special emphasis 
is laid upon the training of teachers. Students 
come from all parts of the South. Graduates 
have a fine record for successful work. 
Fo r further information address 
President Edwar d T. War e Atlanta , Ga . 
KNOXVILL E COLLEG E Beautifu l Situation. Healthfu l Location , 
Best Mora l and Spiritua l Environment. 
Splendid Intellectua l Atmosphere . 
Noted for Honest and Thoroug h Work . 
Institution offers ful l courses in the following departments. College , Normal , Hig h 
School, Gramma r School, Domesti c Science, 
Nurs e Trainin g and Industrial . 
Good water , steam heat, electri c lights, 
natura l drainage , splendid dormitories. Ex ­
penses very reasonable . 
Winte r Ter m Begin s Decembe r 7, 1921 
Fo r catalog and othe r informatio n address 
PRESIDEN T J . KELL Y G1FFE N Knoxville , Tenit. 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1921 ATLANTA , GEORGIA 
Over 100 acres of beautiful campus. Twelve buildings 
with new $150,000 administration building with modem 
chapel, gymnasium and laboratories ready for use In 
September. Strong faculty—Religious atmosphere—Athletics—Co-educational. Admission only by application. 
RE-ARRANGE D COURSES OF STUDY 
Junior High School—7th and 8th Grades and 1st and 
2nd years' Hig h School Courses, with certificate. 
Junior College—3rd and 4th Tea r Hig h School with 
Freshman and Sophomore years of College work, with 
Diploma. 
College—Four years above Hig h School, or two years 
above Junior College Course, with degree of A.B . 
Domestic Science—Commerce—Normal— 
Pre-medlca l Course 
53rd year of nine months opens September 21, 1921. 
$150.00 per year pays tuition, board room and laundry 
HARRY ANDREWS KING. President 
The Florida Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Natha n B . Young , President 
Tallahasee , Florid a 
SIMMONS UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. Founded 1879. 
The only Institution In the State hirin g for Ite "Wee ' 
Collegiate, Ministerial. Medical, and Lega l training for Colored citizens In Kentucky. 
Special training In Insurance. Socia l Service. Nursin g and 
Hospital Work. „,__ , _ 
Normal. Commercial. Music . Domestic Science. Missionary 
training clav . _ _ ^ . 
Droning cluees, correspondence course. Degrees offered 
Presiden t C . H . Parris h 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerl y Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA . 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
A n institution famous within recent yea n 
tor its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C. A. , 
athletics, all live features. 
Fo r information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
Hig h standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. Fo r literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CBABLOTTC . N . C . 
Biddl e University, operated under the auaploea of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, baa four Departments—High School. Arts and Sciences, Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course is the requirement for entrance to the first year 
of the Hig h School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the 
scientific, German Is substiiu'ed for Greek or Latin . 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class la 
15 units of Hig h School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first Is purely English, 
Greek and Hebrew are taught i n the others. 
Al l students i n the Hig h School Dept. are required 
to take trades i n the Industrial Dept. 
For further Information, address 
President H . L. McCrerey. 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University Atlanta, Ga . 
Co-Educational 
Th e largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christion influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Hig h School, No r 
mal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Sewing, 
Printing and Tailoring. 
Fo r further information address 
JOH N H . LEWIS , President 
BISHOP J . S. FLIPPER , Chairmen Trustee Board 
Mention THE CRISIS. 52 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
rounde d 1899 Incorporated 1904 
BEREA N 
Manual Training and 
Industrial School 
(Non-Sectarian) 
S. College Ave . & N . 19th St. 
Philadelphia , Pa . 
Winte r Ter m Openin g Januar y 3, 1922 
DA Y AN D NIGH T SESSION S 
Write for Bulletin to the Principal 
MATTHE W ANDERSON , D.D . 
1926 S. College Avenue , Philadelphia , Pa . 
Talladega College 
Talladega, Alabama 
Founded in 1867 for the Education of 
Negro Leade n 
Beautiful an d Healthfu l Location . 
Literary , Scientific, Educational , Social Service, Theological, Musical, 
Business Administration. Journalism, 
Nurs e Trainin g Courses. 
Hig h Standard s of Christia n Man ­
hoo d and Womanhood . 
Fo r furthe r informatio n address 
F . A . SUMNER , President 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FO R YOU R GIRL " 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona , Fla . 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary , Grammar , High , Normal , Vocational. 
Nurs e Trainin g at McLeo d Hospital a specialty. Term s reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNF , - - Principal. 
Roger Williams University,Nashville,Tenn. 
FOUNDE D 1866 LOCATIO N IDEA L 
ROGE R WILLIAM S UNIVERSIT Y is the 
largest institution in the Southland built, 
owned and operated by Negroes. It offers 
courses in the Libera l Arts College, Normal, 
Academic and Musical departments. Athletics 
is one of its strong features. 
Perhaps no scene in and around Nashville 
is more beautiful than that of Roge r Williams 
University. It stands upon the lofty banks 
of the Cumberland Rive r in sight of the government's lock and dam. Th e roaring waters 
as they fall over the dam in their onward march 
to the sea lend enchantment to the scene. 
FALL TERM BEGINS SEPT. 19, 1921 
Fo r Catalo g and Information "Write 
SAMUE L A . OWEN , Presiden t 
JOSEPH K. BRICK AGRICULTURAL 
INDUSTRIAL and NORMA L SCHOOL 
BRICKS, N . C. 
This School offers a first-class High School 
Course, including Domestic Science, Domestic 
Art, Agriculture, Wor k in Wood, Iron and 
Mechanical Drawing, Piano and Vocal Music , 
Night School. 
Teachers and officers, 25; enrollment, 350; 
boarders, 220. Cottage and buildings, 84. 
School farm, 1,129J4 acres. Strong athletic, 
literary and Christian associations. School term 
34 weeks. Environment fine. School receives 
four mails a day. Ou r postoffice handles money 
orders, registered matter and parcel post mail. 
For further information write 
T . S. INBORDEN , Principal , BRICKS , N . C. 
VIRGINIA UNION UNIVERSITY 
(Richmond , Va.) 
In addition to regular hiirh school, college, premedical and theological courses, now offers an especially arranged course in connection with the school 
of Social Work and Publi c Health of this city. 
This course wil l lead to a decree- Fo r particulars 
address The President. 
COLEMA N COLLEG E 
GIBSLAND . LA . 
Supported by Baptist Stat e Woman' , Home 
Mission Society of Chicag o and Boston and 
A . B . H . Society of Ne w York . Student! 
fro m tlx different states. Graduate s exempted on tin t grade by Louisiana . Arkansa s 
and Oklahoma . 
O. L. COLEMAN , President 
ST. MARY' S SCHOOL A n Episcopa l boardin g school fo r girls, unde r the 
direction of the sisters of St. Man- . Address: TH E 
SISTER-IN-CHARGE , 61SS Germantow n Avenue , 
Philadelphia , Pa . 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau Wil l Hel p Yo u Get a Better Payin g Position. 
Register NO W SEASONABL E TEEM S 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Bo x St, Wilberforce , 0 . 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New Yor k 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Cours e of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincoln Hospital and Home 
New York, N.Y . 
Mention THE CRISIS. TH E CRISIS 
Vol . 23. No . 2 DECEMBER , 1921 Whol e No . 134 
Opinion 
of W. E. B. DuBois 
PRESIDEN T HARDIN G AN D SOCIA L 
EQUALIT Y 
FOR fifty years we who, pro 
and con, have discussed the 
Negro Problem, have been 
skulking behind a phrase— 
"Social Equality. " Today President 
Harding's speech, like sudden thunder in blue skies, ends the hiding and 
drives us all into the clear light of 
truth. 
We had our excuses perhaps in the 
past: about every problem of human 
relations lurks a penumbra of shadowing possibilities, which we would 
not discuss. It seems unnecessary, 
inappropriate, beside the point. An d 
so defenders of the higher training 
of women have hestitated to explore 
sex freedom for females; and lovers 
of democracy have declined to consider the possibility of the masses voting their own wages. It is not that 
we have denied the ensuing problems 
that shadow our main object, but we 
have said with a certain truth: sufficient unto the present tangle is the 
obvious evil thereof. Le t us follow 
the clear light and afterward turn to 
other darknesses. 
But sometimes this becomes suddenly impossible. Sometimes the soconsidered minor problem is so tremendous and insistent that it leaps 
to the fore and demands examination 
and honest facing. This is particularly so when we have not simply ignored the problem but have deliberately and cynically lied about it, denied it, and said not that "Social 
Equality" was not a pertinent and 
pressing problem; but rather that it 
was no problem at all. 
The Birmingham Speech 
AND now comes President 
Harding's Birmingham speech when 
unwittingly or deliberately the 
President brings the crisis. We may no 
longer dodge nor hesitate. We must 
all, black or white, Northerner or 
Southerner, stand in the light and 
speak plain words. 
The President must not for a moment be blamed because, when invited to the semi-centennial of a great 
southern city of industry, he talked 
of the Negro instead of the results 
of profitable mining. There is but 
one subject in the South. The 
Southerners themselves can speak no other, 
think no other, act no other. The 
eternal and inevitable southern topic 
is and has been and will be the Black 
Man . 
Moreover, the President laid down 
three theses with which no American 
can disagree without a degree of selfstultification almost inconceivable, 
namely: 
1. The Negro must vote on the 
same terms that white folk vote. 
2. The Negro must be educated. 
3. The Negro must have economic 
Justice. 
The sensitive may note that the 
President qualified these demands 
somewhat, even dangerously, and yet 
they stand out so clearly in his speech 
that he must be credited with meaning to give them their real significance. An d in this the President 
53 54 TH E CRISIS 
made a braver, clearer utterance 
than Theodore Roosevelt ever dared 
to make or than William Taft or 
William McKinley ever dreamed of. For 
this let us give him every ounce of 
credit he deserves. 
Social Equality 
BUT President Hardin g did not 
stop here. Indeed he did not begin here. Eithe r because he had no 
adequate view of the end of the fatal 
path he was treading or because, in 
his desire to placate the white South, 
he was careless of consequences, he 
put first on his program of racial settlement a statement which could have 
been understood and was understood 
and we fear was intended to be understood to pledge the nation, the 
Negro race and the world to a doctrine so utterly inadmissible in the 
twentieth century, in a Republic of 
free citizens and in an age of Humanity that one stands aghast at the motives and the reasons for the pronouncement. 
It may to some seem that this statement is overdrawn. Some puzzled 
persons may say: but Negroes themselves have told me that they repudiate "Social Equality" and amalgamation of race; in fact, right there at 
Birmingham, Negro applause of the 
President was audible. 
Al l this does not minimize—rather 
it emphasizes the grave crisis precipitated by the President's speech. It 
emphasizes the fact of our mental 
skulking or transparent and deliberate dishonesty in dealing with the 
Negro. 
Social equality may mean two 
things. The obvious and clear meaning is the right of a human being to 
accept companionship with his fellow on terms of equal and reciprocal 
courtesy. In this sense the term is 
understood and defended by modern 
men. It has not been denied by any 
civilized man since the French 
Revolution. It is the foundation of democracy and to bring it into being, 
the world went through revolution, 
war, murder and hell. 
But there is another narrow, stilted and unreal meaning, that is sometimes dragged from these words, 
namely: Social Equality is the right 
to demand private social companionship with another. 
Or to put it more simply : the real 
meaning of "social equality" is eligibility to association with men, and 
the forced and illogical meaning is 
the right to demand private association with any particular person. 
Such a demand as the latter is idiotic 
and was never made by any sane 
person ; while on the contrary, for any 
person to admit that his character is 
such that he is physically and morally unfit to talk or travel or eat with 
his fellow-men, or that he has no desire to associate wit h decent people, 
would be an admission which none 
but a leper, a crimina l or a lia r could 
possibly make. It is the very essence 
of self respect and human equality 
and it carries with it no jot of arrogance or assumption—it is simply 
Homo Sum. 
Self-Deception 
DESPIT E this, for fifty years the 
Southern white man has said to 
the Negro : Do you mean to say that 
you consider yourself fit to associate 
with white people? An d the Negro 
has answered ; but the question which 
he answered was not the one asked, 
but rather the other totally different 
question: Do you mean to say that 
you want to force your friendship 
and company on persons who do not 
want them? The answer to this is 
obviously an emphatic and indignant 
No. But when the Negro said No, 
he knew that he was not answering 
the question the white man intended 
to ask and the white man knew that 
the Negro knew this, and that he himself had purposely asked a question 
of double and irreconcilable meaning, 
when he said, "Do you want Social 
Equality? " OPINIO N 55 
An d so this undeceiving deception 
has gone on for fifty years until the 
President of the United States, 
throwing caution to the winds, has 
either boldly or unwittingly announced as a national policy that 
"men of both races may well stand 
uncompromisingly against every suggestion of Social Equality. " 
Or in other words, that no man, no 
matter how civilized, decent or gifted 
he may be, shall be permitted to associate with his fellow men on terms 
of equality or want to associate with 
them, if he be a Negro or of Negro 
descent. 
Let us sweep away all quibbling: 
Let us assume that the President 
was sane and serious and could not 
and did not mean by "social equality" 
anything so inconceivable as the right 
of a man to invite himself to another man's dinner table. No. Mr . 
Harding meant that the American 
Negro must acknowledge that it was 
a wrong and a disgrace for Booker 
T. Washington to dine with 
President Roosevelt! 
The answer to this inconceivably 
dangerous and undemocratic demand 
must come with the unanimous rin g 
of 12 million voices, enforced by the 
voice of every American who believes 
in Humanity. 
Let us henceforward frankly admit that which we hitherto have always known ; that no system of social 
uplift which begins by denying the 
manhood of a man can end by giving 
him a free ballot, a real education 
and a just wage. 
Race Equality 
LET us confess that the pseudoscience to which the President 
unhappily referred as authority, and 
the guilty philanthropy which has 
greedily levelled racial barriers and 
now seeks wit h the bloodstained 
hands of a Lugar d to rearrange 
them so that profit may emerge and 
manhood be dammed—let us confess 
that all this is vain, wrong and hypocritical and that every honest soul 
today who seeks peace, disarmament 
and the uplift of all men must say 
with the Pan-African Congress: 
"The absolute equality of races,— 
physical, political and social— is the 
founding stone of world peace and 
human advancement. No one denies 
great differences of gift, capacity and 
attainment among individuals of all 
races, but the voice of science, religion 
and practical politics is one in denying the God-appointed existence of 
superior races, or of races naturally 
and inevitably and eternally inferior." 
To deny this fact is to throw open 
the door of the world to a future of 
hatred, war and murder such as never 
yet has staggered a bowed and crucified humanity. How can a man bring 
himself to conceive that the majority 
of mankind—Chinese, Japanese, Indians and Negroes are going to stand 
up and acknowledge to the world that 
they are unfit to be men or to associate with men, when they know they 
are men? 
Amalgamation 
BUT President Hardin g does not 
stop even here. He declares 
'Racia l amalgamation there cannot 
be." 
What does the President mean? 
Does he mean that the White and 
Negro races in this land never have 
mixed? There are by census reports 
over two million acknowledged mulattoes in the United States today; 
and without doubt there are, in fact, 
no less than four million persons with 
white and Negro blood. 
Does he mean that there is no amalgamation today? Between 1850 and 
1921 the mulattoes have increased 
over 400 per cent. Does he mean 
there will be no future amalgamation? How does he know? 
Or does he mean that it would be 
better for Whites and Blacks not to 
amalgamate? If he meant that, why 
did he not say so plainly? An d if he 56 TH E CRISI S 
had said so, 99 per cent of the 
Negroes would agree with him. We 
have not asked amalgamation; we 
have resisted it. It has been forced 
on us by brute strength, ignorance, 
poverty, degradation and fraud. It is 
the white race, roaming the world, 
that has left its trail of bastards and 
outraged women and then raised holy 
hands to heaven and deplored "race 
mixture." No, we are not demanding and do not want amalgamation, 
but the reasons are ours and not 
yours. It is not because we are unworthy of intermarriage — either 
physically or mentally or morally. It 
is not because the mingling of races 
has not and wil l not bring mighty 
offspring in its Dumas and Pushkin 
and Coleridge-Taylor and Booker 
Washington. It is because no real 
men accept any alliance except on 
terms of absolute equal regard and 
because we are abundantly satisfied 
with our own race and blood. An d 
at the same time we say and as free 
men must say that whenever two human beings of any nation or race desire each other in marriage, the denial of their legal right to marry is 
not simply wrong—it is lewd. 
Segregation and Race Pride 
AND this brings us to the last 
word of President Harding : He 
says in one breath: 
Especiall y would 
I appeal to the self 
respect of the colored race. I would 
inculcat e i n it the 
wis h to improve itself as a distinct 
race wit h a heredity, 
a set of traditions, 
a n arra y of aspira ­
tions all its own. 
Out of such racia l 
ambitions and pride 
wil l come natura l 
segregations. 
The one thin g we 
must sedulously 
avoid is the development of group and 
class organizations 
i n this country. 
Ther e has been a 
time when we heard 
too much about the 
labor vote, the business vote, the Iris h 
vote, the Scandinavia n vote, the Italia n 
vote, and so on. Bu t 
the demagogues who 
would arra y class 
against class and 
group against group 
have fortunately 
found littl e to rewar d their efforts. 
Is the President calling himself a 
demagogue? Does he not realize the 
logical contradictions of his thought? 
Can he not see his failure to recognize the Universa l in the Particular, 
the menace of all group exclusiveness 
and segregation in the forced segregation of America n Negroes? Can 
he not in this day of days wit h foreigners of every race flocking to 
Washington and the eyes of a bloodweary world strained after them—• 
can he not realize the vast, the 
awful implications of this appeal 
to the Frankenstein of race exclusiveness — that hateful thing which 
has murdered peace and culture and 
nations ? Does he not hear the answer 
that leaps to our lips? Fo r when 
Warre n Hardin g or any white man 
comes to teach Negroes pride of race, 
we answer that our pride is our business and not theirs, and a thing they 
would better fear rather than evoke: 
Fo r the day that Black men love Black 
men simply because they are Black, 
is the day they wil l hate White men 
simply because they are White. 
An d then, God help us all! 
CHAMOUNI X 
I HAVE seen the League of 
Nations, the Federation of the 
World , sitting in a little upper 
room and stared at by reporters, amidst streams of hopes and 
fears and of intrigues. Afte r that I 
came to Chamounix—to cow bells 
and silence and trickle of waters. 
Above this world-on-end, lies the vast 
Thin g of Snow,—silent, tremendous, 
a world apart, remembered and forgotten ; a place of lights and shadows, 
unknown to earth. An d of mists. I 
think the real marriage of earth and 
stars lies somehow in these mists. 
There is every preparation for it : 
the calm and pretty valley wit h its 
cows, wit h its homes, its little intrigues and tragedies, its laughter 
and flowers. Then gradually and 
gravely uplifted, the pointing pines; 
the fingers of the sullen, steadfast OPINION 5 7 
pines, pointing, always pointing. 
And then a space of lichen, leaf and 
brown gorse; and then a wide grey 
pause of utter rock, weirdly a waste, 
grim in its sense of age and strength. 
After that the snows, the white and 
blue and golden snows with their 
feet drabbled in the earth. 
What more fitting approach to the 
stars, to the thoughts that lie beyond 
the world, enchained and hallowed? 
One sees this mirage of earth and 
skies as a mist, a grey and white uncertainty, where line and point drift, 
merge and dissolve into something 
that is just cloud and sky. 
Last night in the rift of the world 
formed by the serried snow-broidered edge of the Alps, I saw the moon 
sailing in seas of sounds and tints 
of tawny green and hurrying waters; 
without the narrow rift, lifted their 
heads, snows of clouds and clouds of 
snows, mountains real and mountains spiritual, clouds of mountains 
and mountains of clouds, until the 
world, the great soiled world, was a 
thing so beautiful, so rare, so still 
and sweet that life seemed all love 
and wonder. I could almost hear the 
sound of stars raining down upon 
Mont Blanc: the mist of the rain was 
moon shine there on the dim White 
Mountain, and the song of the sound 
of it was as the voice of death calling 
to the victorious. It was like white 
age above the brutal strength of 
youth; it was sweet childhood which 
is always apart and beyond the scarred and moaning world. How singular 
is this ceaseless sound of waters, the 
dripping and dropping of snows, the 
roar of fallen mists, the dashing of 
clouds in the slow, grey and crumpled 
rivers of riven ice. And yet against 
the voice of the waters is the voice 
of the mountain; it is the mountain 
audible, the song of snows, the color 
of space, the feeling of things without end. The mountain is unmoveable; day and day, night after night 
we have flown and whirled about it, 
changed to city after city and ridden 
over hill and dale, resting and running, yet the mountain is always 
there, pale and calm and motionless, 
curiously eternal. 
If I lived here long I should pray 
to Mont Blanc, throwing my hands 
in ecstacy, screaming my tears. I 
should heap fire against it and vow 
gold and jewels. It should be God. 
For what else can God be but a 
Mountain or the Sea? 
In that transforming miracle of 
the mountain and the mist there is 
always sinking to earth some solemn 58 THE
singing as of things and of thoughts 
that rise above, beyond and athwart 
the heavy tongued earth and melt to 
something vaster and truer. It is 
midnight in the valley. I cannot 
sleep, for the mountain never sleeps 
and the moon tonight is widely 
awake. I sit and scribble and then 
ever and again creep to my window. 
The marvel of it, the sheer, inhuman 
perfectness of it all, the almost pain 
of its beauty and hurt of its joy! It 
is there still in the morning. The 
White Wraith has melted into the sky, 
throwing earthwards one long pale 
finger. Its feet are at the founding 
stones of the universe and its head 
is lost with the stars. Its thoughts 
are the thoughts of God. The world 
is grey and black with purple interludes. The waters wail. At last the 
long shaft dies there from the topmost shoulder of the mighty hill and 
with its death the mist drops nearer 
to the black and burning earth. And 
always the pines point upward. 
THE SERMON IN THE CRADLE 
NOW when Jesus was born in 
Benin of Nigeria in the days 
of English rule, behold, there 
1 came wise men from the 
East to London. 
Saying, Where is he that is born 
King of the Blacks? For we have 
seen his star in the east, and are 
come to worship him. 
When the Prime Minister had 
heard these things, he was troubled, 
and all England with him. 
And when he had gathered all the 
chief priests and scholars of the land 
together, he demanded of them 
where this new Christ should be 
born. 
And they said unto him, in Benin 
of Nigeria: for thus it was written 
by the prophet: 
And thou Benin, in the land of 
Nigeria, art not the least among the 
princes of Africa: for out of thee 
shall come a Governor, that shall 
rule my Negro people. 
 CRISIS 
Then the Prime Minister, when 
he had privily called the wise men, 
inquired of them diligently what 
time the star appeared. 
And he sent them to Benin, and 
said, "Go and search diligently for 
the young child; and when ye have 
found him, bring me word again, 
that I may come and worship him 
also." 
When they had heard the Premier, 
they departed; and lo, the star, which 
they saw in the east, went before 
them, till it came and stood over 
where the young child was. 
When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy. 
And when they were come into the 
house, they saw the young child with 
Mary his mother, and fell down, and 
worshipped him: and when they had 
opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts: gold and 
medicine and perfume. 
And being warned of God in . a 
dream that they should not return 
to England, they departed into their 
own country another way. 
Save one, and he was black. And 
his own country was the country 
where he was; so the black Wise 
Man lingered by the cradle and the 
new-born babe. 
The perfume of his gift rose and 
filled the house until through it and 
afar came the dim form of years and 
multitudes. And the child, seeing 
the multitudes, opened his mouth and 
taught them, saying: 
Blessed are poor folks for they 
shall go to heaven. 
Blessed are sad folks for someone 
will bring them joy. 
Blessed are they that submit to 
hurts for they shall sometime own 
the world. 
Blessed are they that truly want 
to do right for they shall get their 
wish. 
Blessed are those who do not seek 
revenge for vengeance will not seek 
them. BUYERS OF DREAM S 59 
Blessed are the pure for they shall 
see God. 
Blessed are those who will not 
fight for they are God's children. 
Blessed are those whom people like 
to injure for they shall sometime be 
happy. 
Blessed are you, Black Folk, when 
men make fun of you and mob you 
and lie about you. Never mind and 
be glad for your day will surely 
come. 
Always the world has ridiculed its 
better souls. 
TO THE PAN-AFRICAN CONGRESS 
{Address delivered by M. Jean 
Baugniet, in the name of the 
International Confederation of Students 
at Brussels, Belgium, Sept. 2, 1921.) 
THE International 
Confederation of Students would not 
want the second Pan-African 
Congress to close without extending fraternal greetings to the 
organizers and members of the 
Congress in session here. 
It therefore takes this opportunity 
to express at this meeting its most 
sincere sympathy for the intelligentsia of the Negro race. At a moment, and in a day when millions of 
Negroes are collaborating beyond 
the Atlantic and beyond the Sahara 
on the things of the mind, it is no 
longer possible to ignore them or to 
leave them ignored. We believe that 
one of the most sacred duties of the 
youth of our day is to assemble, regardless of prejudice of race or color, 
the intellectual forces of all nations 
in the hope of advancing toward a 
better future. 
So it is with hearts of ardent 
hopefulness that we today greet 
Negro students and their leaders 
from across the sea. If their desire 
to know us is as strong as ours to 
know them, we shall assuredly succeed in evolving a mutually beneficial 
understanding. Negro brothers, the 
International Confederation of 
Students extends to you its heartfelt 
sympathy. 
BUYERS OF DREAMS 
A Story 
ETHE L M . CAUTIO N 
SPRIN G and Summer had passed with 
their promise and visions of life. Now 
came Autumn—glorious fulfillment. She 
painted her pathway with reds, and golds, 
and browns. Boughs that had once been 
showers of pink petals were now freighted 
with richly tinted fruits. Leaves to whom 
the wind had whispered shy little secrets 
covered the earth with their radiant hues, 
and as one trampled through them, the 
wonder and mystery crept up into one's 
very soul. If with Spring came restlessness 
and yearning, and with Summer thrills of 
experimenting, with Autumn came conviction and decision. 
At this season of the year the Seller of 
Dreams was always very busy with folks 
wanting various and sundry dreams. So 
today he busied himself polishing his cases 
and placing his wares to the best advantage 
for inspection by Youth, Beauty, and Age 
who would surely visit him. His whole 
shop was radiant and inviting with cleanness. 
And such dreams as he had!—marvelous 
things of costly price and others not so attractive and therefore to be bought for less. 
And because in the Autumn people usually 
paid highly for their purchases, the less 
expensive, ordinary little dreams were not 
given the place of honor. 
It was early in the morning. The shop had 
scarcely been open when in came a dashingyoung lady needing a dream. She looked 
the wares over very carefully and asked 
prices. One that was all shining and dazzling appealed to her but the price was 
rather more than she had thought of paying. 
"Here are some beautiful ones," said the 
shopkeeper. 
"Oh, those!" answered the girl in disgust. 60 THE CRISIS 
"Well, of course, they are not as gorgeous 
as the ones you like." 
The girl pondered and pursed her mouth 
and made little mental calculations on her 
fingers. Finally: 
"If you will agree, I will pay you what 
I have with me now and you can put the 
dream aside. I will come with the rest 
later. Wil l that be all right?" 
"Yes, I shall be glad to oblige you if you 
are sure that is the dream you wish." 
"Oh, but it is! Just see how it shines! 
Everyone will turn to look because it is so 
beautiful." 
She went away with a satisfied smile on 
her face. 
A few hours later another girl came in, 
dignified and impressive in air, and asked 
to see the dreams. 
The shopkeeper showed her the shiny 
beautiful ones; but she wanted something 
out of the ordinary, something that everyone didn't have. So he showed her some 
that were very unique, even peculiar. 
"That's what I am looking for. I want 
a dream that will make me stand out as 
one in a thousand. There can be lots of 
gorgeous dreams and many drab ones, but 
very few people would think of taking one 
like I want. That is why I want it." 
She paid for her dream and took it away. 
Then trade lagged until nearly closing 
time, when a very plain little girl came in 
and quietly closed the door. 
"What kind of dream would you like?" 
asked the keeper. 
"Oh, I'll look around and see." 
"I have some very lovely ones, but," eyeing her plain clothes, "they are very expensive." 
"It won't be a question of money. I have 
been saving and saving so that I would have 
enough for whatever dream I picked out." 
"Do you like this one?" picking out the 
most gaudy one he had. 
"No, no. That isn't a real dream. That 
is only a bubble. It costs a lot, but we 
can't always measure worth by cost. That 
dream is for the society butterfly. It means 
fine clothes, and expensive parties; late 
hours and breakfasts in bed; yachts and 
trips; perfume and paint; and in the end, 
emptiness and dissatisfaction." 
"Then, maybe you would like this one. 
I sold one today." 
"No, that is for the girl who wants a 
career. She wants a dream that means 
bringing the world to her feet for some 
wonderful bit of work she has cornered. 
She doesn't realize the emptiness of mere 
fame and of work done just for personal 
glory." 
The shopkeeper noticed the wistful twist 
in her smile and discovered that when she 
looked him full in the face, there were 
golden lights in her deep brown eyes. 
"I think I like that dream over there," 
she said, indicating a very inconspicuous 
one off in a corner. 
"That looks like a real dream and I am 
glad it is not very expensive, because more 
girls can buy one. Let me show you how 
beautiful it is." 
He handed it out to her and her eyes 
sparkled and there was a lilt in her voice 
as she held it up to the light and said: 
"This dream means comradeship, and 
love, home and happiness. Can you not 
see the beautiful babies in it? See their 
laughing eyes, and the dimples in their 
hands and plump little knees. See them 
wriggle their toes and reach their little 
hands to love and caress your face! I 
wouldn't pay a penny for your flashy 
dreams. A pin prick, and they are no more. 
Neither do I want your dream of a career 
to end my life in loneliness and emptiness 
and bitterness. This is a dream I shall 
buy. Love, babies, life! " 
And the shopkeeper decided that of the 
three, she had made the wisest choice. 
WHAT EUROPE THOUGHT OF THE PANAFRICAN CONGRESS 
JESSIE FAUSE T 
A CORRESPONDEN T of a New York 
newspaper speaks of the serious consideration which Europe gave to the sittings of the Second Pan-African Congress. 
Judging from the amount of publicity received from the leading journals of the CELEBRATIN G TH E BIRT H OF DESSALINE S I N HAIT I 
61 62 THE
world, this meeting impressed Europe in 
many ways. The London Christian World 
finds it most impressive in its personnel, its 
eloquence and its frankness: 
"There has been a small, but very significant, group of Africans in London during the week-end. They hailed from 
America and Africa, from Guiana and the West 
Indies, etc. They included barristers, journalists, medical men, ministers, merchants 
and university students, and their purpose 
was to bring together men of Negro blood 
for mutual acquaintance and counsel with 
a view to envisage the Negro problem of 
the world as a whole, and to lay plans for 
the raising of the African by strictly constitutional means. 
"Apart from representatives of a few 
missionary societies and other sympathizers, it was entirely a colored man's 
Congress. Every white man present must have 
been amazed at the revelation of power and 
ability. Of course, there was eloquence; 
that goes without saying when the speakers 
are Negroes. But most Europeans must 
have envied some of the speakers' command 
of lucid English. In certain instances it 
was only eloquence; but there was substance 
in most of the speeches and constructive 
suggestions in some. One could not fail to 
be impressed with the sense of potency and 
possibility. Friendliness was a marked feature. Most of those present had never met 
before, yet one cannot recall a Congress in 
which it was easier for a sheer outsider to 
feel at home. There was courtesy and goodfellowship on every hand. 
"The soul of the Congress was Dr. W. E . 
Burghardt DuBois, the author of the passionate and amazing book 'Darkwater.' 
"But Dr. DuBois is more than a personal 
force; he is significant of the new Negro. 
He does not tower as an isolated figure 
above his fellows. In the Congress there 
were men of eminence in many walks of 
life; a kind of Negro intelligentsia, all 
eager for the raising of their race. They 
were under no illusions with regard to 
Negroes. They freely criticized themselves, 
especially for their lack of cohesion. The 
impression grew on one that they were determined to make that sneer impossible for 
the future." 
The Aberdeen, Scotland, Free Press 
thinks such a congress inevitable: 
"The Pan-African Congress, which is 
 CRISIS 
meeting in London this week, is a significant sign of the times. The educated Negro 
has become vocal. He has tasted some of 
the fruit of the tree of knowledge, and has 
been asking himself questions — questions, 
some of which even the white man may find 
it difficult to answer. The upheaval created by the war has been world-wide, and 
the wave of political unrest which swept 
over Europe and led to the downfall of 
ancient dynasties has been threatening the 
framework of African Society as well. The 
black man's mind—like the white man's 
creeds and philosophies—has been sorely 
shaken by the war. As General Smuts 
says, he is losing faith in the white man, 
in the white man's education, and the white 
man's religion. The educated native has 
heard of the principle of "self-determination," and he is proceeding to apply it to 
his own case. He has heard of the League 
of Nations, and asks whether the Negro 
race is to be represented at the great 
Sanhedrin of the Tribes." 
The Paris Petit Parisien considers it extremely fitting that the Congress should be 
held in Rue Blanche (White Street). Pierre 
Bonardi writes: 
"These blacks who were holding their 
meetings in White Street gave the effect 
of a symbolism which was perfectly justified 
since the members of the Congress have 
taken upon themselves as their mission the 
establishment of an equality between the 
black race and the white race, an equality 
if not of color at least of values. This 
concern which they manifest proves, to 
start with, that the desired equality does 
not as yet exist, but the high personages 
who figure in this Congress gave proof by 
their very presence that some Africans have 
on the one hand attained to the very highest degree of civilization, and that they 
would like, on the other hand, to make it 
evident that the Negro race is very near 
the intellectual level of other races." 
According to the Paris Humanite, France 
had not suspected the existence of such a 
group of educated and thoughtful men and 
women of African descent: 
"The black and mulatto intelligentsia 
which the Congress revealed or permitted 
us to know better, showed by its very existence that the black race is not naturally 
or essentially an inferior race, and that it 
is not destined to remain so forever. PAN-AFRICAN CONGRESS 63 
"How can we consider inferior to white 
men these orators with their clear thought 
and their ready words; these audiences at 
once calm and attentive; these delegates, 
men and women representing strong organizations of tens, yes hundreds and thousands 
of members; that charming young woman 
who was the first colored aviatrix of 
America?" 
No less noted a personage than Sir Harry 
Johnston, African explorer and writer, remarks in the London Observer: 
"There has been meeting in London a 
Pan-African Congress, attended mainly by 
American Negroes or Americans with a 
greater or lesser degree of Negro blood in 
their composition. But there have also participated a few educated African Negroes 
and several men or women wholly of the 
white race. I, myself, had wished to be 
there to take part in one or two of the discussions and to meet old friends and acquaintances from America who were deeply 
interested in the growing, intensifying problems of the Negro race i n the United States 
and in Africa." 
The London African World shows that 
the spectators must have found the sessions 
well worth attending: 
"Throughout the Pan-African Congress' 
sessions in London it was very wisely 
steered. Its meetings became more interesting and better attended as they continued. Al l phases of Negro disability in 
Africa—West, East, North, and South— 
were touched. Extremes of speech were 
carefully tempered by succeeding speakers. 
These men all had something to say, and 
said it, for the most part excellently. Ideas 
for the future emerged. But always behind it all there was the resentment at the 
manner of treatment by the ruling white 
races whatever the Continent to which they 
belonged. 
"The impressions of the Congress that 
remain in one's mind are the intense love 
of country and race, the boundless enthusiasm, easily stirred into emotional display, 
the deep-rooted sense of grievance, the effective manner in which many of the speakers marshalled their arguments, and the 
merriment that so easily bubbled at some 
of the humorous flicks at the ideas of 
Europeans." 
Black men have something to contribute 
to the world thinks the London Challenge: 
"The Second Pan-African Congress, 
which has now concluded its sessions, is an 
event of the gravest import. The growth 
of a body of public opinion among peoples 
of Negro descent, broad enough to be called 
Pan-African, is one of the signs of the 
times, and while the leader of the Congress, 
Dr. DuBois, is miles removed from the inflated ambitions and swaggering attitude of 
Mr. Marcus Garvey, he, too, stands for the 
development of a black race-consciousness 
opposing itself in pride and defiance to the 
whites. The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People, of which 
Dr. DuBois is secretary, is a sane organization which has already gained considerable 
influence and succeeded in defending the 
black man's rights all over the world. The 
Association has a claim upon the sympathy and help of every Christian, not only in 
view of the terrible recrudescence of lynching and forced labor, but because the 
African race must be helped to make its valuable contribution to the world's life and 
thought." 
It is clear to the London Daily Graphic 
that these black men and women were proud 
of their cause: 
"They were so intensely in earnest, both 
the men and women, so absolutely convinced 
of the justice of their cause, their right to 
a citizen's franchise, to representation in 
the world's councils, to everything, in fact, 
that civilized. humanity offers to her sons, 
regardless of race, color and creed." 
The London Public Opinion feels that the 
race has found itself and calls the 
Congress : 
" A remarkable exhibition of race-consciousness and a revelation of the intellectual and moral development of the Negro." 
The purpose of the Pan-African Congress 
is defined by the Paris edition of the New 
York Herald: 
"The Pan-African Congress is not a 
scheme of migration either to Africa or 
elsewhere. It believes in the equality of 
men and races, but it seeks to realize this 
through education and opportunity and periodic conference. 
"The question of the status of the Negro 
in modern society, the leaders declare, is 
no longer a domestic problem of the United 
States, or a parochial problem of Jamaica, 64 THE
or a Colonial problem. It is rather a great 
world-wide problem to be viewed and considered as a whole." 
The Paris Petit Parisien elaborates a little: 
"To bring about the evolution of the 
black race which is scattered throughout 
the entire world, to obtain for it absolute 
equality with the white race from the political, social and economic standpoint by 
means of development resulting from the 
education and the instruction which the 
former is to receive from the latter, to 
make it co-operate closely with the white 
race—such are the main ideas of the new 
Pan-African Congress which opened its sessions yesterday in the Hall of Civil 
Engineers and which was presided over by M. 
Diagne, Deputy and High Commissioner of 
black troops in France." 
A note of selfish fear is sounded by the 
Paris Matin: 
"What is the goal of the Pan-African 
movement? 
"The liberation of the blacks. This is 
a legitimate goal and one which will be inevitably attained. It will be attained the 
moment that the men actually under the 
domination of the superior races will have 
learned how to know and to co-ordinate 
their own forces. 
"We have seen what has been taking 
place in Japan. We shall learn perhaps tomorrow of the transforming of China and 
later—it is almost a certainty there will be 
a transformation of Africa. But what we 
want is that this movement which we ourselves have helped to create will not turn 
against us. We are willing to help in an 
evolution which we ourselves have prepared, 
but we do not hold with being the victims 
of a revolution. 
"The Congress particularly desires that 
the problems raised by the contact of the 
black and white races be studied and made 
public." 
The Reuter Press Agency reports of the 
last Paris meeting in the Westminster 
Gazette: 
"The Congress concluded its sittings yesterday with the adoption of a document addressed to the world at large, in which the 
role of each of the colonizing Powers is examined. 
"The statement in question particularly 
 CRISIS 
insists on the necessity of recognizing the 
equality of the races from both the physical, 
political and social points of view, and of 
the constitution, among the colonizing 
Powers, under the aegis of the League of 
Nations, of an International Committee 
charged to study the problem raised by 
the evolution and protection of the Negro 
race." 
France at least realizes that black as well 
as white people are divided into groups of 
extremists, of conservatives, of harebrained schemers, of careful thinkers. The 
Paris Temps submits: 
"It is the claims of the wiser group 
which must be studied. As was perfectly 
natural they turned towards the League of 
Nations and asked it to establish in its 
bureau a permanent organization charged 
with working toward the liberation of black 
peoples and founded on the principle of 
equality of races. The League of Nations 
can't do otherwise than give them some 
semblance of satisfaction by establishing a 
commission to which shall be entrusted the 
study of the question. But it will be 
prevented by the prejudices of many 
from proclaiming equality of races as was 
the case at the Peace Conference when 
President Wilson absolutely refused to recognize it in the case of Japan. The road 
will be long for Negroes in the League of 
Nations toward the liberation, modest 
though it is, whose program they have elaborated in their Congress. But there is nothing to keep us French from putting into 
immediate practice in our colonies some 
articles at least of this program to start 
with. There is one to which we certainly 
have no objections since indeed we have 
already adopted it for a good many years 
back, namely 'the recognition of civilized 
men as civilized, regardless of their race 
or color.' 
"In the main the Negroes have asked us 
in their Congress to be treated as brothers, 
backward ones for the most part, to be instructed and to be urged toward a higher 
social level, with good will and with respect 
for their race so far as its natural rights 
and its peculiar characteristics are concerned. They ask our friendly aid for advance along a road to civilization. Such a 
request would never find the soul of our 
France hostile and we are unwilling to PAN-AFRICAN 65 
doubt that our Colonial ministers will not 
take time to go to Afric a to make some 
inquiries into the best methods of granting 
their requests, for our colonies are not only 
territories for mines, cattle, agricultural 
products, they are, in addition and above 
all, men without whom our colonies would 
soon be sterile wastes, and we must have 
these men not against us but for us, not 
constrained by force but allied by their 
hearts." 
To some the Congress is indicative of 
the approach of black rule. The English 
Manchester Dispatch observes mournfully: 
"The white races do not naturally look 
forward with joyful emotions to the day 
when a prolific black race will rule. We 
may salve our fears by pinning our faith 
to the mollifying effects of education, religion, and civilization, but the time may 
come when we shall have to submit ourselves to the tender mercies of our dusky 
conquerors. 
" A black leader observed in a speech the 
other day: 'We solemnly warn America 
that the patience of the colored peoples has 
its limits.' 
" A possible precaution might be found 
in the provision of a black Palestine, a 
home of their own, in one of the more promising lands of Africa. " 
The members of the Congress had to battle with the obstacle common to all international organizations—that of merging 
national differences into a racial blend. 
Pierre Bonardi notes in the Paris Petit 
Parisien: 
"Each of these Negroes represents a mentality which is not racial but which belongs 
to the particular milieu where he received 
his education. It will only be by conciliation and by the effacing of personalities 
that they will arrive at anything. If 
Negroes succeed in making one their different 
points of view, in effacing themselves in the 
interest of their brothers despite their 
personal ambitions, we shall have to admit 
that they will have given an unexpected 
example to the whites who even then will 
hardly be able to follow it. 
"The blacks of Afric a certainly have 
valuable defenders in their brothers who 
hail from the rest of the world. 
Everything that we have heard at these meetings 
proves it." 
 CONGRESS 
But there was unity, and, according to 
the London West Africa, that was the most 
significant feature of the Congress: 
"The fact that so many people could 
gather, at great expense, from remote 
places, and disregarding the point that they 
are nationals of this Power or that, could 
unite on the vital matter of common grievances alleged to be suffered solely on account of race, and could speak with such a 
sense of sincerity and responsibility, is a 
fact which cannot lightly be passed over. 
We make no pretense of agreeing with 
everything in the speeches and resolutions. 
Probably no single member of the gathering differs from us on that point. But, on 
the whole, the speakers impress one with a 
sense of their earnestness, their willingness 
to abide the issue if given equality of opportunity, and their resolve to work for 
civil and political freedom within the limits 
of the Constitutions of their countries." 
In Brussels indeed there was, however, a 
serious clash between American and British 
Negroes on the one hand, and French and 
Belgian Negroes on the other, with regard 
to the adoption of the resolutions which had 
been passed unanimously at London. The 
Americans and British gave in partly because there was a chance for the resolutions 
to come up again at the final session in 
Paris, but still more because they realized 
that unity between the different black 
groups was the supreme necessity of the 
organization. But the bad faith of the 
French presiding officer, M . Diagne, did 
not pass unnoticed. Says the London African World: 
"The reason of these strenuous American 
and British efforts to have the London 
declaration endorsed by the Brussels 
Congress was, unquestionably, 'the resentment 
at the manner of treatment by the ruling 
white races'—to quote an expression in 
your last week's 'Impressions of the 
Meetings at Westminster'—a resentment frequently ventilated during the Congress, and 
notably by Mr. DuBois. 
"After some three hours' fierce struggle 
concerning the refusal by Mr. Diagne 
(chairman of the Congress) to submit the 
London declaration to a vote of Congress, 
this distinguished Senegalese proposed the 
vote of the Otlet (Belgian) and of the de 
Magalhaes (Portuguese) motions, motions 66 THE
asking the creation in each colonial nation 
of an institution of scientific research, concerning the development of the Negroes, institutes of which the works should be centralized by an international body. 
"These motions voted by M . Diagne and 
his supporters were proclaimed by him, 
adopted by the Congress, whilst, in fact, 
this was not the case, the American and 
British Negroes (the majority of the 
Congress) not having voted for it." 
Sometimes a note was sounded which 
brought back a protest from white auditors. Brussels was peculiarly sensitive. 
Says L'Echo de la Bourse: 
" A Negro doctor, former deputy in the 
Portuguese Parliament, declared the policy 
of spoliation and of oppression must give 
way to a policy of co-operation. He declared also the right of the black race to 
rise as well as the others, a thing moreover which it was in process of doing, and, 
he added, since the colonies in the heart of 
Africa are not adapted to white civilization, it is in the interest of the whites to 
have healthy and well instructed workers 
there. It was necessary, he said, that colonization, which up to this time was carried 
on for the profit of the white man, should 
also be made profitable to the black man, 
and 'if you are not willing to co-operate in 
our advance, we shall advance just the 
same without you and in spite of you.' This 
was the one note of violence which was 
heard, but we must take account of the 
circumstances and must remember that the 
Portuguese Congo was one of the main 
countries where slaves were procured and 
that at this very moment they are still 
searching for laborers for San Thome, an 
island, which is a veritable charnel-house 
for Negroes." 
One striking instance of the growing 
feeling of kinship between all the dark 
races was that an East Indian (Mr. 
Varma) spoke in the interest of East 
Africa. The London African World reports: 
"Mr. Varma stated that the Africans of 
East Africa had delegated him to represent 
their grievances before the Colonial Office 
and any societies. On the basis that Europeans in Kenya had argued that to permit 
Indians to have the vote would be to injure 
the rights of the natives, he said that the 
Likipia reserve transfer, the eighty-four 
 CRISIS 
days' forced labor—which he called the 'back 
to slavery' policy—the suggested reduction 
of natives' wages from six rupees a month, 
the vote for education for the children of 
3,000,000 natives of one-fifth of the sum 
allocated to the children of 9,000 
Europeans, showed how Europeans safeguarded 
the rights of natives. If the Congress 
wanted to watch the interests of Africans 
in East Africa , he said, now was the time 
to do it." 
The American delegates, according to the 
Scottish Glasgow Herald, did not always 
confine themselves to the sufferings of 
American Negroes—there was also progress 
to be reported: 
"Miss Fauset, of Philadelphia, literary 
editor of TH E CRISIS, spoke on the subject 
of the colored women in America, who, she 
said, had been a great moving force behind 
all the movements for emancipation. 
Colored women had taken up social work in 
the great cities of America, and were rescuing many girls who came into the cities 
from other parts, and who, through their 
ignorance, might otherwise be exploited. 
Colored women were everywhere branching 
out into every field of activity in the professions and in business. She asked the 
African delegates to carry a message of 
friendship and encouragement to African 
women from the colored women of America." 
The London Times gives a very fair idea 
of the program in Brussels: 
"Mme. Curtis dealt with the state of affairs in Liberia. The president of the 
Congress, M. Diagne, pointed out the significance of the fact that Liberia is included 
among the signatories to the Treaty of 
Versailles. He declared that the Entente had 
specifically recognized the equality of the 
white and colored races by admitting a 
Negro representative to the negotiations. 
"M . Barthelemy, Deputy for Arras, laid 
stress upon the necessity for sending more 
doctors, teachers, and missionaries to the 
colonies, and fewer officials. Miss Fauset 
described the progress made in America by 
the establishment of schools for colored people. M. Panda, a delegate from the 
Belgian Congo, protested against the calumnies 
published in the German press concerning 
the black troops belonging to the Army of 
Occupation in Germany. PAN-AFRICAN CONGRESS 67 
"After the session had ended an 'African 
Room' for Colonial exhibits was opened in 
the World Palace." 
Al l the newspapers wrote at length on 
Dr. DuBois, who was generally recognized 
as the moving spirit of the Congress. The 
correspondent of the London Challenge 
writes: 
"The question that was most frequently 
asked by visitors to the Congress was 
whether Dr. DuBois agreed with the flamboyant and threatening 'All-Black' policy 
of Mr. Marcus Garvey. He told me that, 
while he was in accord with Garvey's main 
aspiration, he repudiated his methods, 
which, he thought, were lacking in plain 
sense, and he questioned the soundness of 
his financial enterprises." 
The Belgian Echo de la Bourse thinks 
General Smuts would choose his words carefully in the presence of the American leader: 
"Dr. DuBois, head of the American delegation, is an intellectual of mark. He gave 
us an exact account of the lamentable conditions throughout the world. 
"General Smuts would never dare declare 
in the presence of Dr. DuBois as he did in 
the presence of the London correspondent 
of the Belgian Star and of The Neptune, 
that we would do well to send our colonial 
officials to stay a while in South Afric a in 
order to learn how to treat black people. 
"Whether or not you like M . Burghardt 
DuBois, whether or not you agree with his 
program, you have to bow to his brilliant intellect and his devotion to the black race." 
Speaking of the resolutions drawn up by 
Dr. DuBois and presented at all three sittings of the Congress, Felicien Challaye, 
delegate from the Bureau International 
pour la Defense des Indigenes, says in Les 
Cahiers : 
"Such is the program developed by M . 
DuBois. It seems to me to take into account 
all the realities and all the possibilities, to 
present that mingling of realism and of 
idealism which characterizes great political 
thought." 
The Belgian Independance Beige apologizes for the indifference of the whites toward the affairs of the black world: 
"The session (of the Pan-African 
Congress) has caused no little surprise. It has 
even given rise to some erroneous interpretations. We know so little of the black 
world outside of that of the African colonial, in our political preoccupation, it holds 
certainly less place than that of the 
Mussulmans who are near at hand or that of 
the more distant Oriental. However 'geocentric' we may be in our conception of the 
physical world, we remain 'white centric' 
with regard to the human societies which 
live on our planet. 
" A parallel between the progress wrought 
since emancipation by the blacks of the 
United States and the serfs of Russia (liberated two years earlier) points to an advance more than twice as great on the part 
of the Negroes from the economic as well 
as the intellectual point of view and what 
has taken place in the United States has 
also taken place in the Antilles and in many 
a South American state." 
Even France, the much-vaunted friend 
of the blacks, is not entirely blameless. M . 
Challaye says frankly in Les Cahiers, which 
is the official organ of the "Societe Des 
Droits de L'Homme," the organization that 
freed Dreyfus: 
"It is true that a black elite is, in France, 
given equal treatment, but the mass of natives in the colonies of France as well as 
in those of the other powers is too often 
subjected to a regime of tyranny and of 
spoliation. I personally recalled to the 
Pan-African Congress the plight of the natives of the French Congo ever since the 
time the regime of the great concessionary 
companies had been imposed upon them." 
It is pleasant to realize that these delegates in the midst of their warfare for 
right and justice took advantage of this occasion to honor the dead. The London 
African World says of their stay in Paris: 
"Between the afternoon and evening sessions a wreath was placed by the delegates 
on the grave of the unknown French soldier buried under the Arch of Triumph—a 
beautiful and impressive ceremony." 
So the Second Pan-African Congress 
came to an impressive end. It made plain 
to the world not only what it thought of 
the members of its own race, but pretty 
plainly what it thought of the members of 
others. The London Punch points it out 
shrewdly: 
" 'NO ETERNALL Y INFERIOR RACES' 
"Headlines in The Times. 
"No, but in the opinion of our colored 
brothers, some infernally superior ones." 110 DELEGATES T O TH E PAN-AFRICAN 
CONGRESS BY COUNTRIES 
United States of America R. P. Sims, Bluefield, W . Va . 
West Virgini a Teachers' Association. H . A . Hunt, Fort Valley, Ga., 
Ga. Ass'n Advancement Negro Education. 
G. R. Hutto, Bainbridge, Ga., Knights of Pythias. 
Mrs. A . E. Hutto. 
P. F . Haynes, St. Joseph, Mo., 
Odd Fellows. Dr. Henry R. Butler, Atlanta, Ga., 
Ancient Free Masons. H . R. Butler, Jr., Atlanta, Ga., 
Mrs. Viol a Hart Felton, Americus, Ga., 
Eastern Star. Lydi a G. Brown, Washington, D. C , 
Dunbar High School. Florence Kelley, New York City, 
N. A . A . C. P. Rev. W . H . Jernagin, Washington, D. C. National Race Congress of America. Jessie Fauset, New Yor k City, 
Delta Sigma Theta Sorority. William S. Nelson, New York City, 
Omega Psi Ph i Fraternity. Dr. A . Wilberforce Williams, Chicago, 111., 
Chicago Defender Pub. Co. Bishop C. H . Phillips, Nashville, Tenn., 
C. M . E . Church. Bishop John Hurst, Baltimore, Md. , 
A . M . E . Church. Mrs. John Hurst. 
Dr. R. T. Brown, Birmingham, Ala. , 
C. M . E. Church. Dr. C. H . Phillips, Jr., St. Louis, Mo-, 
Missouri Negro Republican League Club. Mrs. C. H . Phillips, Jr. Mrs. H . R. Butler, Atlanta, Ga., 
Colored Parent-Teachers' Association. Miss Lavini a Black, New Yor k City. Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Spingarn, 
N . A . A . C. P . C. H , Tobias, New York City, International Committee, Y . M . C. A . 
Bishop Gary and Mrs. Gary, Chicago, 111., 
A . M . E . Church. 
Mrs. French, St. Louis, Mo . 
R. R. Wright, Jr., Philadelphia, Pa-, 
A . M . £ . Church. 
Capt. and Mrs. N . B. Marshall, 
Walter F . White, New Yor k City, 
N . A . A . C P . 
Dr. W . E. B. DuBuis, New Yor k City, 
N . A . A . C P . 
England 
Dr. John Alcindor and wife 
Alic e Werner 
George Lattimore 
Ruth Fisher 
Dr. F . Hoggan 
Robert Broadhurst 
Mrs. Fisher Unwi n 
J. R. Archer, ex-Mayor of Battersea 
Roland Hayes 
Rev. Mr . A . M . Chirgwin 
Rev. Mr. Frank Lenwood 
France 
Deputy Barthelemy 
Felicien Challaye 
Mrs. Ida Gibbs Hun t 
Senateur Aubert 
Dr. George Jackson 
Rayford Logan 
Mme. L . Chapoteau 
Mrs. Charles Youn g 
Belgium 
Paul Otlet 
General Gillain 
Jean Baugniet 
Senateur L a Fontaine 
Belgian Congo 
Paul Panda 
Members of Unio n Congolaise (18) 
Madame Sorolea 
Sierra Leone 
Mr . Sutton 
Dr. Ojo Olaribigbe 
Rev. Mr . E . G. Granville 
GROUPS REPRESENTE D A T TH E SECOND PAN-AFRICA N CONGRESS 
68 LEAGU E O F NATIONS 69 
Guadeloupe 
Gratien Candace 
Isaac Beton 
Abyssinia 
Dr. Vitellian 
India 
Mr. Saklatvala 
Mr. Judhava 
I, Ghous 
Portuguese Africa (6 provinces) 
Nicolas de Santos-Pinto, of the Liga Africana. 
Portugal 
Jose de Magalhaes, President of the Liga African 
Morocco 
Mr. Arnol d 
Spain 
General Luis Sorelas 
Denmark 
Edward F. Frazier 
Madagascar 
Jean Razaief 
Haiti 
Dantes Bellegarde 
Villius Gervais 
Grenada 
Albert Marryshow 
Jamaica 
Nathan S. Russell 
British Guiana 
Mr . Callender 
Southern Nigeria 
Ibidunni Morondipe Obadcnde 
Dr. Peter Thomas 
South Africa 
Mrs. Davis 
Mr . and Mrs. John L . Dube, representing Natal. 
Senegal 
Blaise Diagne 
Liberia 
Liberian Consul to Brussels 
Mrs. Helen Curtis 
East Africa 
Norman Leys 
Mr. Banda 
V. S. Varma 
Gold Coast 
J. Eldred Taylor 
W. T. Hutchinson 
Nigeria 
Rev. W . B. Mark 
Other persons were present from Swaziland, 
Jamaica, Martinique, French Congo, Trinidad, the 
Philippines and Liberia ; and in addition to these there 
were at least ] ,00 0 visitors. 
TH E INTERNATIONA L BUREAU OF LABOR 
OF TH E LEAGU E OF NATIONS 
Sir : 
I HAV E the honor to acknowledge the receipt of a copy of the address to the 
League of Nations, voted for by the 
Second Pan-African Congress, which met in 
London, Brussels an d Paris, the 28th, 29th 
and 31st of August an d the 2nd, 3rd , 5th 
and 6th of September, 1921, a copy whic h 
you were kin d enough to send me on the 
15th of last September through the 
International Bureau for the Defense of 
Natives. 
This address contains the followin g resolution whic h is of specia l interest to the 
Internationa l Burea u of Labor. "The second Pan-African Congress asks that in the 
International Bureau of Labor a section 
be set aside to deal particularly and in detail with the conditions and needs of native 
labor, especially in Africa and elsewhere. 
This Congress earnestly believes that the 
labor problems of the world can never be 
understood or completely solved so long as 
colored, and especially black, labor is enslaved and neglected. The Congress believes furthermore that the first step toward the emancipation of labor throughout the world would be the organization 
of a thorough investigation into native labor." 
1 learned of this resolution wit h the utmost interest because i t set before the In ­
ternationa l Burea u of Labo r the entir e 
problem of the protection of native laborers and especially of Negr o laborers. This 
matte r of protection indeed has been one 
of the principa l preoccupations of this in ­
stitution ever since its inception. 
Th e Internationa l Burea u of Labo r has 
alway s considered it its duty to protect la ­
borers withou t makin g any race distinction 
and indeed tha t its protection ought to extend especially to those men who are subjected to the most inhuma n conditions of 
labor, as is the case of a large numbe r of 
native peoples, particularl y of black peoples. Th e principl e of the equality of 
races i n the matte r of protection whic h it 
pretends to afford laborers is with the 
International Bureau of Labor a first principle. I n proof of this see the preamble and 
articl e 427 of part 13 of the Peace Treaty . 
Althoug h it is true tha t i n this matte r 
as i n man y others the Internationa l Burea u 
of Labo r can interfer e only wit h the greatest difficulty because of the difficulties presented by the ver y diversit y of the governin g nations, and although, i n general, it 
has no other weapon tha n recourse to publi c 
opinion, stil l the Internationa l Burea u of 
Labo r is not entirely withou t some means 
of protectin g native labor. 
Th e first of these is revealed i n articl e 70 TH E CRISIS 
421 of the Peace Treaty , the tenor of whic h 
is as follows: 
"Th e members promis e to put into prac ­
tice the agreements (covenants, articles, 
etc.) of whic h they shall have approved, 
conformably to the stipulations of the present part of the present treaty, to those of 
their colonies or possessions, and to those of 
their protectorates whic h have not complete self-government, wit h the followin g 
reservations: 
1. Tha t the agreement should not be rendered inapplicabl e by loca l conditions. 
2. Tha t the modifications necessary to 
adapt the agreement to loca l conditions 
shall be introduced into the latte r (the 
agreement). 
Eac h of the members wil l have to notify 
the Internationa l Burea u of Labo r of the 
decision whic h it proposes to make wit h regar d to each of its colonies or possessions 
or its protectorates whic h does not have 
complete self-government. " 
On tha t day six members ratified, completely or i n part, the Agreements of the 
Washingto n Conference, namely : Finland , 
Grea t Britain , Greece, India , Roumani a and 
Czecho-Slovaki a 
In accordance wit h articl e 408 of this 
same Treaty , the Internationa l Burea u of 
Labo r has sent to the Britis h government 
a formul a for an annua l report, invitin g it 
(the Britis h government) to make known 
the measures taken or envisaged by it fo r 
puttin g into execution one of the agreements whic h it had already ratified ... . 
Bu t native labor should be protected not 
only i n the colonies or protectorates of the 
nations possessing colonies, but also amon g 
the people who are to comply, according to 
the Peace Treaty , wit h the regime of the 
Mandates. 
Her e again the Internationa l Burea u of 
Labo r obtained throug h the organ of the 
Internationa l Burea u of Labor, through 
negotiations wit h the League of Nation s 
(a n account of whic h yo u wil l find i n the 
copy of the Official Bulleti n whic h I am 
sending wit h this letter), the righ t to be 
represented by an expert of its choosing i n 
the permanent Commission of Mandate s established by articl e 22 i n the Peace Treaty . 
Thanks to this representation, the 
International Bureau of Labor will have also 
under its jurisdictio n the whole ensemble 
of the laborin g world ; an d native peoples, 
even those suffering from the most inhuma n 
treatment, ma y have the certaint y of being 
protected. 
The resolution whic h yo u sent me shows 
that the second Pan-Africa n Congress has 
completely realized tha t the first step i n 
bringin g about the gradua l emancipatio n 
of native labo r is to keep publi c opinion in ­
formed by a meticulous system of presentatio n of the actua l conditions whic h control 
this labor at the present time , not only i n 
the colonies and protectorates of the 
European nations, but also in the territories 
placed according to the regime of the 
Mandates under the tutelage of the League of 
Nations. Th e resolution also points out the 
means of carryin g on this inquir y continuously, namely, the establishment in the 
International Bureau of Labor of a section 
whose specia l dut y shall be the detailed consideration of the conditions and needs of 
native laborers i n Afric a an d elsewhere. 
I am dwellin g on this interestin g suggestion al l the mor e because fo r some months 
past I myself have been tryin g to brin g i t 
to fruition . I have ha d to renounce this 
project temporaril y fo r lack of a sufficiently 
large personnel. Toda y re-established i n 
my intention throug h the resolution of the 
Pan-Africa n Congress, I am goin g to take 
up the idea agai n an d tr y i n the nea r future to establish a section of Nativ e Labor. 
Naturall y the budget at m y disposa l is still 
limite d an d the section cannot have at its 
inception a complete development. 
Nevertheless, I am sure that eventually I shall be 
able to extend its limits to meet the reall y 
considerable task whic h it wil l have to handle. A t present an official of the Scientific 
Divisio n is goin g to be charged wit h followin g up the conditions of native , and 
particularl y of Negr o labor. I wil l let you 
know at some futur e date the name of 
this official who furthermor e wil l be in ­
structed to establish relations between the 
Internationa l Burea u of Labo r and you on 
the one hand, and wit h the Internationa l 
Burea u fo r the Defense o f Aborigine s on 
the other. 
I shall take grea t pleasur e i n seeing these 
relations develop into a closely welded, reliable an d cordia l collaboratio n an d i t is i n 
that hope tha t I am extendin g to yo u the 
assurance of m y complete regard . 
ALBER T THOMAS . National Association for the 
Advancement of
A FEDERA L ANTI-LYNCHIN G BILL ! 
THE ten-year fight of the N . A . A . C. P. , 
fo r a Federa l Anti-lynchin g bill , has 
reached its most successful and most critica l 
point. O n October 20, the Committe e on 
the Judiciary of the House of 
Representatives reported out favorably the Dyer Antilynchin g bil l H . R. 13. This action was 
taken afte r the bil l ha d been amended an d 
approved by the Attorney-General , removin g some of the defects whic h migh t have 
caused i t to be attacke d on constitutiona l 
grounds after its passage. 
The fight has reached the stage where 
we must brin g to bea r every possible bit 
of pressur e on Congress as a whole and on 
individua l Congressmen to force action im ­
mediately and favorabl y on this necessary 
legislation. Th e Nationa l Office of the 
N . A . A . C. P. , throug h its fou r hundred 
branches and throug h other organizations, 
is seeking to have thousands of telegrams 
and letters pou r i n upon Congress to show 
the nationwid e sentiment behind the bill , 
which is demandin g its passage by Congress. 
Ever y Negr o i n Americ a and every whit e 
person who is opposed to the crime of lynch ­
in g should immediatel y send a telegram to 
his or he r representative . Letters are valu ­
able, but telegrams are mor e impressive . 
W e must let Congress kno w tha t the failur e 
to pass the Dye r bil l wil l be regarded as a 
betrayal. W e must let every representative 
i n Congress kno w tha t a vote against the 
Dye r bil l is a vote i n favo r of lynching . 
Ac t now! Send a telegram today! Urg e 
you r friends to do the same ! Be sure to 
mention the bil l by name and by number! 
Wit h our united strength we can cause the 
Dye r bil l to be made a la w and thus end 
mob rul e i n America ! 
As we go to press we hea r tha t Henr y 
Lincol n Johnso n and Perr y W . Howar d 
have drafte d amendments to the Dye r bil l 
whic h wil l rui n its effectiveness. Deman d 
the unamended Dye r bill. 
 Colored-People. 
ANNUA L MEETIN G 
THE Annual Meeting of the National 
Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People will be held in the East Room 
of the Sage Foundation , 130 East Twenty -
second Street, Ne w Yor k City , on the afternoon of Monday , Januar y 2, 1922, at two 
o'clock. Ther e wil l be reports from officers 
an d branches, and the nominations for directors wil l be voted upon. 
The Nominatin g Committe e for members 
of the Boar d of Directors of the Nationa l 
Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People reports these nominees for 
terms expirin g December 31, 1924: 
E . Burto n Ceruti , Esq. , Lo s Angeles, Cal . 
Mr . George W . Crawford , Ne w Haven , 
Conn . 
Bisho p Joh n Hurst , Baltimore , Md . 
Mr . Pau l Kennaday , Ne w Yor k City . 
Mr . Joseph Princ e Loud , Boston, Mass. 
Mrs. Ell a Rus h Murray , Catskill , N . Y . 
Dr . W . A . Sinclair, Philadelphia , Pa . 
Mr . Neva l H . Thomas, Washington , D . C. 
Mr . Charle s H . Studin , Ne w Yor k City . 
Rev . G . R. Waller, Springfield, Mass. 
Butle r R. Wilson , Esq. , Boston, Mass. 
The Nominatin g Committee : 
DR . V . MORTO N JONES , Chairman 
DR . GEORG E E . CANNON . 
MR . JOE L E . SPINGARN . 
TH E LIBELOUS FILM 
IT wil l be remembered tha t Miss Kathery n 
Johnson, Mesdame s Hele n Curtis and 
Laur a Rollock, and Messrs. Edwar d Frazie r 
and Lleyelly n Rollock were arrested last 
June , for distributin g handbills attackin g 
the "Birt h of a Nation. " The N . A . A . C. 
P. undertook their defense. The y were 
given suspended sentences in the 
Magistrate's Court and appealed their cases. 
Judge Talley of the Court of General 
Sessions has just reversed their conviction, 
saying : 
"I n the opinion of this Court, the defendants were well withi n their rights i n distributin g the circulars i n question, and the 
71 72 TH E CRISIS 
complaint against them should have been 
dismissed. I hold tha t the ordinanc e i n 
question was never intended to prevent the 
lawfu l distribution of anythin g other tha n 
commercia l and business advertisin g matter, and the circula r i n question does not 
come withi n that category. It would be a 
dangerous and un-America n thin g to sustai n an interpretation of a city ordinanc e 
which would prohibit the free distributio n 
by a body of citizens of a pamphle t setting 
forth their views against wha t they believed to be a movement subversive of their 
rights as citizens. " 
This is not only a victor y for the N . A . 
A . C. P., but fo r freedom of speech as well , 
and it was won by two colored attorneys, 
Aike n A . Pope and Jame s C . Thomas. 
GETHSEMAN E AN D ARKANSA S 
IN all the disgraceful record of America's 
denia l of even simple justic e to he r colored citizens, there is no greater example 
than tha t of Arkansa s in her efforts 
to put to death twelve innocent men 
who are accused of participatio n i n the 
Phillip s Count y riots of October, 1919. In 
TH E CRISI S for Novembe r was told how 
lawyers employed by the N . A . A . C . P . to 
defend the men had applied for a wri t of 
habeas corpus, whic h was granted by the 
Unite d States Distric t Court of the Easter n 
Distric t of Arkansas, to prevent the execution of the six men who were to die on 
September 23, 1921. Since that time, a demurre r to that wri t wa s filed, and that demurre r was sustained, automaticall y dismissin g the wri t of habeas corpus, annullin g 
the stay of execution. Attorney s for the 
defendants thereupon filed an appeal to the 
Unite d States Supreme Court , basin g their 
appeal on an assignment of errors. 
Honorable John H. Cotteral, United States 
District Judge in Arkansas, granted this appeal, statin g i n his decision tha t "the 
. . petitioners . . • havin g filed 
their assignment of errors and the court 
being of the opinion tha t there exists probable cause for an appea l i n this cause, the 
appea l to the Supreme Court of the Unite d 
States is allowed. " 
A s a result we have finally reached the 
last court of resort, wher e we are confident 
of victory . 
Th e petitio n fo r a wri t of habeas corpus, 
whic h includes the errors mentioned above, 
is so illuminatin g a document and so clear 
a statement of the cases, tha t we are printin g it i n full . Becaus e of its length, onehalf of it is bein g give n i n the present issue 
and the remainde r wil l be printe d i n the 
Januar y issue of TH E CRISIS . 
Th e N . A . A . C . P. , togethe r wit h loca l 
organizations i n Arkansas, have been fightin g against the combined strengt h of forces 
of prejudic e i n tha t Souther n State . W e 
have expended to date $11,249.39. W e are 
obligated to pa y an additiona l $2,500. Ou r 
balanc e on han d is less tha n $200 wit h 
whic h to meet this account. W e sincerely 
urge you to read carefull y this amazin g 
document whic h portray s so clearl y the 
vicious methods whic h have been used i n 
the attempt to murde r these innocent men. 
Havin g read this document, we urgentl y 
appea l to yo u to forwar d a contribution , 
makin g it as large as possible, to ai d us 
in ou r efforts to free these men. 
TH E ARKANSAS PEONS 
A brief prepared by Scipio Jones reviewing the case for 
presentation to the Supreme Court of the United States. 
YOU R petitioners, Fran k Moore , Ed . 
Hicks, J. E . Knox , Ed . Coleman and 
Pau l Hall , state that they are citizens and 
residents of the State of Arkansas, and 
are now residin g i n Littl e Rock, confined in 
the Arkansa s State Penitentiary , i n the 
Wester n Divisio n of the Easter n Distric t 
of Arkansas, withi n the jurisdictio n of this 
court; that the defendant is the keeper of 
the said Arkansa s State Penitentiary , and 
as such is unlawfull y restrainin g you r petitioners of their liberty , and will , unless prevented from so doin g by the issuanc e of the 
wri t herein praye d for, deprive them of 
their lif e on the 23rd da y of Sept., 1921, i n 
violatio n of the Constitutio n an d laws of 
the Unite d States, and the Constitutio n and 
laws of the State of Arkansas. 
Petitioners further say that they are 
Negroes, of African descent, black in color, ARKANSA S PEONS 73 
and that prio r to the time s hereinafte r mentioned were citizens and residents of 
Phillips County, Arkansas, at Elaine; that on 
the day of October, 1919, they were 
arrested, placed i n the Phillip s Count y jai l 
and thereafter unti l their tria l wer e kep t i n 
close confinement upon an alleged charge of 
murde r i n the first degree fo r the killin g of 
one Clinto n Lee , a whit e man , said to have 
occurred on the 1st day of October, 1919; 
that said Clinto n Le e wa s killed , as they 
are informed, whil e a membe r of a posse 
of white men who were sai d to be attempting to quell a race riot, growin g out of the 
killin g of W . A . Adkin s on the nigh t of 
September 30, 1919, at Hoo p Spu r i n said 
County and State ; tha t said Adkin s wa s 
killed, as they are advised, unde r these circumstances an d conditions: Petitioners and 
a large numbe r of the members of their 
race were peaceably and lawfull y assembled 
in their churc h house at or nea r Hoo p Spur, 
with no unlawfu l purpose i n view, and wit h 
no desire o r purpose to injur e or do any 
wrong to any one; tha t whil e they were 
thus assembled, whit e persons began firing 
guns or pistols from the outside into and 
through said churc h house, throug h the 
windows and shooting the lights out therein, 
causing a grea t disturbanc e and stampede 
of those assembled therein ; tha t the whit e 
persons so firing on said churc h came there 
in automobiles, of whic h there wer e several, 
and came for the purpose of breakin g up 
said meeting ; tha t said Adkin s wa s kille d 
either by members of his own part y or by 
some other persons unknow n to you r petitioners; tha t the whit e men sent out the 
word to Helena , the county seat, tha t said 
Adkin s had been kille d by the Negroes, shot 
down i n cold blood whil e on a peaceable mission, by an arme d force of Negroes, assembled at the church , whic h caused grea t excitement al l over the Cit y of Helen a and 
Phillip s County ; tha t the report of said 
killin g spread lik e wild-fir e into othe r counties, all over the Stat e of Arkansas, and 
into other States, notably the State of 
Mississippi; that early the next day a large 
number of whit e men of sai d Count y armed 
themselves and rushed to the scene of the 
trouble and to adjacent regions, the vicinit y 
of Elain e bein g one of them, and began the 
indiscriminat e huntin g down, shooting an d 
killin g of Negroes; tha t i n a short time 
white men from adjoinin g counties an d 
from the State of Mississipp i likewis e armed 
themselves, rushed to the scene of the 
troubl e and began the indiscriminat e shootin g down of Negroes, both men and women, 
particularl y the posse from the State of 
Mississippi , who shot down i n cold blood 
innocent Negr o men and women, man y of 
whom were at the time in the fields pickin g 
cotton; tha t highl y inflammabl e articles 
wer e published i n the press of Arkansa s 
and especially of Helen a and throughout 
the Unite d States, i n whic h the trouble was 
variousl y called a "race riot, " "a n uprisin g 
of the Negroes, " and a "deliberately planned 
insurrection amon g the Negroe s against the 
whites " of that part of Phillip s County ; 
tha t the officers of Phillip s County , especiall y the Sheriff, called upon the Governor 
of the State, and the Governo r in tur n 
called upon the Commandin g Officer at 
Camp Pik e for a large numbe r of the 
Unite d States soldiers to assist the citizens 
i n quellin g the so-called "race riot" , "uprising" , or "insurrection" ; tha t a company of 
soldiers was dispatched to the scene of the 
trouble who took charge of the situation and 
finally succeeded i n stopping the slaughter. 
You r petitioners furthe r say that they, 
together wit h a large numbe r of their race, 
both men and women, were taken to the 
Phillip s Count y jail , at Helena , incarcerated therein and charged wit h murder; that 
a committee of seven, composed of leading 
Helen a business men and officials, to wit : 
Sebastian Straus, Chairman ; H . D . Moore , 
Count y Judge ; F . F . Kitchens, Sheriff; J. G . 
Knight, Mayor; E. M. A. Lien, J. E. 
Horner and T. W. Keese, was selected for the 
purpose of probin g into the situation and 
pickin g out those to be condemned to death 
and those to be condemned and sentenced to 
the penitentiary ; tha t said Committe e assumed charge of the matte r and proceeded 
to have brought before them a large number of those incarcerated i n jai l and examined them regardin g their own connection 
and the connection of others charged wit h 
participatio n i n said trouble ; that i f evidence unsatisfactor y to said Committe e was 
not given they would be sent out and certain 
of their keepers woul d take them to a room 
in the jai l which was immediately adjoining , and a part of the Court Hous e buildin g 
where said Committe e was sitting , and tortur e them by beating and whippin g them 
wit h leathe r straps wit h meta l i n them, cut­74 TH E
tin g the blood at every lic k unti l the vic ­
tims woul d agree to testify to anythin g 
their torturers demanded of them; that 
there was also provided i n said jail , to 
frighte n and tortur e them, an electric chair, 
i n whic h they would be put naked and the 
current turned on to shock and frighte n 
them into givin g damagin g statements 
against themselves and others, also stranglin g drugs were put up their noses fo r 
the same purpose and by these methods and 
means false evidence wa s extorted from 
Negroes to be used and wa s used against 
your petitioners. 
Petitioners furthe r say that o n every day 
from October 1, unti l after their tria l on 
Novembe r 3, 1919, the press of Helen a and 
the State of Arkansa s carried inflammator y 
articles givin g accounts of the trouble, 
whic h were calculated to arouse and di d 
arouse bitte r feeling against you r petitioners and the other members of their race ; 
. that shortly after being placed 
i n jail , a mob was formed i n the Cit y of 
Helena , composed of hundreds of men, who 
marched to the county jai l for the purpose 
and wit h the intent of lynchin g your petitioners and others, and would have done so 
but for the interference of Unite d States 
soldiers and the promis e of some of said 
Committe e and other leading officials that 
i f the mob would stay its hand they would 
execute those found guilt y i n the form of 
law. 
Petitioners furthe r state that prio r to 
October 1, 1919, they were farmers and 
share croppers; that nearl y al l the lan d i n 
Phillip s County is owned by whit e men ; 
that some is rented out to share croppers 
to be tilled on shares, one-half to the tenant 
and the other half to the owner; tha t some 
years past there has grown up a system 
among the lan d owners of furnishin g the 
Negr o tenants supplies on whic h to make 
crops and whic h is calculated to deprive 
and does deprive the Negr o tenants of all 
their interest i n the crops produced by 
them; that in pursuance of this system, 
they refused to give the share croppers 
any itemized statement of account of their 
indebtedness for supplies so furnished, refused to let them move or sell any part of 
their crops, but themselves sell and dispose 
of the same at such prices as they please, 
and then give to the Negroe s no account 
thereof, pa y them only such amount as 
 CRISIS 
they wish , and i n this wa y keep them down , 
poverty stricke n an d effectually unde r their 
control; tha t fo r the purpos e of protecting 
themselves, if possible, against the oppressive and ruinous effects of this system, the 
Negr o farmers organized societies, wit h the 
view of unitin g their financia l resources i n 
mora l and lega l measures to overcome the 
same, whic h fac t became quickl y know n to 
the plantatio n owners; tha t such owners 
were bitterl y opposed to such societies, 
sought to prevent their organization , ordered the members to discontinue their 
meeting an d sought by every means they 
could employ to disrup t them; tha t on the 
30th da y of September, 1919, petitioners 
and other members of the Rati o Lodge , near 
Elaine , learned tha t some o f the Negro 
farmers of a nearby plantatio n ha d employed U . S. Bratton , an attorne y of Littl e 
Rock, Arkansas, to represent them i n effectin g a settlement fo r them wit h their landlords, or, i f he could not, to institut e legal 
proceedings to protect their interests, and 
tha t either he, or his representative , would 
be there on the followin g da y to meet wit h 
al l partie s concerned, perfec t the arrangements, and lear n al l the facts as fa r as possible, and decided to hold a meetin g with 
the view of seeing hi m whil e there, and 
engagin g hi m as a n attorne y to protect 
their interest; tha t accordingl y they met 
tha t nigh t i n the Hoo p Spu r church , which 
resulted, as hereinbefore set out, i n the 
killin g of said Adkin s and the breakin g up 
of said meeting : tha t on the mornin g of 
October 1, Mr . O. S. Bratton , son and agent 
of Attorne y U . S. Bratton , arrive d i n Elain e 
fo r consultation wit h those who migh t desire 
to employ his father, wa s arrested, hardl y 
escaped bein g mobbed, notwithstandin g it 
was well know n tha t he wa s there 
only fo r the purpose of advisin g with 
those Negroe s as to their rights, and 
gettin g from them such facts as would 
enable his fathe r intelligentl y to prepare 
fo r their lega l rights; tha t he wa s carried 
thence to the Count y jail , throw n into it 
an d kept closely confined on a charge of 
murde r unti l the 31st da y of the same 
month, when he wa s indicte d on a charge 
of barratry , withou t any evidence to sustai n the charge ; tha t on tha t day he was 
told by officials tha t he woul d be discharged, 
but not to go on the publi c streets anywhere, to keep the matte r a secret, to leave ARKANSA S PEONS 75 
secretly i n a closed automobil e and to go 
to West Helena , four miles away , an d there 
take the train , so as to avoid being mobbed; 
that he wa s told he woul d be mobbed, or 
would be i n grea t dange r of being mobbed 
if his release became know n publicl y before 
he was out of reach ; tha t the Judg e of the 
Circui t Court, the Judg e of the same court 
before whom petitioners were tried , facilitated the secret departur e and himself went 
to West Helen a and there remained unti l 
he had seen said Bratto n safely on the 
trai n and the trai n departed. 
Petitioners furthe r say tha t the Circui t 
Court of Phillips County convened on 
October 27, 1919; that a grand jury was organized composed wholl y of whit e men, one of 
whom, W . W . Keese, wa s a member of the 
said Committe e of Seven, and man y of 
whom wer e i n the posse organized to fight 
the Negroes; tha t durin g its sessions, petitioners an d man y others of the prisoners 
were frequently carrie d before it i n an 
effort to extrac t from them false incrimin ­
atin g admissions and to testify against each 
other, and tha t both before and after, they 
were frequently whipped , beaten and tortured ; tha t those i n charge of them had 
some wa y of learnin g when the evidence 
was unsatisfactor y to the gran d jury , and 
this wa s alway s followed by beating and 
whipping ; tha t by these methods, some of 
the Negr o prisoners wer e forced to testify 
against others, two against you r petitioners, 
though no one could truthfull y testify 
against them; tha t on Octobe r 29, 1919, a 
joint indictmen t wa s returned against petitioners accusin g them of the murde r of said 
Clinto n Lee , a ma n petitioners di d not know 
and ha d never, to their knowledge, even 
seen; that thereafter on the 3rd day of 
November, 1919, petitioners were taken into 
the court room before the judge told of the 
charge, and were informe d tha t a certain 
lawye r wa s appointed to defend them; tha t 
they were give n no opportunit y to employ 
an attorney of their own choice; that the 
appointed attorne y did not consult wit h 
them, took no steps to prepar e for their defense, asked nothin g about their witnesses, 
though there wer e man y wh o knew tha t 
petitioners ha d nothin g to do wit h the kill ­
in g of said Lee ; tha t they were immediately 
placed on join t tria l before a n exclusively 
white jur y and the tria l closed so fa r as 
the evidence wa s concerned wit h the State's 
witnesses alone ; tha t after the court's in ­
structions, the jur y retired just long enough 
to writ e a verdic t of guilt y of murde r i n 
the first degree, as charged, and returned 
wit h it into court—not being out exceeding 
two or three minutes, and they were 
promptl y sentenced to death by electrocution on December 27, 1919. 
Petitioners furthe r say that durin g the 
course of said trial , whic h lasted less than 
an hour, tha t only two witnesses testified 
to anythin g to connect them i n any wa y wit h 
the killin g of said Clinto n Lee ; tha t said 
witnesses were Walter Ward and John 
Jefferson, both of whom are Negroes and were 
under indictment at the same time for the 
killin g of said Lee ; that they were compelled 
to testify against them by the same methods and means hereinbefore described; tha t 
their testimony was wholl y false and that 
they gave such testimony through fear of 
tortur e and were furthe r told that if they 
refused to testify they would be killed , but 
that if they did so testify, and would plead 
guilt y their punishment would be light ; 
that they thereafter pleaded guilt y to murder i n the second degree and were sentenced to terms of imprisonment; that they 
attach hereto the affidavits of each of said 
witnesses showin g the falsit y of their testimon y and the means of its acquisition. 
Petitioners furthe r say that large crowds 
of whit e people bent on petitioners' condemnation and death thronged the courthouse and grounds and streets of Helen a 
al l durin g the tria l of petitioners and the 
other Negr o defendants; that on account of 
the grea t publicit y given theirs and the other 
cases, on account of their being charged 
wit h connection wit h an insurrection against 
the whit e people, and tha t four or five whit e 
men were killed, on account of the fact tha t 
they are Negroes, and those who ru n the 
court, the Judge upon the bench, the Sheriff, 
the Cler k and al l the jurors ar e whit e 
men, on account of the fact tha t it was 
stated and widel y published that the purpose of the Negroe s was to kil l the whites 
and take their property, and on account of 
all the race prejudice whic h normall y exists and whic h was enhanced a thousandfold 
at the time, by bitterness beyond expression, 
it wa s impossible fo r them to get a fair 
and impartia l tria l in said court before a 
jur y of whit e men ; that the attorney appointed to defend them knew that the preju­76 TH E CRISIS 
dice against them was such that they could 
not get a fair an d impartia l tria l before a 
whit e jur y of said county, yet he filed no 
petition for a change of venue, di d not ask 
the court for time to prepar e fo r a defense, 
and did nothin g to protect their interests; 
that the court did not ask them whether 
they had counsel, or desired to employ counsel, or were able to do so, but simpl y said 
a lawyer, whom he named, woul d defend 
them; that they have, therefore, not ha d a 
trial , have had no opportunity to make a 
defense but that their case was closed 
against them as virtuall y and effectually as 
if on a plea of guilty ; that i f they had been 
given the opportunity they woul d have employed counsel of their own choice and have 
made a defense, their abilit y to do so havin g 
been demonstrated since their conviction ; 
that the feeling against petitioners was 
such that it overawed the Judg e on the 
bench, the jury , the attorney appointed to 
defend them and every one connected wit h 
said court; that all , Judge , jur y and counsel, were dominated by the mob spiri t tha t 
was universall y present i n court and out, 
so tha t i f any juro r had had the courage 
to investigate said charge wit h any spirit 
of fairness, and vote fo r a n acquittal, he, 
himself, would have been the victim of the 
mob; that such wa s the intensity of feelin g against petitioners and the other defendants, tha t had counsel for them objected 
to the testimony of the two witnesses 
against them said Wards, Green and 
Jefferson, on the ground that it was extorted by 
beating an d torture , as they ar e advised he 
should have done, he himself woul d have 
been the victim of the mob ; tha t it is possible counsel di d not kno w how the evidence 
against them wa s obtained, an d they do not 
desire to appea r to criticiz e him , ye t he 
knew tha t i f the evidence against them wa s 
acquired as before stated, i t wa s incompetent and should have been excluded, a 
fact whic h petitioners di d not know, tha t 
petitioners were ignoran t of their rights, 
ha d never been i n court before, an d ha d 
counsel asked them about this testimony 
they woul d have tol d hi m how it wa s obtained, tha t throug h fea r of the mob spirit 
no witness wa s called i n their behalf and 
they themselves were advised not to take 
the stand on their own behalf; tha t as a 
result of the mob dominatio n of court, counsel and jury , the court, althoug h a court of 
origina l jurisdictio n i n felony cases, lost its 
jurisdictio n by virtu e of such mob domina ­
tion an d the result wa s but an empt y ceremony, carrie d throug h i n the apparen t form 
of law, and tha t the verdic t of the jur y was 
reall y a mob verdict, dictated b y the spirit 
of the mob and pronounced and returned because no other verdic t woul d have been tolerated, and tha t the judgmen t against them 
is, therefore, a nullity . 
(To be continued in January) 
KUTTAN , TH E SOUL 
CORALI E HOWAR D HAMA N 
I. 
T A M the joyous dancer, the strong leaper, 
I am the Soul ; 
I am the perfect Whole . 
Joy-bringe r am I and still the body's keeper. 
 live withi n that prison dark and still , 
Bu t when dawns Death, 
I go upon the breath, 
Lik e sun and flowing win d on a hig h hill . 
Throug h jo y and sorrow, ecstasy and pai n 
O f every day, 
Throug h lif e I go my way— 
Fro m God I come; to God I go again . 
II. 
Lik e to a bird , a butterfly, a cloud, a smoke, 
a shadow 
A m I, the Soul . 
I n dreams, i n sleep, I leave the tire d body, 
An d go fort h unti l the dawn , 
Upo n the wind ; 
Whe n m y body wakes, I come back to it. 
A time wil l come whe n m y body wil l not 
wake , 
The n I shall go free 
To dance i n sparklin g sunbeams i n the air, 
An d
Tha t
Lea p
An d
 fly amon g the clouds, 
 surge and tower; 
 down into the ocean's deepest water, 
 then whir l up an d u p an d u p to high ­
est Heave n an d God . 
ITH E VIRGIN OF GUADALUPE 
LANGSTO N HUGHE S 
AFTE R the comin g of the Spaniards, 
who brought priests an d missionaries, 
as well as soldiers to conquer Mexico , most 
of the subdued Indians were converted to 
the faith of the Catholics. The ancient 
Indian temples to barbaric gods were torn 
down b y the European s who built new 
Christia n churches i n their stead. Thu s it 
came about tha t the brow n me n learned to 
worship the saints and idols brought by the 
invaders and so forgo t their old gods. 
One day a pious follower of the 
Spaniards' faith, Juan Diego by name, was returning from mass across the hill of 
Guadalupe, when suddenly a veiled figure, all 
light and beauty, appeared before him. Th e 
poor India n was muc h astonished and filled 
with surpris e whe n the woma n spoke to 
him and commanded i n a soft voice tha t he 
go to the bishop an d tell His Excellenc e to 
construct a churc h on the hil l wher e the 
figure was standing. This Jua n did, or 
attempted to do, but the bishop's servants, 
thinking the man a common, ignorant 
Indian, would not give him admission to the 
house, so Jua n Dieg o wen t back. 
Fo r a second time the visio n appeared 
before him, issuin g the same comman d i n 
her beautiful voice, so the India n returned 
i n search of the bishop. Eac h time , however, he wa s refused an entry but the vision 
told him to persevere. Finally , after man y 
days, he wa s admitte d and the old fathe r 
asked hi m wha t he wished. Whe n Jua n 
Diego told of the beautifu l spirit and her 
message, the bishop could not believe such 
a tale and though t perhaps tha t the poor 
fellow was demented. A t last he told the 
Indian tha t he woul d have to brin g some 
sign or token of proo f i n support of his 
strange words. 
Once mor e the ma n returned to the hil l 
and there at its foot the brigh t vision reappeared. Hearin g the message tha t the 
bishop had sent, she said, "Pluc k those 
flowers there at your feet." Bu t Jua n 
Diego, standin g on the bar e and rock y earth, 
asked, "Wha t flowers?" The n suddenly 
lookin g down he saw the groun d covered 
wit h whit e blossoms whic h he began to 
pick and wit h whic h he filled his small 
woven tilma or mantle, used to wra p about 
his shoulders on cold mornings. 
The n he went to the bishop and said, 
"Her e is you r sign. " Openin g the mantl e 
the whit e flowers rolled out at their feet. 
The bishop looked, but stil l more marvellous 
than the flowers, the surprised priest saw, 
painted on the mantl e where the blossoms 
had been, the figure of the Virgi n surrounded b y a halo of light. "This, " he said, "is 
surely the proof. " So they proceeded to 
erect the church on the top of the hill . 
Late r a magnificent cathedra l was built at 
its foot where the tilma bearin g the pictur e 
of the Virgi n is preserved to this day above 
the alta r an d on the spot wher e the vision 
first appeared, a sprin g of wate r gushed 
fort h and is now covered by a pretty shrine 
where people ma y stop to drink. 
Once a yea r a grea t fiesta is held i n honor 
of this patron saint of Mexic o and man y 
people come from fa r awa y to visi t her. 
An y day whe n one cares to take a tri p out 
to the stately churc h where she is housed 
near Mexic o City , her faithfu l worshippers 
ma y be seen goin g on their knees the long 
distance from the outside door to the hig h 
alta r carryin g whit e candles in their hands, 
crawlin g up to place them before her—L a 
Virge n de Guadalupe — whose name is 
know n an d loved by al l Mexico . 
Men of the Month. THE late Mr . Robert Ambros e Caldwel l 
was bor n i n Georgia , i n 1843. H e wa s 
taken to Cam p County , Texas, wher e he 
later purchased a 340-acre far m and raised 
cotton, corn, suga r cane, potatoes and fruit . 
H e was the prime factor and largest contributo r to the buildin g of West Chape l 
School i n 1879. H e was elected Magistrate , 
but because he was colored he could not get 
a bondsman. I n a county election, however, 
77 78 TH E CRISIS 
he succeeded i n helpin g to elect a candidate 
for Count y Judg e who ' promised that, if 
elected, he would appoint a Negr o on the 
Boar d of Examiners fo r Teachers. Joseph 
W . Anderso n of Fis k Universit y was appointed to this position, being the first 
Negr o to hold such a n office i n norther n 
Texas. Mr . Caldwel l served as county and 
distric t chairma n of the Republica n part y 
and attended every State Convention since 
the days of President Grant, and the 
National Convention that nominated President 
McKinley . H e served on the Federa l Gran d 
and Petit Jurie s at Jefferson, Tex. 
Mr . Caldwel l leaves a wif e and 15 children, most of whom are teachers i n Texas. 
DR. HENRY M. MINTON of 
Philadelphia was graduated from Phillips 
Exeter Academy in 1891, being Class Day 
Orator; i n 1895 he was graduated from 
the Philadelphi a College of Pharmac y and 
i n 1906 the Jefferson Medica l College 
awarded him the degree of M.D . H e opened 
the first colored dru g store i n Philadelphi a 
and fo r 7 years he labored 16 hours a day 
compounding prescriptions. Dr . Minto n 
took charge of the Tuberculosis Clini c for 
Negroes at the Henr y Phipp s Institut e of 
the Universit y of Pennsylvani a i n 1915. 
The services of two other physician s and 
3 social service workers have been added, 
and there are as man y as 25 patients at 
each clinic . Since 1907 Dr . Minto n has 
been a member of the staff of Mercy 
Hospital, where he was recently made the 
Superintendent. 
Dr. Minto n was born December 25, 1871. 
His fathe r was a well-known lawye r and 
his grandfathe r was one of the most celebrated of the Philadelphi a group of colored 
caterers. 
ON Januar y 13, 1847, the late Mr . Loya l 
F . Frima n was born i n Oswego, N. Y . 
H e joined the Unio n Arm y and was assigned to the First Cavalry , Unite d States 
Colored Volunteers, remainin g unti l honorably discharged. In 1869 he went to 
Springfield, Mass., where he accumulated property, 
and conducted one of the best barbe r shops 
i n the city ; he also served as a letter carrier. Mr . Frima n attained the highest ran k 
in the Masonic Order. He was Past 
Master of Sumner Lodge of Masons and one 
of the organizers of the T. Thoma s Chap ­
ter, Roya l Arc h Masons, and of the Va n 
Hor n Commandery , Knights Templar. He 
was a veteran of the Civi l Wa r an d a membe r of Wilco x Post No . 16, Gran d Arm y of 
the Republic . 
MR. CAL F. JOHNSON was born 
October 14, 1844, in Knoxville, Tenn. He 
has accumulate d a fortun e estimated at 
over one-quarter millio n dollars an d is the 
owne r of some of the best bric k structures 
i n the cit y and of a rac e trac k of almost 
100 acres. Th e Cit y Commissio n recently 
purchased a par k and playground , payin g 
$35,000 fo r it, an d name d i t "Th e Ca l F . 
Johnso n Park. " Mr . Johnso n is a member 
of the loca l branc h of the N . A . A . C. P . 
THE late Attorney Gustavus W. 
Wickliffe was the first Negro lawyer admitted to practic e i n the courts of California . 
H e wa s born i n Chattanooga , Tenn. , i n 
1869. H e wa s a graduat e of Howar d Hig h 
School, Nashville , Tenn. , an d of the La w 
School of Howar d University . I n 1889 he 
entered the Federa l Service , bein g employed 
first as a railwa y mai l cler k an d late r as 
a clerk i n the Post Office Departmen t in 
Washington . 
I n Lo s Angeles, i n 1901, Governo r Gaze 
appointed hi m Cler k of Wharfingers wit h 
the State Boar d of Harbo r Commissioners 
an d he served here fo r seven years. 
Attorne y Wickliff e held man y positions 
of honor an d trust i n business an d fraterna l organizations i n Lo s Angeles. H e was 
a 33rd degree Mason . Beside s his widow, 
he leaves 2 children . 
MR. FRANK A. BYRON came to 
Washington, D. C, from Chicago, 111., in 
1901, wit h the Hon . Mr . George Edmun d 
Foss, who wa s Chairma n of the Committee 
on Naval Affairs of the House of 
Representatives. He served as messenger to the 
Committe e fo r 16 years an d fo r 15 years 
performed the duties of assistant clerk ; at 
the beginnin g of the 66th Congress he was 
appointed assistant clerk by the Hon . Mr . 
Thoma s S. Butle r of the 7th Pennsylvani a 
District . On July' B of this yea r he was 
appointed clerk of the Committe e on Nava l 
Affairs of the Hous e of Representatives, 
bein g the first Negr o appointee. His salar y is $2,740 pe r year. Mr . Byro n is a 
graduat e of Howar d Universit y La w School. TH E LAT E ROBER T A . CALDWEL L
TH E LAT E LOYA L F . FRIMA N
FRAN K A . BYRO N
 TH E LAT E ATTORNE Y G. W . WICKLIFF E 
 CA L F . JOHNSO N 
 DR. HENR Y M . MINTO N 
79 THE HORIZON 
COMPILED BY MADELINE G. ALLISON 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
THE Ne w Yor k American says: "Hele n 
Haga n gave a pleasin g demonstration 
i n Aeolia n Hal l of her skil l on the piano. 
Mor e than that, Miss Haga n brought genuine musica l feeling to he r interpretations 
and considerable emotiona l warmth. " Miss 
Haga n is a graduat e of the Yal e Universit y 
School of Music , where she was awarded a 
scholarship. 
C Durin g October, the colored musica l comedy "Shuffle Along, " playin g i n Ne w Yor k 
City , reached 175 performances. The previous record made by William s and Walke r 
was 98 performances at the Par k Theatr e 
i n 1910. Included i n the cast are the composers, Messrs.' Mille r an d Lyle s and Sissle 
and Blake . 
C The facult y of Huntingto n Hig h School, 
Newport News, Va. , has appeared i n a mu ­
sicale at First Africa n Baptist Church , 
They were assisted by the High School 
Orchestra. Numbers included vocal works of 
Burleigh , Schumann , Nevin ; organ numbers of Gounod, Galbraith, Rockwell and 
Legure; and piano selections of Scharwenka 
and Chaminade . 
C Fis k Universit y has celebrated the 50th 
anniversar y of the Jubile e Singers. Fou r 
of the origina l singers— Mabl e Lewis Imes, 
of Cleveland; Maggie Porter Cole, of 
Detroit; Eliza Walker Crump, of Chicago, and 
Hunte r B . Alexander, of Chattanooga , participated. Unde r the leadership of Prof. 
George L . White , they toured the worl d 
several times; on their first 3 tours i n 
America , they realized $150,000, whic h was 
used fo r the buildin g of Jubile e Hall . 
C Musical America of August 20 contains 
an article , "Bridgetower, Mulatt o Frien d of 
Beethoven, " writte n by Mrs. Mau d Cune y 
H are. The articl e gives informatio n from 
German sources, including letters of 
Beethoven, hitherto unknown to the Englishspeaking public. 
([ Loui a Jones, violinist, has gone to Paris 
to continue his musica l studies. Mr . Jones 
is a graduate of the New England 
Conservatory of Music. 
C H. Coleridge-Taylor, son of the late 
Samuel Coleridge-Taylor, has made his debut 
i n Londo n as the conductor of an orchestra . 
A Londo n criti c says: "Hi s control of his 
forces an d sympatheti c understandin g of 
the musi c made a favorabl e impression. " 
d Th e Chora l Clu b i n Atlanta , Ga. , has 
given a concert in the City Auditorium. 
Negro melodies and classical selections were 
rendered by the club, whic h is composed of 
240 voices, and an orchestr a of 20 pieces. 
Th e soloists wer e Clarenc e Washington , 
Robert White , D . Crawford , Lill y Carter, 
W . J . Trent ; the pianists, Florenc e Harris 
and Mildre d Greenwood ; Kempe r Harrel d 
was the director. Ther e were 500 whit e and 
2000 colored people i n the audience. 
C. Willia m Servic e Bell , baritone , and E . H . 
Margetson , pianist, have give n a recita l for 
the Y. W. C. A., at Newark, N. J. 
Included on the program was "Like Stars Which 
Nigh t Hang s i n the Purpl e Skies, " b y Mr . 
Margetson . 
C Geral d Tyle r composed the prologue 
musi c ofStevens' Centennia l drama , whic h 
was presented at the Coliseum i n St. Louis, 
and marked the 100th anniversary of 
Missouri's annexation to the Union. Mr. Tyler 
is Superviso r of Musi c at Sumne r Hig h 
School. 
(I Th e Pac e Phonograp h Compan y of Ne w 
Yor k is presentin g Ethe l Waters an d the 
Blac k Swa n Troubadours i n a coast to 
coast tour. 
EDUCATIO N 
DR. FRAN K G . SMITH , of Chicago , has 
passed the Illinois State Board of 
Optometry by a written examination which 
included 8 subjects. 
d Ther e ar e 40 Negr o students enrolled at 
the Universit y of California . 
C A t Geneva College , Beave r Falls, Pa. , 
there are 7 Negr o students, a n increas e of 
5 over the past 2 years. 
80 TH E 81 HORIZON 
C Dr. Gilbert H. Jones, Dean of the 
College of Liberal Arts of Wilberforce 
University, has been asked by authorities of 
Boston Universit y Graduat e School fo r permission to translat e his inaugura l dissertation from Germa n into English , fo r reference use i n classes i n philosophy. Th e 
book is titled "Lotz und Bowne, Eine 
Vergleigung Ihrer Philosophischen Arbeit." Dr. 
Jones received the doctorate i n Philosoph y 
from the Universit y of Jena , Germany . 
G In football games, Howar d has beaten 
Virgini a Theologica l Seminar y by a 19—0 
score; Hampton vs. St. Paul, 25—2; 
Virginia State Normal vs. St. Augustine, 7—0; 
Hampto n vs. Shaw, 7—6; Talladeg a vs. 
Morris Brown , 23—13; Lincol n vs. Morgan , 
63—3; Howar d vs. Virgini a State Normal , 
26—0; Howar d vs. Shaw, 24—0. 
G A t Lincol n School, Sumter, S. C , there 
are 13 teachers fo r an enrollment of nearl y 
2,000. Th e Negroe s ar e appealin g fo r relief measures. 
C Wile y University , Marshall , Tex., has a 
freshman class of 93 an d a senior college 
class of 29; there are 7 professors devoting 
full time to college work . Ever y course for 
which a degree or diploma is given is recognized by the Texas State Board of 
Examiners. The School has an enclosed athletic par k wit h a grandstan d seating 1,000. 
C This yea r the Joh n F . Slate r Fun d in ­
creased its ai d i n the maintenanc e of county 
trainin g schools fo r Negroe s from 107 to 
142 schools; the salar y lists amount to 
$550,000. 
G Fo r the yea r endin g August 31, 1921, 
there was a tota l circulatio n of 108,207 
books i n the Colore d Departmen t of the 
Louisvill e Fre e Publi c Library . Since its 
opening, 11 women have been traine d for 
librar y work . The y wer e sent from librarie s 
at Houston, Tex.; Birmingham, Ala.; 
Atlanta, Ga.; Evansville, Ind.; Knoxville, 
Nashville , Memphis and Chattanooga , Tenn . 
Mr. Thomas F. Blue is head of the 
Louisville library. 
C The sum of $1,000,000 has been appropriated by the Genera l Assembl y fo r the 
support of Negr o schools i n Nort h Carolina . 
C Ground has been broken fo r an athletic 
field at Hampto n Institute . Ther e wil l be a 
grandstand, a quarte r mil e track, a 220­
yard straightaway , a football and a baseball 
field. 
C Ezekie l H . Mille r ha s been awarded the 
Master's degree at Columbi a University . 
Mr . Mille r is a Federa l Boar d student who 
has been approved fo r wor k leadin g to the 
degree of Ph.D. He is a graduate of 
Howard, 1917, and an ex-soldier of the 351st 
Fiel d Artillery . His allotment is $1,200 a 
year. 
C A secret conference on missionar y and 
educationa l wor k amon g Negroe s i n Afric a 
and elsewhere has been held at Lake 
Mohawk, N. Y. The Negro race was represented by Thoma s Jesse Jones and R. R. Moton . 
G Negro college women in southeast 
Virginia have established Lambda Chapter of 
the Alph a Kapp a Alph a Sorority . Mrs. P . 
S. Puryear, of Virginia Normal and 
Industrial Institute, is president. 
C I n Cleveland, Ohio, there are 100 colored 
public school teachers. 
MEETINGS 
THE Alpha Phi Alpha, Fraternit y wil l 
hold its 14th annual convention in 
Baltimore, Md., December 27-31. Railroads 
have grante d a reduction of one and onehalf far e on the certificate plan. 
C Th e Delta Sigma Theta Sororit y wil l hold 
its annua l convention in Philadelphia , Pa. , 
December 27-29. 
C Th e Alpha Kappa Alpha Sororit y wil l 
convene i n Indianapolis, Ind., December 27­
31. Te n new chapters wil l be represented. 
C Ther e were 200 delegates present at the 
meeting of the Pennsylvania State 
Federation of Negro Women's Club, held in 
Reading. A protest against the Ku Klux Klan 
was sent to the Governo r i n the name of the 
14,000 colored club women of Pennsylvania . 
Mrs. Rut h L . Bennett was re-elected president. 
G The Michigan State Association of 
Colored Women's Clubs has elected Mrs. Ida 
Postles, of Detroit, as president. A special 
feature of the convention was an address 
by Mrs. Mar y B . Talbert. 
C The nationa l conference of the Y . M . 
C. A. will be held in Cincinnati, Ohio, 
December 1-4. 
TH E CHURC H 
ST. JAME S Presbyteria n Church , i n Ne w 
Yor k City , has celebrated the sixt h anniversar y of the pastorate of Dr . Fran k 
M . Hyder. Th e church has a membership 
of 1,400 of which 1,154 members joined durin g the past 6 years; over $65,000 has been 
raised. 
C The Men's Clu b of Dixwel l Avenu e Con ­82 TH E CRISIS 
TWENTY-FIFT H
gregationa l Church , Ne w Haven , Conn., is 
holding its 16th season of "Community 
Betterment" series. Among the speakers is 
Willia m Pickens, Fiel d Secretary of the 
N . A . A . C. P . 
C The Protestant Ministeria l Associatio n 
of South Bend , Ind., has elected the Rev. 
Mr . B . F . Gordon, a Negro , as secretarytreasurer. Mr . Gordon is pastor of the 
Taylo r A . M . E . Zion Chapel. H e is a grad ­
uate of the Universit y of Chicago, holdin g 
the Master's degree. 
INDUSTRY 
THE Tupelo, Miss. , Oi l and Ice Co., is employin g Joh n B . Anderson , a Negro , as 
chief refrigeratin g engineer. Mr . Anderso n 
has been an employee fo r 20 years. Th e 
operating force of the company is 10 
whit e and 18 colored men. 
C Negroes in Dearfield, Colo., are operatin g the Dearfield Packin g and Provisio n Co. 
It has a capacity of 10,000 cans daily. 
C Madison Simms, a Negro barber in 
Knoxville, Tenn., has been employed in the establishment of Charle s Chandle r for the 
past 21 years. H e has shaved over 60,000 
people. 
C Mr . C. H . James, a Negr o of Charleston, 
W . Va. , is head of a $250,000 general produce business. 
C The Wag e Earners' Saving s Ban k of 
Savannah, Ga., was organized i n 1900 wit h 
resources of S102; its resources now are 
$1,000,000, wit h a paid-i n capita l of $50,­
 ANNIVERSAR Y OF TH E CATAWB A SYNODICA L 
000 an d a surplu s of $25,000; its deposits, 
among 20,000 depositors, amount to $957,­
498. Th e institutio n owns its own bankin g 
building , whic h is appraise d a t $95,000, and 
other rea l estate amountin g to $31,500. The 
officers are L . E . Williams, president; Sol 
C. Johnson, vice-president; R. A . Harper, 
cashier; E . C. Blackshear, assistant cashier. 
C Th e Columbi a Laundry , a Negr o enterprise i n Norfolk , Va. , is employin g 14 workers. Mr . Charle s H . Robinso n is i n charge. 
C A syndicat e of Negroe s i n Lo s Angele s 
has purchased 21,800 acres in Lower 
California for the establishment of a Negro 
colony. Th e company has been incorporated 
fo r $250,000 and is know n as the Lowe r 
Californi a Mexica n Lan d & Development 
Co. Theodor e W . Tro y is president and 
Attorne y Hug h E . McBeth , secretary. 
<I Th e Pac e Phonograp h Corporation , makers of Blac k Swa n Records, has purchased 
a 3-story buildin g i n Ne w Yor k City . Afte r 
6-months' business, the compan y is employin g 15 people i n its office and shipping-room, 
an orchestr a of 8 men, 7 distric t managers 
i n the large r cities of the countr y and 1,000 
dealers and agents; it ships 2,500 records 
every workin g day. 
(T Colored substitute letter1
 carriers in 
Richmond, Va., have displaced white special deliver y boys. 
CT The Independent Orde r of St. Luke , i n 
Richmond , Va. , ha s been established 54 
years. It has a membershi p of 67,577 
adults an d 15,110 children , an d ha s paid TH E 83 HORIZON 
SABBAT H SCHOO L CONVENTION , CHARLOTTE ,
$880,750 i n death claims. It edits the St. 
Luke Herald. 
C The colored Berry & Ross 
Manufacturing Company, New York City, has received 
a $10,000 order from agents on the West 
Coast of Afric a fo r colored dolls. 
CRIME 
THE followin g lynching s have take n 
place since our- last record : 
Jones County , N . C , August 14, Jerome 
Whitfield, hanged. 
Allendale, S. C, October 24, Ed. 
Kirkland, shot; body burned; murder. 
Winneboro , La. , Octobe r 25, Sa m Gordon, 
hanged; murder. 
TH E WORL D WA R 
AT the outbreak of the war, 5,571 
Negroes were serving in the Regular 
Arm y and 5,300 i n the Nationa l Guard ; durin g the period of hostilitie s 5,800 volunteered an d 367,710 wer e inducted into service, makin g a tota l of over 384,000 Negroes, 
or about 12% of the tota l enlisted forces of 
the Unite d States. 
C The personne l of Negroe s i n the Arm y 
was distributed as follows: Quartermaste r 
Corps, 30.6%; Infantry, 20.7%; Depot 
Brigades, 15.6%; 82nd Division, 7.2%; 
Engineers, 5.9%; Development Battalions, 2.2%; 
Cavalry , .9% ; Militar y Aeronautics, .3% ; 
Machine Gun Training Center, .2%; 
Medical Department, .2%; Miscellaneous, 16.2%. 
C I n line organizations 925 Negroe s re­
 N . C. 
ceived commissions; i n the Medica l Corps, 
356; in the Dental Corps, 66; in the 
Sanitary Corps, 1; there were 60 chaplains. 
C Ther e were 9,558 Negroe s who made the 
supreme sacrifice durin g the worl d war. 
O f these, 512 were kille d i n action, 219 
died of wounds received i n action, 8,350 died 
of diseases, and 477 died of miscellaneous 
causes. 
POLITICS 
SINC E the suffrage was granted to women 
the enrollment of colored voters in 
Baltimore, Md., has increased from 16,800 to 
37,475. 
C Ne w Haven , Conn., has its first Negr o 
Alderman , i n the person of Attorne y H . 
G. Tolliver. 
C President Hardin g has sent to the Senate 
the name of the Rev. Solomon Porte r Hood , 
of Ne w Jersey, for Unite d States Ministe r 
to Liberia . Mr . Hood is 68 years of age 
and a graduat e of Lincoln . The position 
pays $5,000 per year. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
DURING the past 8 years, 14 colored 
Y . M . C. A . buildings were erected at a 
cost of $1,980,000, of which Mr. Julius 
Rosenwald contributed $350,000. The buildings 
are located in Chicago, New York, 
Brooklyn, Pittsburgh, Columbus, St. Louis, 
Indianapolis, Nashville, Cincinnati, Kansas 
City , Baltimore , Washingto n and Atlanta . 
Ther e are nearl y 25,000 paid-up members. S4 TH E CRISI S 
The Chicago branch, of whic h Mr . George 
A . Arthu r is i n charge, had 2,500 members 
last year; its budget for this yea r is $89,000, 
of which the colored people's share is 837c 
The 46 colored Y . M . C. A . buildings i n the 
Unite d States are wort h $2,880,500. 
C The Cleveland Home fo r Age d Colored 
People has celebrated its 25th anniversary . 
The wor k is supported by the communit y 
fund. 
C Robert Lisby , Jr. , has been appointed 
Unite d States Deput y Marshal l at the Post 
Office buildin g i n Philadelphia . Mr . Lisb y 
was formerl y a member of the police force. 
(I Ned Gourdin, the Negro athlete of 
Harvard University, is the winner of the national pentathlon championship of the 
Amateur Athletic Union. He led a field of 7 
competitors wit h a score of 12 points. H e 
won the runnin g broad jump wit h 21 feet 
1 inch ; the javeli n throw wit h 169 feet 
inches, and the 200 meter dash i n 23 minutes 
and one-fifth second. 
(I Dr . Willia m H . Browning , a graduat e of 
Meharry , has been appointed to the Denta l 
Staff of the Unite d States Publi c Healt h 
Department. Dr. Brownin g has been prac ­
tisin g dentistry i n Lo s Angele s for the past 
6 years. 
(T Th e Salvatio n Arm y has opened a build ­
in g i n Harlem , the Negr o section i n Ne w 
Yor k City . It has a seatin g capacit y of 
300 an d the wor k is i n charge of Captai n 
Oliv e Gaines, a colored woman . 
d George Young , a Negr o i n Ne w Yor k 
City , operates Young's Boo k Exchange . He 
started 6 years ago wit h 6 books; his collection has grow n to over 8,000 books by 
and pertainin g to the Negro . 
(L Chester K. Gillespie, a Negro in 
Cleveland, Ohio, is attorney for the Department 
of Finance . 
C Willia m Lillison , a colored patrolma n in 
Knoxville , Tenn. , has been retired . H e will 
receive a pension of $80 a month. 
C I n Greensburg , Pa. , Thoma s E . Stokes, 
a Negro , has been placed i n charge of the 
manufacturin g and dispensin g department 
of Westmorelan d Hospital . H e is a graduate of the Universit y of Pittsburgh , 1919. 
C Th e Unite d States Militar y Hospita l for 
Colored Soldiers and Sailors ma y be erected 
i n Tuskegee, Ala . Its cost wil l be between 
$500,000 an d $1,000,000. Ther e is much 
dissatisfaction wit h this location. 
(I Mauric e Ray , a Negr o i n Philadelphia , 
has been appointed to the Prohibition 
Enforcement Squad. 
C Th e 8th colored Regimen t of Chicago, 111., 
has been federalized. It has 1,250 men with 
FIV E GENERATION S OF TH E PARSON S FAMIL Y A T SANT A FE , NE W MEXIC O mrs. Mar y C. Parsons, of the First Generation, Died This Yea r at the Ag e of 88. TH E HORIZON 85 
Colonel Otis B . Dunca n i n command. Whil e 
at camp, the regimen t wo n range honors 
and mention fo r genera l efficiency. 
G I n Detroit, a Junio r Branc h of the N . A . 
A. C. P. has been formed. John M. 
Ragland is chairman of the Junior Committee. 
G Motio n picture s of the Protest Parad e 
conducted by the Detroit Branc h of the N . 
A . A . C. P. , durin g the Conference last June , 
are being shown at the Baudett e Theatre . 
Mr . Dudley , wh o ha d them made, intends 
to show the film i n other cities. 
(I O n a recent visi t to Panama , the Rev. 
Matthew Anderson , of Philadelphia , was 
received by President Parro s and Governo r 
Morrow . 
G Percentages of illiterac y i n Ne w Yor k 
Cit y are : native white , 0.3; foreig n born 
white, 13.8; Negro , 2.1. Th e numbe r of il ­
literat e Negroe s i n Ne w Yor k Stat e is 5,032. 
G It has been found tha t the late Jame s 
Milto n Turner, who died i n 1915, left an 
estate valued at over $300,000. Mr . Turne r 
wa s a forme r Unite d States Ministe r to 
Liberia . 
G Grad y Hospita l Annex , a hospital-school 
for colored people i n Atlanta , Ga. , has been 
dedicated. 
G St. Louis University , a Catholi c institu ­
tion, has refused to pla y a football game 
wit h the Engineerin g School of Milwaukee , 
because the latte r team has a Negr o center 
—McMann . 
G A s the result of protest by Negr o citizens, the Huntingto n School of the Y . M . 
C. A., in Boston, Mass., has admitted 
Harvey Shaw, a Negro. 
G Siki , a Negr o of Senegal, is middleweight 
boxin g champio n of Franc e and of Europe . 
He won the title by defeating Ercole 
Balzac, in the second round of a contest in 
Paris. 
G Groun d has been broke n fo r the Colored 
15th Regimen t Armor y i n Ne w Yor k City . 
C Dr . M . Russell Nelso n has been appointed 
an interne i n charge of the Gynecologica l 
Divisio n of Bellevu e Hospital , Ne w Yor k 
City . Dr . Nelso n is 24 years of age an d a 
graduate of the University of 
Pennsylvania. 
G Negroe s at Gary , Ind., have 10 grocery 
stores, severa l barbe r shops and restaurants, 
2 undertakin g establishments, and 1 dru g 
store, operated by a woman , Dr . Bagby-Carter. Ther e ar e rea l estate brokers, physicians, dentists and lawyers; a Justic e of the 
Peace, a Deput y Prosecutin g Attorney , 
truan t officers and 8 policemen. I n 1919 the 
Centra l State Ban k was opened and has assets of $70,000; the National Realty and 
Investment Company is a business representing- $300,000. Th e Negr o population is estimated at 10,000. 
G O n the Isthmus of Panama there are 5 
colored America n citizens servin g as Cana l 
Clubhous e Secretaries. Their duties correspond to those of Y . M . C. A . secretaries. 
The y are T. B . Nelly , J. O. Collins, J . E . 
Waller, K . C. Manning , W . V . Eagleson. 
NATIONA L URBA N LEAGU E 
AMON G those who participated i n the 
National Urban League's Annual 
Conference, held in Chicago, were Miss Jane 
Addams, Founde r of Hul l House ; Miss 
Juli a Lathrop , formerl y Directo r of the 
United States Children's Bureau and 
President of the National Conference of Social 
Work ; Federa l Judge E . O. Brown ; Miss 
Mar y McDowell , Hea d Worker, Universit y 
Settlement; Horac e J. Bridges, Leade r of the 
Ethica l Cultur e Society, and Kell y Miller, 
Dea n of the College of Arts and Sciences, 
Howar d University . 
G Twenty-five cities were formall y represented at the conference—some of them 
havin g as man y as 8 delegates. 
C The Men's Cit y Club , the Women's Cit y 
Club , the Federatio n of Churche s and the 
Woman's Club—al l of the cit y of Chicago, 
have given a dinne r at the Men's Cit y Clu b 
in honor of L. Hollingsworth Wood, 
President; Eugene Kinckle Jones, Executive 
Secretary, and Charles S. Johnson, Director of 
the Department of Research and 
Investigation of the National Urban League. There 
were 200 guests present, among whom were 
50 persona l guests of Mr . and Mrs. Juliu s 
Rosenwald. Mrs. Joseph T. Bowen, 
President of the Woman's City Club Bulletin, was 
Toastmaster. Miss Mar y McDowel l arranged the testimonial. 
C Joh n C. Dancy , Executiv e Secretary of 
the Detroit Urba n League , has been appointed by Mayo r Couzens as a member of the 
Mayor's Committe e on Unemployment. 
G Elme r A . Carter, Executiv e Secretary of 
the Louisvill e Urba n League , has been appointed a member of the Mayor's 
Emergency Committee on Unemployment. The committee is composed of 15 persons from the 
city at large . This League has appointed a 
colored woma n as Travelers' A :d worke r to 
protect, inform and direct colored travelers 86 TH E
at railwa y stations i n the city of Louisville . 
C The six months' record of the Los 
Angeles Urban League shows that 480 men and 
women were furnished employment at 
monthly wages of more than $21,000; 88 
women and children were given outings. 
Th e Count y Probatio n Departmen t has referred cases of colored juvenil e offenders 
to Louis S. Tenette, the Associate 
Executive Secretary. 
C Th e Pittsburg h Urba n League has been 
successful i n getting colored people fo r the 
first time, to use free settlement houses 
i n outlyin g districts. 
C The Frederick Douglass Community 
Center of Toledo, Ohio, which was responsible 
fo r the formatio n of the Toledo Urba n 
League , has taken over large r quarters. A t 
its forma l opening, the Mayo r and 3 judges 
of the city attended. Mr . Fran k Saunders, 
a member of the Governin g Board , donated 
the boys' basketball equipment. 
PERSONA L 
MRS . HARRIE T E . LOWE , of Winston -
Salem, N . C , is 100 years old. She 
is the mother of 4 children, 3 of whom are 
public school teachers. She is the grand ­
mother of 32, the great-grandmothe r of 46, 
and the great-great-grandmothe r of 2. 
Mrs. Lowe has been a consistent member 
of the Missionar y Baptist Churc h fo r 55 
years. 
(I W . Davi d Brown , of Ne w Yor k City , is 
dead. Mr . Brow n ha d been i n the undertakin g business 21 years and was a prominent member of a numbe r of fraternities, 
d W . Alliso n Sweeney, a writer, of Chi ­
cago, 111., is dead. 
FOREIGN 
AT a meeting of the Women's Reform 
Club of Pretoria , Mrs. Maxeke , a na ­
tive Bantu , was a speaker. Lad y Steel presided. Mrs. Maxek e is president of the 
Bant u Women's Association . The meeting 
was called to discuss the existin g conditions 
of lif e of native women in towns, and proposals for their betterment. The Woman's 
Outlook says: "Mrs. Maxek e spoke fluently, 
clearly and wit h dignity . A s givin g the 
views of those most nearly concerned, it 
must be considered as the most importan t 
speech of the meeting; it was a strikin g 
comment on the disability of the voteless 
citizen, to whos^ utterances and wishes so 
littl e importance is attached, that durin g 
 CRISIS 
MRS . HARRIE T E . LOW E 
her address the reporters sat back takin g 
no notes, and dismissed her reall y interesting an d able speech withou t any lines 
i n their report. " 
(i Ther e are i n Manila , P . I., the followin g colored men wh o ar e employed i n 
the classified civi l service : Robert G. 
Woods, chief clerk, and W . A . Caldwell, 
thie f accountant, Burea u of Constabulary ; 
Walter H. Loving, conductor of the 
Constabulary Band, with the rank and pay of 
Major ; Professo r J . H . M . Butler, D i vision 
Superintendent of Schools, Bureau of 
Education; and Davis Lockett, chief veterinarian, Burea u of Agriculture . 
C Th e Rhenis h Women's League , Berlin -
Germany , has been denied a permit for a 
publi c exhibitio n of "Th e Blac k Pest, " a motion pictur e dealin g wit h the question of 
colored troops on the Rhine . Th e denia l 
wa s made on the grounds tha t the film wa s 
not onl y worthless as propagand a but was 
also calculated to injur e Germa n prestige 
abroad. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 87 
Educate Your Girl at 
The National Training 
School for 
Women and Girls 
Lincoln Heights, Washington, D. C. 
Among the best schools for women and 
girls in the United States. 
The School that develops CHARACTER and PERSONALITY. We fill 
our students with a burning desire to 
go out into the world and make not 
only a LIVING but a LIFE. 
COURSE S 
6th, 7th and 8th Grades, Norma l Preparator y 
and Normal , Music , Business, Domesti c 
Science an d Arts 
Socia l Servic e 
Beaut y Cultur e Physica l Cultur e 
Ideal Location High Grade Teachers 
Thorough Training 
SEN D FO R CATALO G 
Nanni e H . Burroughs , President 
Prairie View State Normal 
and Industrial College 
Offers short courses in Auto Mechanics, Battery Repair, Acetylene Welding, Ignition and Vulcanizing. 
For full information address: 
Division of Mechanic Arts 
Prairie View, Tex. 
MANASSAS INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
MANASSAS , VIRGINI A 
Beautiful location, 191 ax-res, fourteen buildings. Direct railroad connections. Tiie only school of its kind in historic Northern Virginia State standard Four-Year High School Course. Advanced Grade School. Busines-s and Trade Courses. High moral standards. Prepare hoys and girls to become useful men and women: terms reasonable. 
For information address 
EDWARD D. HOWE, PRINCIPAL 
KINDERGARTE N DEPARTMEN T 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y 
In full operation since 19.12 
Professional course of two years 
Address 
Kindergarten Department 
Atlant a Universit y Atlanta , Ga . 
St. Philip's 
Normal & Industrial School 
San Antonio, Texas. 
(FOR GIRLS) 
Normal. Academic, Junior ami Music Courses, 
Teachers' Training, Domestic Sciences and 
Arts, I dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring, Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookeeping and Spanish. 
Boarding facilities. Ideal location. 
Faculty from leading Universities. 
Write for Bulletin. 
Artemisia Bowden, Principal 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N O F COLORE D 
GRADUAT E NURSE S 
and 
BUREA U O F INFORMATIO N 
Fo r Colored Graduat e Nurse s 
Centra l Headquarter s 
317 West ISSth St., 
Ne w York , N . Y . 
Telephone Audubon 5602 
A MONEY GETTER becaus e it is A CROW D GETTER . 
Churches and Clubs looking for i pity thai will afford so 
evening of Side Splitting Fun, should bate 
The Slabtown Convention As entertainment Is one aot; full of wit 
tsd good humor. Scores of churches bare cleared from 
One to Two Hundred Dalian la One Night PRICE, Us. 
MISS NANNIE H. BURROUGHS, Author Lincoln H.lohti Washington D. C. 
MISS 
MADELIN E 
ALLISON 
Shopper 
CHRISTMA S in onl y one 
month! Remember those last 
days of shopping last Christmas? 
And the clerks who didn't care—? 
Well, let me do your Christmas 
shopping for you this year in 
New York. Hurry up and write 
me. 
Address: Room 622 
70 FIFTH AVENU E 
NEW YORK, N. Y. (Refers by permission to the Editor of the "Crisis.") 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 88 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
JUS T TH E CHRISTMA S BOO K YO U WAN T 
The Negro in Literature and Art 
by Benjamin Brawley 
NE W EDITION , ENLARGE D 
When this book first appeared in 1918 it at once impressed the reading public as 
the authoritative treatment of a subject that had never before been formally considered. 
For some months it has been out of print. It now appears with two additonal chapters, one on Charles S. Gilpin and one on the General Progress of the subject within 
the last three years. It is superbly illustrated with photographs of Dunbar, 
Chesnutt, DuBois, Tanner, Burleigh, Gilpin, and other representative persons not elsewhere obtainable in one volume. 
Price, $1.50 
This volume , together with a year's subscription to TH E CRISIS—$2.5 0 
DUFFIEL D & CO. , 
211 East 19th Street 
NE W YORK , N . Y . 
DARKWATE R 
O R 
20th Century Uncle Tom's Cabin 
A human document of extraordinary intensity 
and insight, and dealing with the place of the 
darker races in the modern world. The book 
contains as a frontispiece a good picture of 
Dr. Du Bois. The book is selling like wild 
fire. Price only $2.00 po>tpaid. Satisfaction 
guaranteed or money refunded. AGENT S 
WANTED . Send 60 cents for outfit. 
AUSTI N JENKIN S CO. , 
Book and Bible Publishers, 
Washington, D. C. 
TH E THINKER ! 
"TH E SCIENTIFI C SID E O F TH E Negro 
PROBLEM " by Harold E . Simmelkjaer is new, 
thorough, able, original and instructive! It should 
be read by every thoughtful American! 
Copies 25 cents 
GEO . R. JORDAN , Pub. 
219 East 88th Street New York , N . Y . 
IMPROV E YOURSEL F 
HEL P OTHERS ! 
Easy, pleasant* dignified 
work. $2 per hour. Unusual 
opportunity. Send 60c in 
stamps for membership, supplies, etc. 
National Literary Association 
1230 Too St. N. W.. With.. D. C 
Borrow Books by Mail 
An y published—from the 
Universal Librar y 
224 Tremont St., Boston, Mass. 
YOUNG'S BOOK EXCHANGE 
The only establishment dedicated to collecting 
and distributing the history and literature of 
the African and his descendants. Books out 
of print a specialty. 
135 WES T 135th STREE T 
NEW YORK , N. Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 89 
ENROLL NOW! 
DERRIC K BUSINES S SCHOO L Derrick Bldg., 1514 Fi n Si. 
PHILADELPHIA. PA. 
ONL Y SCHOO L O F IT S KIN D 
SHORTHAND, TYPEWRITING, BOOKKEEPING, OFFICE PRACTICE, FILING. 
SAV E TIM E AN D MONE Y DORMITORIES . $2.50 PE R WEE K BOYD' S 30-DA Y SYSTE M 
M . J . DERRICK , Principa l and Manage r 
TOUC H TYPEWRITIN G IS PROVE N B Y BLINDFOLDE D 
TYPEWRITE R MANIPULATIO N 
"Touc h Typewriting " is the metho d by whic h fast type ­
writing is done. A "Touc h Typist " is worth twice as 
much to a business ma n as a "Sight Operator. " A "Sigh t 
Operator" loses time , stopping the machin e to read the 
manuscript from which she Is copying . 
Ou r graduates take dictation anywher e an d in any way on 
the typewriting machine—i n the dark , blindfolde d or copying by sight from shorthan d notes or plai n copy. W e d o not 
claim to be better than other schools but our students prove 
their training . 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUT E 
1227 S. 17th St., Phila. . Pa . . . 
LEAR N T O TYPEWRIT E 
W e teach you by mail how to 
use a typewrite r without looking 
at the keys. 
Onl y 10 Eas y Lessons. 
Diploma s Awarded . 
IMPERIAL CORRESPONDENC E SCHOOL, 
Box 3173 Washington, D. C. 
Tel . 6417 For t Hil l Cable Address, Epber 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
14 School Street Boston, Mass 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS . Dignifie d Wor k 
70 Fift h Avenue . New Yor k 
Cleota Collins, 
Lyric Soprano 
"She combines an excellent voice with artistic finish of the most mature kind. He r singing proved as 
charming as anything the concert programs will otter 
this season."—Detroit Daily News. 
GEORG E LACY , Manager , 
166 Hamilto n Avenu e Columbus, Ohio 
E. ALDAM A JACKSO N 
Graduat e of Institut e of Musica l Ar t 
Organist-Director of Musi c of St. Mark s M . E 
Church ; Concert Accompanist; Piano, Voice , 
Theory , Instruction, Conducting, Coaching. 
Harmon y taught from beginning to completion. Privat e or correspondence. 
Geothius system, 
studio : 150 W . 138th St., He w York , X . T . 
Telephone Morningside 1708. 
Water's Mechanical Evening School 
Courses of instruction 
Automobil e Construction 
Automobil e Drivin g 
Mechanica l Drawin g 
Mechanica l Mathematic s 
JOH N F. WATERS , Principal 
739 Bainbridg e St., Philadelphia , Pa . 
LINCOLN MOTION PICTURE CO. 
Est. 1916 . Capitalized $75,000 
$50,000 common, $25,000 8% preferred. 
Oldest Fil m Corporation in the Worl d Producing Negro Photo-plays. 
112 1 CENTRA L AVE. , LO S ANGELE S 
LEAR N A TRAD E 
AN D EAR N WHIL E 
YO U LEAR N 
Som e o f ou r students ar t makin g $120.00 
a mont h whil e learning . W e ca n plac e yo u 
W e teac h aeroplan e operating , pilotin g an d - • 
construction , automobil e mechanism , wireless teicyiaph y an d radi o 
telephone . Writ e fo r particulars . 
AUT O and AEROPLAN E MECHANICA L SCHOO L 
Bell 4931 Ofllcel 23 N. Cameron St., Harrisburg Pa. Dia l 3060 
Trainin g Quarter s and Flyin g Field 
Harrisburg Aerodrome, Fourteenth and Sycamore Sts. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 90 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
FARMS IN 
MICHIGAN 
Mak e Ideal Home s 
Where You Will Enjoy 
Splendid Schools 
No Segregation No Lynching 
Good Roads 
Civil and Political Rights 
Peace and Plenty 
MICHIGA N WANTS YO U 
We have Ten Thousand Acres of excellent, new, hardwood, farming lands 
for sale at from TE N to FIFTEE N 
DOLLAR S PE R ACR E in parcels of 
forty acres or more. Eighty acres 
make an ideal Farm Home. 
These lands will be allotted to applicants in the order they are received. 
Al l land guaranteed as represented. 
Peaches, pears, plums, apples, berries and small fruits, melons and all 
kinds of garden produce are raised 
abundantly. 
Fowl, pigs, sheep and livestock thrive. 
For further information apply to: 
MICHIGAN LAN Dand HOMESTEA D CO. 325 Broadway Marke t Building 
DETROIT - - MICHIGAN Fil l out and mai l this blank today. 
Michiga n Lan d & Homestead Co., 
32 5 Broadwa y Marke t Bldg. , 
Detroit, Mich . 
Gentlemen : Please send to my address 
ful l particular s about your Michiga n Farm ­
ing Lands proposition. It is understood that 
I incur no liabilit y in makin g this application. 
Nam e ...' . 
P. 0. Address 
State 
SALESMEN WANTED ! 
If you have any spare time and 
want to make money, write to 
us for our stock selling agency 
in your city. LIBERA L commissions paid. Permanent work 
with this solid, growing company 
if you make good. 
FLORENTINE FILM MFG . CO. 
INC. 
903 You Street N . W. Washington, D . C. 
HOMES 
I am in a position to sell you a 
beautiful home in CORONA, L . I. 
Attractive one and two family 
homes in the most delightful section of New York City. All city 
improvements, best of schools 
and very convenient to any section of New York City for 5 
cents. 
Or will build to suit the demands 
of any one. 
Full information cheerfully given 
L. S. REE D 
46 East Jackson Ave. 
CORONA, N. Y . CITY 
Telephone 348 
HOTE L MAR Y ELIZABET H (A New Hotel) 
W. B. SAWYER , Proprietor 
Nearest colored Hotel to Business center of Miami 
PRICE S REASONABL E 
SPECIAL RATES TO HOTEL MEN 
Will be opened Nov. 1st, 1921 
Cor . 7th St., N.W . 2nd Ave . MIAMI , FLA . 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Churc h Societies 
CENTRA L REGALIA CO. JOS. L. JONES. Pres. 
641 W 9th St. Cincinnati, Ohio 
25,000 Agents Wanted 25,000 Me n and women, be your own boss and earn $5.00 
per da y and more , handling- our line of goods. 
Ove r 100% profit, sells i n every home , fast seller, 
sure repeater . Agent's outfit fre e to star t with. 
DIXIE SALE S AGENC Y 316 1 So. State St. CHICAG O 
STUDENT S W e woul d lik e to secur e the service s of 
students durin g th e schoo l ter m to act as agents 
—takin g subscription s an d sellin g singl e copie s 
of 
The CRISIS Libera l commissio n is offered 
Address: A . G . DIL L 70 FIFT H AVENU E NE W YORK , N . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 91 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
These beautiful ballads are from the pen of the gifted young composer 
W . ASTO R MORGA N 
"LOV E IS LIKE A BUBBLE " THRE E 
KEY S 35c 
"NIGHT AN D YOU " 30c 
" TW O "EVERY MAMMY LOVES HER CHILE KEY S 40c 
"THERE'LL COME A TIME" Foxtrot—25 each-Baiia d "MY CUP" c
"DYIN G WIT H TH E BLUES " 
By F. H . HENDERSON, Jr. 
Get them from your Nearest Music Dealer or 
[2305 7th Avenue Arrow Music Pub. Co., New York, N . Y . 
Upholsterers Cabinet-makers 
Decorators 
A beautifu l and comfortabl e borne is an 
inspiration to your friends as wel l as your ­
self. 
Yo u should hav e the covering of your 
furnitur e changed every three or f ou r years. 
Als o a different period draper y effect for 
all doors and windows. 
Ne w appointments tha t wil l improv e your 
boudoir ar e also necessary. Artcraf t sanitar y 
mattresses $1.00 up. 
Phone 6477 Columbus, writ e or call. Estimates, sample s and designs furnished on 
request. 
ART CRAFT UPHOLSTERY CO. 1929 BROADWA Y NEW YORK , N. Y . 
Holiday 
Suggestions 
TH E CRISI S Calenda r fo r 1922 will be a 
"Negr o Home s Calendar"—containin g picture s 
of attractiv e home s i n the possessio n o f Ne ­
groes i n this country . Pric e 50 Cents pe r 
copy. Read y Dec . 10, 1921 . 
Yo u ca n mak e n o bette r gifts to you r friend s 
tha n goo d books. Consul t the insid e back cove r 
page o f this issu e o f TH E CRISI S fo r suggestion s an d price s an d sen d you r orders early . 
Is it a Holida y Gif t to a friend ? The n mak e 
it a year's subscriptio n to TH E CRISIS . Sub ­
scriptio n is $1.5 0 pe r year. A S A SPECIA L 
OFFE R we wil l sen d a year's subscriptio n free 
to anyon e sendin g u s A T ON E TIM E five pai d 
u p yearl y subscription s to TH E CRISIS . Thi s 
offer hold s goo d unti l Decembe r 31 , 1921 . 
SKIR T & SWEATE R 
Postage BARGAI N Paid 
$8 0 0 Valu e 
BOT H $3.4 9 NOW 
SEND NO MONE Y Her e is one o f the biggest val 
ues eve r offered to reader s o f 
this paper . We'l l send both 
this splendid serge skir t an d 
this beautiful heav y war m 
sweater—withou t askin g fo r 
one cent with the order . Skir t 
is made o f good heav y weigh t 
serge , gathered at waist, wide 
loose belt; tw o pocket s 
trimme d wit h tailored buttons. Colors: Navy blue or 
Black. Siz«s, waist 23 to 40: 
length 36 to 40 inch . Sweate r is 
mad e o f high grade yarn , larg e 
shaw l colla r an d broad , loose, detachabl e belt. Co'ort : 
Cra y or Blue. Size s 32 to 46. ROC K BOTTO M PRICES . 
Just send you r nam e an a address givin g sizes an d colors 
o f skir t an d sweate r wanted . W e 11 send both by parce l 
post prepaid . Yo u pa y the mailma n when delivered. 
Mone y back i f not pleased. Her e is positively a bia 18.0* 
value fo r onl y $3.49 . Sen d Now. Order by No . 19 1 C58 . 
HOWARD LUX CO. , DEPT . 191 CLEVELANS) , » 
MME . G . B. NEEDLES 
FIN E FUR S FU R GARMENT S MAD E T O ORDE R 
Remodeling, Repairing, Redyeing 
2202 Seventh Ave., New York, N . Y . 
Telephone Morningside 7590 
AGENT S WANTE D 
Fo r • hig h grade line o f Callin g Cards, Business Cards. 
Inflations, Socia l Stationery, et c Bi g deman d eTerywhere, 
Libera l commissions. Promp t deliveries. Writ e for sample s 
an d terms. 
THE HOUSE OF CH0WNING, INDIANAPOLIS, IND. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 92 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
EVERY 
SCHOOL 
CHILD 
Should be able to hear our ow n high class colored singers and 
musicians on the Phonograph . 
Man y schools have machine s for their pupils and Colore d Prin ­
cipals and Teacher s should see that the Librar y of Records includes colored singers. 
Ever y BLAC K SWA N RECOR D is a Good Recor d and is 
made by colored people. BLAC K SWA N RECORD S are the only 
records made by Colored People, and is not a Ji m Cro w annex to 
a white concern. 
As k your dealer for a complete list of BLAC K SWA N REC ­
ORD S and ask hi m to demonstrate the "SWANOLA, " the only 
Phonograph made by our people. 
Some exclusive BLAC K SWA N ARTIST S are 
REVELL A HUGHE S MARIANN A JOHNSO N 
HARR Y A. DELMOR E CREAME R and LAYTO N 
ETHE L WATER S KATTI E CRIPPE N 
and the 
BLAC K SWA N DANC E ORCHESTR A 
MAD E B Y 
PACE PHONOGRAPH CORPORATION 
2289 Seventh Avenue New York, N . Y. 
AGENT S WANTE D IN EVER Y COMMUNIT Y 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 93 
NATIONAL CAPITAL CODE OF ETIQUETTE 
Combined with SHORT STORIES FOR COLORED PEOPLE 
ETIQUETTE 
PAR T i 
A Boo k absolutel y i n a class by itself. Interesting , in ­
structive , handsomel y illustrated . Wonderfu l picture s o f 
Washington' s prominen t colore d Societ y leaders o n the 
street ; at the Theatre ; at Church ; i n the Home ; at Recep ­
tions; Balls, Parties, Weddings , Dinners, etc., etc. Th e 
illustration s ar e so perfec t an d natura l that the wel l bred , 
correctl y clothe d me n an d wome n almost spea k to you . 
Learn ' ho w to dress an d conduc t yoursel f o n an y an d al l 
occasions; correct, dress fo r me n an d women ; suggestion s 
i n colors an d materials fo r the ladies; hints as to footwear, 
hats, appropriat e combinations, etc., fo r bot h sexes. 
Wha t to serv e you r guests at breakfast, lunc h or dinner . 
Ho w to convers e intelligently ; ho w to kno w whe n to tal k 
an d whe n to remai n silent ; ho w to mak e friend s an d gai n 
popularity . 
A boo k that wil l hel p the most prominen t membe r o f societ y o r the most humble . 
STORIES 
, PAR T 2 
A wonderfu l collectio n of Short Stories for Youn g an d 
Old . Storie s tha t wil l hol d you r attentio n fro m start to finish . B y the most famou s colore d write r o f Short Storie s i n 
America . 
Stories of Adventur e 
Stories of Braver y 
Stories of School Day s 
Stories of Pluc k 
Stories of Success 
Stories of Grea t Men 
Storie s fo r Father , Mothe r o r the Children , 
Funn y Stories; Storie s tha t wil l brin g the 
tears to you r eyes; Storie s onc e starte d must 
be finished befor e layin g asid e th e book . Hand ­
somel y illustrated—picture s tha t seem to liv e 
throughou t the story . 
A BOOK YOU WILL WANT—MUST HAVE IN 
YOUR HOME — A MOST EXCELLENT GIFT 
Ove r fifty page s o f pleasin g picture s take n 
fro m best photographs. A BI G BOOK , con ­
tainin g ove r 400 pages. Th e peopl e ar e muc h 
please d wit h this ne w publicatio n an d ar e 
sendin g thousand s o f orders to us. Orde r today . W e sen d b y insure d parce l post; retur n you r mone y i f no t perfectl y satisfied . 
Pric e ONL Y $2.50 . Writ e today . 
Illustratin g Tabl e Manner s 
. Agents Wanted 
We are looking for 1ooo hustlers, men 
and women. Our offer will pay you positively $4 to $9 per day. One agent made 
$21 the first day. Such an opportunity comes but once in a lifetime. 
AGENTS ' SAMPL E showing specimen 
pages and the pictures and covers of book 
will be mailed to you for 25 cents. It 
represents exactly the complete book. 
Send 25 cents for agents' outfit to-day. 
AUSTI N JENKIN S CO . 
NO. 523 9TH STREET , 
WASHINGTON , 
Send for free catalog of 160 books 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 94 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
MADE TO YOUR 
ORDE R 
Pants 1.9
NO EXTR A 
CHARGE S 
Send no 
Money 
Postage 
Prepaid 
» 
We make this special 
offer for 30 days, to 
prove the wonderful 
value, style and fit of 
Progress tailoring. We will tailor to 
your special order, a pair of these 
stylish $6.00 pants, send them to you 
postage prepaid and guarantee two 
years' solid wear or money back for 
only $1 .95 . 
Earn $30 to 
$35 extr a 
every week, taking orders from your friends 
and neighbors for our high class tailoring. 
No experience necessary. 
Big Sample Outfit FRE E 
Drop us a line today and we will send you absolutely free our 
big assortment of woolen samples, style book and special wholesale prices on our made-to-measure suits—$12.45 up and made-tomeasure pants—$1.95 up. Full details of this offer sent FREE . 
Agents Wanted 
The Progress Tailoring Co., Dept. M-17 Chicago, 111 
Mention The Crisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 95 
GOIN G FAST ! 
AC T QUICKL Y IF YO U WAN T 
ORCHARDVILL E LOT S 
AT $29 . 
50 EAC H 
$3.00 DOWN AND $1.50 A MONTH 
This offer is meeting with GREA T 
SUCCESS . People from AL L 
OVE R TH E COUNTR Y are taking advantage of it, and the demand 
for the lots is INCREASIN G B Y 
LEAP S AN D BOUNDS . 
The lots are size 30 x 144 feet each and 
have plenty of room for a house, garden, chicken yard, etc., besides a few 
fruit trees which can be planted later 
on. Each lot is sold under a MONE Y 
BAC K GUARANTE E and the title to 
the property is ABSOLUTEL Y 
CLEAR . 
The location of Orchardville is ideal 
and everybody who has been there so 
far has expressed himself or herself as 
being HIGHL Y PLEASE D with everything. That is why the demand for the 
lots is increasing so fast. 
This offer should receive your careful 
consideration because it may be just 
what you have been looking for. You 
can get all the details by simply writing 
your name and address plainly on the 
coupon below and sending it to us 
RIGH T AWAY . We will then send 
you booklets telling you all about it. 
MAI L TH E COUPO N TODAY . 
ARENSON REALTY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
19 S. L a Salle Street CHICAGO , ILL. 
WRITE PLAINLY 
ARENSO N REALT Y DEV'P T CORP . 
CHICAGO , ILL . Date 19* 
Gentlemen:— 
I would like to receive all the detail! retarding your new lot offer, without any obligation on my part. 
Name 
Address Town and State. 
CRI-NO -12-2 1 
Mention THE CRISIS 96 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LaRose Products 
will b e Found ON 
the Bes t Dressin g Table s 
SPECIAL OFFER 4 in 1 Until Dec. 25,192 1 Fac e Powde r $ .50 
Talcu m Powde r .50 All for Vanishin g Peroxide .50 
1/2 oz. Perfum e 1.00 
(Cupi d Drops) $1.5 0 S2 50 
J . R.WIGGIN S manufacturinG CHEMIST — 
1919 Broadway NEW YORK- N. Y 
NATURA L HAI R WIGS 
DIRECT FROM THE MANUFACTURER Ever y wi g is made to your measure by hand, 
using only the best of materials. (No t 
machine made.) 
D Wi g L Wi g 
Has one part extend­ Ha s a part on each 
ing from centre of side to centre of 
forehead half way head. Ventilated 
back. Whil e it can bang in front and 
be parted only at the dressed in a psyche 
part, it can be dressed between the parts 
in many different back of bang. Bobbed 
styles. all around. 
Pric e $13,50 Pric e $18 
Ful l line of hai r goods and straightening 
combs. Send for free catalog. 
ALE X MARK S 
6628 8th Ave., at 42nd, New York City 
We'll Give You a Doll 
A 20-inch Kewpi e Doll—unbreakable , fine finish, 
pretty expression, silk costume, natura l hai r and 
veil. Stands alone. Children everywher e "tickled 
to death" with it. Sell one dozen QUIN O face powder. Th e doll is yours FREE . No money required, Writ e QUINO , Dept. D, Nashbille , Tenn. 
60c on the dollar to agents selling our goods. 
Sanitary ' INDOOR TOILE T Shippe d o n approval . Writ e for remark ­ able rock-bottom factor y offer o n the famoa s an d genuine COMFOR T Indoor Toilet . Save one-thir d now . Highest grade ; gra y enam­ eled; absolutely odorless. Chemicals consume contents an d germs, E&su y cleaned . 
AGENTS: Write for terms. Exclusive territory. Wonderful opportunity to coin money. 
ROBINSO N HOUSEHOL D MFG . CO . 
732 Factorie s Bldq . Toledo , Ohi o 
AWARDE D FIRS T GRAN D PRIZ E 
(Philadelphi a Autum n Fair ) 
Octobe r 16-29th. 
Sophia's Wonder Preparations FO R TH E 
Hair, Scalp and Complexion CLIMAX . A refined preparatio n for MEN . 
( A three months' treatment, mailed 
postpaid, for $1.85) 
AGENT S WANTE D GOO D PROFIT S 
(Send for Catalogue today.) 
A t drug stores or beaut y parlor s 
or direc t fro m 
G. T. YOUNG, Incorporated 
Sophia's Building 
619 South 15th St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
STATEMEN T O F TH E OWNERSHIP , MANAGE ­
MENT , CIRCULATION , ETC , REQUIRE D 
B Y TH E AC T O F CONGRES S O F 
AUGUS T 24, 1912, 
of TH E CRISIS , published monthlv at New York, N . Y . 
for October 1, 1921. 
State of New Yor k }s s .
County of New Yor k J 
Before me, a notary public in and for the State 
and Count y aforesaid, personally appeared Augustus 
Granvill e Dill , who, having been duly sworn according to law, deposes and says tha t he is the Business 
Manage r of TH E CRISI S and tha t the following is, 
to the best of his knowledge and belief, a true statemen t of the ownership . management . etc. of the sfcresaid publication for the date shown in the above captain , required by the Ac t of Augus t 24, 1912, to wit: 
1. Tha t the name s an d addresses of the publisher , editor, 
managin g editor an d huslness manager s are: 
Publisher—Th e Nationa l Associatio n for the Advancement of 
Colored People . 70 Fift h Ave. . New York . N Y . 
Editor—W . E . Burghard t DuBois, 70 Fift h Ave. , New York , 
NT . ' 
Managin g Editor—W . E . Burghard t DuBois, 70 Fift h Ave. , 
New York , N . Y . 
Business Manager—Augustu s Granvill e Dill , 70 Fift h Ave.t 
New York . N . Y . 
2. Tha t the owners are : 
Th e Nationa l Association for the Advancemen t of Colored 
People , a corporation with no stock. Membershi p 90.000. 
Moorfleld Storey. President; Jame s Weldo n Johnson. £«cre-» 
tary : Joe l E . Spingarn . Treasurer : Mary' Whit e Ovington; 
Chairman . Boar d of Directors. 
3. Tha t the known bondholders, mortgagees and other securi 
ity holder s owning or holdin g 1 per cent, or more of tota}" 
amount, of bonds, mortgages, or other securitie s are: NONE i 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL . \ 
Sworn t o and subscribed before me this 1st day 
of October. 
FRAN K M . .TURNER . ^ 
Notary Public Queens Co. , No . 754. Certificate filed 
New Yor k Co. , No . 164. New Yor k Register ^No: 
2122. Ter m expires Marc h 30, 1921. A Selected List of Books 
Dealing with the Negro Problem 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
Two COLORE D WOME N WIT H TH E AMERICA N EXPEDITIONAR Y 
FORCES . (Hunto n an d Johnson ) $2.5 0 
TH E HEAR T OF A WOMA N AN D OTHE R POEMS . (Georgi a Dougla s 
Johnson ) 1.25 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . (Mau d Cune y Hare ) 1.50 
TH E SOU L OF JOH N BROWN . (Stephe n Graham ) 2.0 0 
A NARRATIV E O F TH E NEGRO . (Leil a Amo s Pendleton ) 1.50 
SOUL S OF BLAC K FOLK . (W . E . B . DuBois) 2.0 0 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGR O MIGRATION . (Carte r G . Woodson ) ... . 1.10 
TH E CURS E OF RAC E PREJUDICE . (Jame s F . Morton ) 2 5 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . (B . G . Brawley ) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGR O MIGRAN T I N PITTSBURGH . (Abraha m Epstein).. . .5 0 
GRANN Y MAUME E AN D OTHE R PLAY S FOR A NEGR O THEATRE . 
(Ridgel y Torrence ) 2.2 5 
HAL F A MAN . (Mar y Whit e Ovington ) 1.20 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (Willia m Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIF E AN D WORK . (Bisho p Alexande r Walters) 1.50 
UNSUN G HEROES . (Elizabet h Ross Haynes) 2.5 0 
TH E SHADOW . (Mar y Whit e Ovington ) 2.0 0 
JOH N BROWN . (W . E . B . DuBois) 2.0 0 
NEGR O I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W . Cromwell) 2.0 0 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (Georg e W . Crawford ) . . 1.00 
TH E VOIC E O F TH E NEGRO . (Robert T. Kerlin ) 2.5 0 
NEGR O CULTUR E I N WES T AFRICA . ''George W . Ellis) 3.0 0 
TH E NEGRO . (W . E . B . D u Bois) 9 0 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGR O PRIO R TO 1861 . (Carte r G . 
Woodson ) 2 -0 ° 
TH E NEGR O FACE S AMERICA . (Herbert J. Seligmann ) 1.75 
DARKWATER . (W . E . B . DuBois) 2.2 5 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.5 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
BOOKE R T . WASHINGTON . (Emmet t J. Scott an d Lyma n 
2 0 0 Beeche r Stowe )
Address: TH E CRISIS , : : 7 0 Fifth Avenue, New York, N . Y Beautiful 
white teeth 
MADA M C.J.WALKER' S 
ANTISEPTIC DENTAL CREAM 
IS TH E SECRET 
Mout h acids and a slimy film are the great contributions to decay. You r Dentist wil l tell yo u that 
it is not enough to merely clean the teeth 
and ordinary dentrifices wil l not preserve 
them from decay. Madam C. J.Walker's 
Antiseptic Dental Cream keeps the 
saliva alkaline,which counteracts acid-mouth, prevents 
slimy film, the formation of tarter and 
purines use 
breath. 
A delicious, 
effective germicide 
and mout h wash for 
Cleansing, Polishing and Preserving the teeth. 
of Agents and at Drug Stores. 
64 0 NORT H WES T STREE T 
INDIANAPOLIS,IND M U.S.A. 
Makers of Mme. C J. Walker's Wonderful Hair Grower 