The 
CRISIS 
Easter 
1920 
ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY Your Weapon Against Race Prejudice 
A BRANC H O F TH E 
N. A. A. C. P 
Have You One In Your Community ? 
How the weapon is used: 
1. It binds together the forces fighting injustice, forming a link 
in a nation-wide chain. 
2. It fights existing evils. 
3. It prevents encroaching prejudices. 
4. It educates the colored man in his own problems and their 
solution. 
5. It educates the white man in the folly and danger of present 
methods of solving race problems. 
7. It opens new avenues of employment to the colored worker. 
8. It brings pressure to bear on Congress, state legislatures and 
county and municipal authorities. 
Three hundred and seventeen communities in 43 states, the 
Canal Zone, the Phillipine Islands and Canada have found a branch 
useful. If your community has evils which need correction and 
wishes to aid in solving the national problems of the race, write today to 
The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
70 FIFT H AVENUE, NEW YORK , N. Y . 
National Officers 
President 
MOORFIEL D STOREY 
Vice-Presidents 
ARCHIBAL D IT. CRIMKi 
REV. IOHX HAYNES HOLMES 
BISHOP mu x HURST 
ARTHU R B. SPINGARN 
OSWAL D GARRISON YILLARI) 
Executive Officers 
Chairman of the Board 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Secretary 
JOH N R. SHILLAD Y 
Treasurer 
J . E . SPINGAR N 
Director of Publications and Research 
DR . W. E. B. DUBOI S 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSON , Field Secretary 
WALTE R F . WHITE , Assistant Secretary 
WILLIA M PICKENS , Associate Field Secretary SIXTY-FOU R PAGE S AN D COVER . 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CONDUCTE D B Y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS ; JESSI E REDMO N FAUSET , LITERAR Y EDITOR ; 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINES S MANAGER . 
Vol. 19—No. 6 APRIL, 1920 Whole No. 114 
PICTURES Page 
COVER . Photograph by Battey. 
TH E CARDINAL'S CONCER T HALLS 309 
IN ANCIENT EGYP T 312 
IN MODER N EGYP T 315 
WOMAN' S WA R RELIEF CLUB, SYRACUSE, N. Y . 321 
TH E DUNBA R THEATR E 325 
WAG E EARNERS' SAVINGS BAN K 329 
MEN OF TH E MONT H 335 
ARTICLES 
A N AMERICA N CITIZEN. A Story. Dorothy Canfield. Illustrated by 
Laura Wheeler 302 
BIRD ROMANCE . Mary Effie Lee. Illustrated 308 
NATIONAL1SM AN D EGYPT . Jessie Fauset. Illustrated 310 
TH E NATIONA L Y . W. C. A . AND TH E NEGRO. Catharine D. Lealtad 317 
TH E NEGRO FACES AMERICA . Herbert J. Seligmann 318 
A N EASTE R MESSAGE. A Poem. Carrie W. Clifford 336 
DEPARTMENTS 
OPINION 297 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D 
PEOPLE 320 
TH E LOOKING GLASS 326 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 334 
TH E HORIZON 337 
TH E MA Y CRISIS 
Th e Ma y CRISI S will be Church Number. It will contain the official answer of the Catholic 
hierarchy to MacWilliams' charge, besides articles on the General Conferences and statistics. 
FIFTEE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Th e date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York , NewYork , under the Ac t of Marc h 3, 1679. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM , NORT H CAROLIN A 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Science! The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economic! 
The Department of Social Service 
TER M OPENED SEPTEMBER 22 , 1919 
For further information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
The Cheyney Training School for 
Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNA. 
A normal school of high grade for 
young colored men and women of good 
abilities, who desire to prepare themselves to be teachers. Courses include 
the regular academic and professional 
subjects, and special departments in domestic art, domestic science, manual 
training and agriculture. Board and 
tuition $125. Last regular term began 
Thursday, September 18, 1919. Summer 
school for teachers in active service, 
four weeks beginning July I. Board and 
tuition for the month $20.00. For further particulars and catalog write 
Leslie Pinckney Hill, Principal, Cheyney, Penna. 
1888 1919 
St. Paul Normal and 
Industrial School 
LAWRENCEVILLE, VA. 
Thirty - Second Session 
OPENE D SEPTEMBE R 1919 
COURSES 
Primary, Grammar School, Normal, Industrial 
Graduates receive State Hig h 
School Certificate which will 
admit to Standard Normal 
Schools and Colleges 
SUMME R SCHOO L FO R TEACHER S 
EXTENSIV E TRAD E COURSE S 
Athletic Training, Football, Baseball, Tennis, Etc. 
FULL COURSE IN MILITARY TRAINING 
For Catalog and Further Information address 
Rev. James S. Russell, D. D., 
Principal 
LAWRENCEVILLE , VA . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 295 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located In the City of Atlanta, Ga. 
The courses of study include High School, normal 
School and College, with Manual training and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are graduates 
of Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth and Wellesley. Fifty 
years of successful work have been completed. 
Students some from all parts of the south. Graduates are almost universally successful 
for farther information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA . OA. 
The Alumn i of 
Lincoln University 
are raising 
$50,000 for ALM A MATE R 
Lincoln trains for leadership and success. 
Address: 
President John B. Kendall, D. D. 
Lincoln University 
Chester County, Pa. 
1870
 CLARK UNIVERSITY
 19, 9 
ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Beautiful campus overlooking the city. Comfortable 
buildings with modern conveniences; talented faculty: 
vigorous, religious atmosphere; excellent library and 
laboratories: co-educational; athletics. Admission 
only by application. 
Course s o f Study : 
Domestle Science. Public Speaking, Mule ; 
Pre-Academy , Seventh and Eighth Grades. 
Academy or High School, four years with diploma. 
Pre-Medical, two years above academy. 
Normal, two years above academy with diploma. 
College, lour years with AB degree. 
Fiftieth year opened September 24, 1919. 
Expenses, $15.00 per month will cover all necessary 
expenses. 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING , President. 
The Florida Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahassee, Florida 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the Negro Problems 
20 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY ca ATLANTA , CA . 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College). 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE . N . C . 
Biddle University, operated under the auspices of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Department!—High School, Arts and Sciences Theological 
and Indus trial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course la the requirement for entrance to the first veer 
of the High SCHOOL 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific, in the 
scientific, German Is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class Is 
16 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three yean. The first Is purely English. 
Greek and Hebrew are taught In the others. 
All students In the High School Dept. are required 
to take trades In the Industrial Dept. 
For further Information, address 
President H . L. MoCrorsy, 
Charlotte, N . C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta. Ga . 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence- Wel l equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College Preparatory, Nor 
mal. Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training, Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began September 10. 1919. 
For further information address 
W. A . FOUNTAIN , President 
BISHOP J. S. Flipper, Chairman Trustee Board 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 296 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
MANUAL TRAINING and 
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
FOR COLORE D YOUT H 
BORDENTOWN, N. J . 
A high institution for the training of 
colored youth. Excellent equipment, 
thorough instruction, wholesome surroundings. Academic training for all 
students. 
Courses in carpentry, agriculture and 
trades for boys, including auto repairing. 
Courses in domestic science and domestic art for girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly 
equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and 
modernly equipped. 
Terms reasonable. 
Fall term began September 15, 1919. 
For information address 
W. R. VALENTINE, Principal 
The Agricultural 
and Technical College 
of North Carolina 
Maintained by the State and Federal 
Government 
Fo r males only. Practical 
and Strong Courses by the 
following Departments: 
Agricultural, Mechanical, 
Academic, Teacher Training, 
and Military . 
Summer School for teachers of both sexes. 
Writ e today for catalog. 
JAS . B. DUDLEY , 
President, 
Greensboro, N. C. 
Wiley University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana, Arkansa s and Okla ­
homa State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University. University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented on its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W . DOGAN , Presiden t 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND , LA . 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Home 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B . H . Society of New York . Students 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana , Arkansa s 
and Oklahoma. 
O . L . COLEMAN , President 
ST. MARY' S SCHOOL 
A n Episcopa l boarding school for girls, under the 
direction of the sisters of St. Mary . Address: TH E 
SISTER-IN-CHARGE , 6138 Germantown Avenue, 
Philadelphia , Fa . 
WILBERFORC E UNIVERSIT Y 
SUMME R SCHOO L 
WILBERFORC E OHI O 
Seventh Annual Session, June 21 to July 31,1920 
Location ideal; faculty large ; dormitory 
room ample, teaching facilitie s the best. 
Special lectures: model school for observation and practice ; fees and expenses reasonable. 
Credit in regular session given for work done 
in the summer; al l courses standard. 
Courses offered—professional, normal, collegiate and hig h school. 
Fo r further particulars writ e 
GILBER T H . JONES , 
Bo x 44 Director Summer School, 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH , 
President of the University . 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE 
Beautifu l Situation. Healthfu l location . 
Best Mora l and Spiritua l Environment. 
Splendid Intellectua l Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work . 
Institution offers ful l courses in the following departments: College, Normal, Hig h 
School, Gramma r School, Domestic Science 
and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
natura l drainage, splendid dormitories. Ex ­
penses very reasonable. 
Spring term opens Marc h 4. 1920 
For catalog and other information address 
PRESIDENT . J . KELL Y GIFFE N 
Knoxville . Tenn . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS 
Vol. 19. No. 6 APRIL, 1920 Whole No. 114 
Opinion 
of W. E. B. DuBois 
EVER Y FOU R YEAR S 
EVER Y four years the disgrace 
of the buying up of certain 
delegates for the Republican 
convention is repeated in the 
Southern South. In South Carolina, 
Georgia, Florida, Alabama, 
Mississippi, Louisiana, and Texas, there are 
a few professional grafters, black and 
white, who assume to represent the 
"Republican Party. " They are for 
sale to the highest bidder. 
Republican candidates begin their campaign 
by sending men into the South to buy 
the support of these men, and the 
whole Negro race is blamed for this 
recurring disgrace. But whose is the 
fault? The fault lies at the doors of 
the National Republican Party. Not 
only is the party and its candidates 
willin g and eager to buy up this support, but they have repeatedly refused support or countenance to the 
better class of colored leaders, who 
seek to oust these thieves. They give 
recognition and offices to the "Lil y 
Whites " wherever possible, thus carrying out a policy, begun by Theodore 
Roosevelt and brought to its highest 
fruition by William H . Taft. 
Only yesterday in Tennessee, where 
a real Republican movement with 
high aims and efficient leadership has 
been led i n the western part of the 
state by R. R. Church, a Republican 
convention composed only of white 
men calmly ousted every black 
Republican. And it stands every chance of 
being given recognition by the 
National Republican Committee, which 
refused to seat Perr y Howard of 
Mississippi, who was legally elected 
and in the face of right and justice, 
put a white man in his place. So that 
the Republican Party has practically 
said to the South,—No decent colored 
man need apply and we wil l recognize 
anything, decent or indecent, among 
white politicians. 
To cap all this, the party refuses to 
take a single step toward enforcing 
the Fourteenth and Fifteenth 
Amendments, or to stop the disgraceful disfranchisement of colored voters. 
REMEMBE R 
THE foundations of the present 
political South are built upon 
sand. It requires only a resolute executive in the White 
House and a free House of 
Representatives ; then when the Representatives from the Southern South 
knock at the door, the House of Representatives has simply to say—Who 
votes i n Mississippi, in South Carolina, in Alabama?—and to declare 
that upon such a basis of franchise, 
the so-called members of Congress 
have not been legally elected. 
This is all. The deed is done. An d 
the Negro is a free man. 
No r is the possibility of this so far 
away. A little more southern arrogance in Washington, a little more 
greed in the expenditure of public 
funds, such as occurred during the 
war; a little larger assumption that 
the South owns the United States, 
and the nation may awake to real 
Democracy. 
Or, again,—suppose the "dirty 
foreigners" and the disfranchised 
Socialists and the disfranchised 
blacks should get together and vote 
together at the next election! 
HAIT I 
THE United States is at wa r 
with Haiti. Congress has 
never sanctioned this war. 
Josephus Daniels has illegally 
and unjustly occupied a free foreign 
297 298 TH E CRISIS 
land and murdered its inhabitants by 
the thousands. He has deposed its 
officials and dispersed its legally elected representatives. He is carrying on 
a reign of terror, brow-beating, and 
cruelty, at the hands of southern 
white naval officers and marines. Fo r 
more than a year this red-handed deviltry has proceeded, and today the 
Island is in open rebellion. The 
greatest single question before the 
parties at the next election is the 
Freedom of Haiti. 
HYD E PAR K 
A CROW D of white profiteers in 
the Hyde Park division of the 
city of Chicago publish a 
Property Owners' Journal and 
are moving heaven and earth to get 
Negroes voluntarily to segregate 
themselves. They have even had the 
impudence to quote TH E CRISI S in 
their own defense, when we asserted 
"the right of any individual of any 
race or color to choose his own marital mate, his own friend, and his own 
dinner companion,—in fine, to be the 
master of his home". Wha t these 
real estate agents want is not only to 
be masters of their own homes, but 
also of ours. They may buy property 
where they please, but we must not 
buy where we please. They claim the 
right not only to occupy their own 
houses, but to determine who shall 
live next door. We hope that the 
Chicago Negroes will buy just as much 
property in Hyde Park as they can 
pay for, and proceed to live therein. 
TH E SECON D BATTL E O F LEXINGTO N 
HOW high shall we value human 
life? 
In Massachusetts, in 1775, 
eight men were killed in the 
first battle of Lexington. Was it 
worth while? The shot "was heard 
'round the world! " 
In Kentucky, in 1920, five men 
were killed in the second battle of 
Lexington. Was it worth while? 
Already lynch law has cost Americ a 
3,000 lives, and mob law has taken 
ten times as many. If further bloody 
toll can be saved by five deaths, we 
have gotten off far more cheaply than 
we deserve. 
UNIVERSA L MILITAR Y TRAININ G 
THOS E who believe i n Worl d 
Peace and oppose Militarism, 
owe a debt to the American 
Negro: because southern 
Democrats feared the Negro in arms, 
they rebuked their own President and 
voted down universal military service. 
Selah! 
T O GENERA L LEONAR D WOO D 
Sir: 
WE Negroes have noticed that 
large numbers of 
Congressmen and many other persons would like to see you 
President of the United States. We 
black folk, despite the fact that threefourths of us are illegally disfranchised and misrepresented by our enemies in Congress, nevertheless wil l 
probably cast a million votes in 1920. 
In order, then, that Ave may vote 
intelligently in both the primary and 
final elections, may we ask you two 
questions: 
1. Wh y did you, in 1917, refuse to 
admit Negro candidates to the 
Plattsburg Officers' Training Camp? 
2. In 1919, while in conversation 
with the editor of the Des Moines 
Register, you are reported to have declared that you were utterly opposed 
to having Negro officers over Negro 
troops. Is this true? 
I trust we may have, at your convenience, answers to these inquiries. 
Ver y respectfully, 
TH E CRISIS . 
NEGR O WRITER S 
SINC E its founding, TH E CRISI S 
has been eager to discover 
ability among Negroes, especially in literature and art. It 
remembers with no little pride its 
covers by Richard Brown , William 
Scott, William Farrow, and Laur a 
Wheeler; and its cartoons by Lorenzo 
Harris and Albert Smith ; it helped 
to discover the poetry of Roscoe 
Jamison, Georgia Johnson, Fenton 
Johnson, Lucian Watkins. and Otto OPINION 299 
Bohanan; and the prose of Jessie 
Fauset and Mar y Erne Lee. Indeed, 
TH E CRISI S has always preferred the 
strong matter of unknown names, to 
the platitudes of well-known writers; 
and by its Education and Children 
numbers, it has shown faith in the 
young. 
One colored writer, Claude McKay , 
asserts that we rejected one of his 
poems and then quoted it from 
Pearson's ; and intimates that colored editors, in general, defer to white editors' opinions. This is, of course, arrogant nonsense. But it does call our 
attention to the need of encouraging 
Negro writers. We have today all 
too few, for the reason that there is 
small market for their ideas among 
whites, and their energies are being 
called to other and more lucrative 
ways of earning a living. 
Nevertheless, we have literary ability and the 
race needs it. A renaissance of 
American Negro literature is due; the material about us in the strange, heartrending race tangle is rich beyond 
dream and only we can tell the tale 
and sing the song from the heart. 
From the beginning, the editor has 
read wit h care every manuscript 
sent us, which explains the unconscionable delay in returning many; 
and yet for three years the editor was 
editor, business manager, and chief 
clerk, and only this last year has TH E 
CRISI S been able to hire an editorial 
staff even approximately adequate to 
the work. 
SOUTHER N REPRESENTATIVE S 
THE conditions under which a 
person is allowed to vote 
under our government, is left 
i n the hands of the states, 
wit h only two limitations: 
First.—No person can be deprived 
of a vote on account of "race, color, 
or previous condition of servitude" 
(Fifteenth Amendment). 
Second.— If the state limits the 
right to vote for any other reasons, 
Congress has the right proportionately to reduce its representation 
(Fourteenth Amendment). 
In the Nort h the right to vote is 
restricted slightly by educational 
qualifications; in the South the right 
to vote is so restricted by educational, 
property, military, industrial, and administrative qualifications, that the 
majority of voters are disqualified. 
The United States has a right to reduce representation in Congress. The 
Republican majority is in honor bound 
to do this. The Negro race should demand such reduction. The reduction 
would not make the North lose a single Congressman, but it would sweep 
out of the National House forty-two 
Negro baiters from the South, who 
are upholding lynching and voting 
"Jim-Crow" legislation and depriving 
Negroes of education. 
The South may pretend that it 
would assent to this, rather than let 
Negroes vote. This is a falsehood. 
Restrictions on the black vote would 
disappear in a day. Bu t even if it 
were true, the Negro would be infinitely better off: he would retain his 
legal right to vote in the South and 
his actual vote in the North and in 
the Border States, while his enemies 
would be kicked out of Congress. Wh y 
hesitate ? The demand on the 
Republicans should be unanimous. 
SOLDIERS ' INSURANC E 
LIFE insurance is a necessity 
for a civilized man. The life 
insurance furnished by the 
United States Government to 
its soldiers is the cheapest and best insurance obtainable. There is no color 
discrimination. 
Every Negro soldier ought to make 
every possible sacrifice to maintain 
this insurance. The government offers the most advantageous terms to 
delinquents and furnishes options and 
information. 
Despite these facts, large numbers 
of ex-service men are letting their 
policies lapse and the race is thus 
losing vast sums of money. 
If the men themselves do not see 
the value of this insurance, clubs, 
churches and organizations might 
combine to keep up the policies. 
Institutions might be endowed in this 
way and worthy objects helped. 300 TH E CRISIS 
If any one knows of any ex-soldier 
who has not kept up his life insurance, 
he should write immediately to J. 
Williams Clifford, Wa r Risk Bureau, 
Washington, D. C. 
TH E CHARG E FO R "WRIT E UPS " 
THE CRISI S is continually embarrassed by requests from 
persons who either send 
money or ask our "charge" 
for publishing a picture and biography. 
TH E CRISI S regards this as a serious 
ethical question. There is a widespread custom on the part of some 
periodicals of accepting payment for 
articles and especially for personal 
notices and pictures to be published in 
their news columns. 
This is from every point of view a 
pernicious and dishonest practice. 
The reader of a periodical has the 
right to assume that news is printed 
because of its importance and that 
people are mentioned favorably because of their desert. If only that 
news is published which is paid for, 
or if our "Men of the Month " are to 
be selected from those offering the 
most cash, then we are headed 
straight to the catastrophe of a venal, 
purchasable press. 
The best papers today refuse absolutely this form of bribery. But 
the public does not yet understand 
this, and it is necessary especially for 
the Negro press to emphasize these 
principles: 
1. It is wrong for a periodical to 
print matter for which it is paid, except in the plainly indicated advertising sections. 
2. It is wrong for a periodical to 
receive money as a gift for matter 
which it has already printed, except 
as advertisements. 
3. It is wrong for a periodical to 
accept payment in advance for copies, 
on condition that certain contributed 
matter will appear. 
These are the principles of T H E 
CRISIS, and any money sent us in 
contravention of these principles will 
be promptly returned. 
The matter which we print may 
not be the best and our judgment of 
men and measures may often be 
faulty, but the reader can at least 
know that no money consideration has 
influenced us. 
A N APPEA L 
To Missionary Boards, and all other 
Friends of Negro Education: 
H E Association of Colleges for 
Negro Youth, consisting of 
eleven institutions, (Howard 
University, Wilberforce University, Fis k University, Virgini a 
Union University, Atlant a University, 
Morehouse College, Knoxvill e College, 
Talladega College, Shaw University, 
Benedict College, and Bishop College), through its appointed representatives, asks leave to bring to your 
attention the status of the teacher in 
these and similar institutions. 
We are not unmindful of the difficulties that must be met by those who 
bear the ultimate burden of the maintenance of these schools. No one appreciates more than our teachers the 
fact that sacrifices have to be made 
from time to time, and that in the 
Christian service which they attempt 
to render, there is a compensation 
wholly beyond all monetary consideration. We do not feel, however, that 
it is intended that the scale of livin g 
shall be reduced to such a point as to 
make the worker physically inefficient or call in question his self-respect. 
Withi n the last five years, not only 
salaries, but the number of workers 
in these schools has remained largely 
stationary, and this in spite of such 
an increase in the number of students 
as has taxed every institution to its 
fullest capacity. Where there was one 
teacher to fifteen students, there is 
now a ratio of one to thirty. 
Obviously, the responsibility of the teacher 
has been doubled. Nevertheless, for 
the most part, the missionary colleges 
in the South still attempt to abide by 
the salary scale that obtained twenty OPINION 301 
years ago, an d this i n the face o f the 
fac t tha t instructors ar e expected to 
hav e goo d college trainin g an d to be 
ambitiou s to continu e their studies i n 
ever y wa y possible . Onl y the ma n of 
highl y exceptiona l qualifications 
stands an y chanc e i n most o f the colleges, of beginnin g at a salar y of mor e 
tha n $800 o r o f risin g above $1,200. 
Salarie s o f $500 to $700 are stil l frequent. W e do not need to remin d yo u 
o f th e increas e i n the cost of livin g 
withi n the last five years. Practicall y 
ever y essentia l articl e tha t enters in ­
to the cost of maintainin g a family , 
—food , clothing , an d al l household 
supplies,—ha s increase d fro m 100 to 
300%, so tha t the purchasin g powe r of 
a dolla r is barel y one-third , an d i n no 
case mor e tha n one-half o f its forme r 
value . It is obviou s tha t economi c 
condition s have brough t about a correspondin g reductio n i n salaries, so 
tha t the teache r wh o is no w receivin g 
$600 to $900 is i n realit y gettin g an 
equivalen t o f less tha n half tha t 
amount, on the basis o f his forme r in ­
come. 
It is eviden t tha t i f the present 
wag e scale continues, most of the 
workers wil l be force d to seek outlets 
i n othe r fields. It is wholl y impossible fo r the averag e missionar y teache r to go awa y fo r summe r study ; the 
average singl e ma n does not receive 
a salar y tha t woul d justif y marriag e 
an d the support o f a family ; an d it 
is quit e impossibl e fo r a teache r wh o 
has childre n to giv e them sufficient 
nourishin g food, to decently clothe 
them, an d provid e fo r their education. 
W e submi t these facts only fo r 
wha t they ar e worth , askin g tha t 
somethin g be done ver y soon to im ­
prov e a desperate situation . Mean ­
while , we shall continue to rende r the 
best servic e i n ou r powe r to the youn g 
me n an d wome n wh o have been committe d to ou r care. 
BENJAMI N BRAWLEY , Chairman , 
Dea n o f Morehous e College . 
O F GIVIN G WOR K 
"We give you people wor k an d if you did
you live? " 
The speake r wa s a 
souther n whit e man . H e wa s o f the 
genus called "good" . H e ha d come 
down fro m the Bi g Hous e to advis e 
these Negroes, i n the forlor n little" 
churc h whic h crouche d on the creek. 
H e didn't come to learn , bu t to teach 
Th e result wa s tha t he di d no t learn , 
an d he saw onl y tha t blank , impervious gaze whic h colored people kno w 
how to assume ; an d tha t dar k wal l of 
absolute silence whic h they have a 
habit o f puttin g up instead of applause. H e felt awkward , but he re ­
peated wha t he ha d said, because he 
could not thin k o f anythin g else to 
say : 
"W e giv e yo u people work , an d i f 
we didn't, ho w woul d yo u live? " 
An d then the old an d rathe r ragge d 
blac k ma n arose i n the back o f the 
churc h an d came slowl y forwar d an d 
as he came, he said : 
"An d w e give s yo u homes; an d we 
give s yo u cotton ; an d we make s you r 
lan d wort h money ; an d we waits on 
yo u an d gets you r meals an d cleans 
u p you r dirt. An d i f we didn' t do al l 
those thing s fo r you , ho w woul d yo u 
live? " 
Th e whit e ma n choked an d got red , 
but the old black ma n wen t on talk ­
ing : 
"An d what's more : w e give s yo u a 
heap mor e tha n yo u give s us an d we's 
gettin g might y tire d o f the bargain— " 
" I thin k we ought to giv e yo u fai r 
wages, " stammere d the whit e man . 
"An d tha t ain' t all, " continued the 
old black man , "we ought to have 
somethin g to say about you r wages. 
Becaus e if wha t you give s us give s you 
a righ t to say wha t we ought to get, 
then wha t we give s yo u give s us a 
righ t to say wha t you ought to get; 
an d we'r e goin g to take tha t righ t 
some day." 
Th e whit e ma n blustered : 
"That's Bolshevism! " he shouted. 
An d then churc h brok e up. A N AMERICAN CITIZEN 
DOROTHY CANFIEL D 
I would not have noticed her among the 
other uniformed American women on 
board the steamer, if it had not been for a 
troubled look of uneasiness in her honest 
eyes, which contrasted with the healthy, 
kind, fixed certainty of themselves and their 
standards shining out from the honest eyes 
of the other serious-faced American women 
who made up her "unit", just returning 
home for a well-earned rest after two years 
continuous service in war relief. Indeed, 
the difference between them was so great 
that once the cynic of our party, who had 
seen her staring darkly out to sea, said of 
her mockingly, 
"There's one who looks as gloomy as 
though her shell had been penetrated by the 
awful thought that perhaps French amenities in everyday life and French daily pleasure in small pleasantnesses, may mean more 
civilization than bath-tubs and open plumbing." 
But he was wrong, as usual. Something 
deeper, even more impersonal, was in question, as I learned later on in the voyage 
when I had come to know and greatly respect her. One evening, quite late, she 
stopped her restless pacing about the deck, 
and dropped into the chair beside me. I felt 
touched to sympathy by the long sigh she 
drew, and said, clumsily trying to invite a 
confidence which might perhaps relieve her, 
"Yo u seem to be troubled about something. 
I'd be so glad if I could help." She turned 
her head towards me, quickly, and looked at 
me hard, shaking her head. "I don't see 
what anybody can do about it," she said. 
Then she added, unexpectedly, "What part 
of the States do you come from?" 
"Vermont," I answered, not seeing why 
she should be interested in that. 
She moved her head restlessly and said, 
"Oh, well, I suppose one American is very 
much like another. I know I am, and I'm 
from New Jersey!" 
As I was silent, quite at sea, she went on, 
"I wonder if it would make things any 
clearer to me if I should just tell you all 
about it! Perhaps it would!" 
Her voice was so sincerely troubled that I 
took her hand in mine, as assurance of my 
interest. She began her story. 
II 
And I now set it down here just as she 
told it to me, wishing to shift it to other 
American shoulders, as she shifted it tc 
mine. 
"I had been brought up," she began, "like 
all public school American children, to 
salute the flag every morning, to believe 
that America was the only country where 
Liberty prevailed, and to read in my little 
American history textbook, how our fathers 
had fought to found that new thing,—a 
country where all men are free. 
"Up to the time (I was fourteen years 
old then) that I encountered Jefferson Hcywood, I had no idea that there might be 
shadows in the bright day of American 
freedom. Of course,- Jeff was not the first 
Negro I had ever seen. I had been brought 
up near a lot of them, had played with little 
colored children quite as much as with 
white. But the black flame in Jeff's bloodshot eyes was very different from the lighthearted, giggling fun of my little black 
play-fellows, or from the easy-going good 
humor of Uncle Harry, the bald-headed old 
Negro who used to come once a week to 
shake our rugs and do other things too heavy 
for the maid. And, especially, the bitter 
carelessness of Jeff'.s accent when he said, 
'Yes, I've been off on a jag again', was very 
different from the humble and repeated, 
'Yas'm', of Uncle Harry when my mother 
took him to task for being half-seas over. 
"When I came to know him, Jefferson belonged to a very different world from the 
family-like atmosphere of the small town 
where I had spent my early childhood. He 
ran the elevator in the ramshackle old building in New York where one of my grown-up 
cousins had a studio, and although he had 
come originally from a small town in Virginia, with the same innocent rusticity as 
302 A N AMERICA N CITIZEN 303 
my own small town, it was evident that in 
New York he had become an integral part of 
vicious, big-city life. He drank and gambled to everybody's certain knowledge. 
"With his habits and his quite apparent 
hostility to white people, he would not have 
been kept a day in any other building than 
the battered, shabby rabbit-warren which 
sheltered so many impecunious artists. The 
owners of the building were only waiting for 
a sufficiently big rise in the price of land to 
"I still remember the stories he used to tell me!" 
tear down the dingy old place and put up an 
apartment house. Everybody who rented a 
studio there was told that he might be 
turned out at a day's notice, and all the service of the building was done in the same 
hand-to-mouth precarious method. Jeff always managed somehow to be able to run 
his elevator and the superintendent of the 
building, expecting to lose his own job from 
one day to the next, asked nothing more of 
the powerfully built, sullen Negro who 
looked so malevolently from under his black 
brows at the white people he took up and 
down in his creaking cage. 
" A child finds studio life very tiresome, 
especially if she has had a good deal of it, 
and I used, while waiting for my cousin to 
get ready to go home, to wander up and 
down the dirty, unswept corridors of the 
building and to stand at the windows, looking down idly on the noisy, futile bustle of 
the New York street, feeling dreadfully 
vacant-minded and bored, and 
longing for somebody to talk 
to. In course of time I drifted towards Jeff's cage, (I was 
still child enough to enjoy 
riding up and down in the 
elevator), and towards the 
casual acquaintance with him 
which gave me my first 
doubts of the golden perfection of American institutions. 
"Al l Negroes know how to 
interest children, and Jeff 
shared his race's capacity to 
charm childhood. I still remember the stories he used to 
tell me of his fishing exploits 
in his Virginia village, of his 
happy boyhood with his widowed mother, of the way 
they celebrated Christmas in 
his town. Occasionally also 
he used to tell stories of his 
school, where he had learned 
to speak so correctly; of his 
grave , dignified, well-instructed school-teacher; and 
of the industrial school where 
later he went to learn the 
trade of carpenter. I remember (because it afterwards 
came back to me, vividly) his 
explanation about the old 
blind mare, Nancy, who came 
frequently into these reminiscences. I said one day, 'But, Jeff, how did 
it happen that you had a horse, all your 
own?' 
"His eyes deepened. 'I was going by one 
day when the white man that owned her, 
was beating her up because she couldn't go 
straight. It made me kind of crazy to 
see. . . .' He paused, made a grimace, and 
passed over the details to the end of the 
story. 'I worked two summers for that 
white man, to buy her off'n him. She lived 304 TH E CRISIS 
seven years after that. Happy years, too. 
My mother liked her mighty well, too.' He 
added, on another note, 'They died the same 
winter.' 
"I glimpsed vaguely through this dry outline of emotions deeper than the words 
showed, and was silent a moment. Jeff said 
presently, 'Colored folks have got a fellowfeeling for creatures that get jumped on and 
can't help it.' An d as I found no comment to 
make on this, our interview of that day 
ended. 
"This was the only reference he ever made 
to the deep grievance of his life, until one 
day, emboldened by much talk with him, I 
ventured, priggishly enough, to try to be a 
small mentor for him and made a childish 
and ill-advised effort to serve up to him, at 
second hand, some of the good counsels I 
had heard my mother give to Uncle Harry. 
"The conversation which followed I have 
never forgotten. He said, listlessly, 'Why, 
Miss Ma'gret, I'm an American Negro. 
What else is there for me to do but to get 
drunk and gamble?' 
"I was astonished beyond the extent of 
my capacity for astonishment, sincerely unable to make the faintest guess at the meaning of his words. 'Why, Jeff,' I said earnestly, with a simplicity I find now rather 
touching, 'if you didn't get drunk, you 
could get a better job and earn more money 
and save up and. . . .' 
" 'Well, what would I do with my money?' 
he asked me. 'What good would it do me? 
I'd be a Negro just the same, wouldn't I? 
I'd be punished and spit on, all the time, for 
being something I never asked or wanted to 
be, and that I'd stop being if I could.' 
"Reminiscences of abolitionist ancestors 
stirred vaguely in my head, and with the 
proper canting accent, I pronounced the 
cant phrase, 'Well, I'm sure that is nothing 
to be ashamed of, or to regret.' 
" 'Isn't it!' he blazed out suddenly, and 
then in a voice which brought the words 
home to me, like a thunderclap, 'Would you 
just as soon be a Negro as white?' 
"He had so fiercely focussed on me in one 
burning flash the hidden flame of his heart 
that he succeeded for just an instant in forcing me to take in, actually and intimately, 
the meaning of his words. For just an instant I realized the meaning of the possibility that I might have been born black and 
not white . . . and I gave a vivid reflexgesture of physical recoil, which made Jeff 
laugh sardonically . . . although he had visibly winced. 
"I was horrified at the confession he had 
startled cut of me. I .swallowed hard and 
tried to think of something defensive to say. 
Various smug reflections came to my mind 
and I brought out the one which seemed to 
me most unanswerable. 'Oh, Jeff, there are 
lots of nice things Negroes can do. Look at 
Peter Ruffner.' (He was the elevator man 
for the night shifts.) 'He's saving up his 
money and studying to pass the Civil Service examinations, and he's going to get a 
job in the Customs House and own a little 
home and he's bringing up his children so 
nicely and ' 
"Jeff answered me, with a grunt of scorn, 
'Yes, Pete's giving himself a lot of trouble, 
and what'll he get? No matter how much 
he succeeds, the poorest, little, low-down 
street-mick, if he's white, will look down on 
Pete . . . and you know it. And if Pete 
went home to Georgia, not if he had a million dollars, they wouldn't let him eat in the 
• same restaurant with the most worthless 
white folks, nor pray to God in the same 
church. Not if he'd found out how to cure 
cancer, would he be allowed to vote like the 
white drunkards nor live on the same street. 
There isn't a white convict in a penitentiary 
who would change place with Pete, to have 
his freedom and his job and his savingsbank book and his home, if he had to get inside Pete's black skin to do it . . . and you 
know that, too. Don't you suppose ws 
know the reasoa why nobody on earth would 
be willing to change places with an American Negro? Do you suppose I'd want to 
bring a child into this world to live through 
that—much as I'd like having a son!' 
"I was shocked and silenced, more by the 
dreadful deep quiver of acrimony in his 
voice than by what he said. I shrank a 
little back, as though I saw heat-waves 
quivering over molten metal; and hung my 
head. 
"Of course, like everyone else, I had been 
perfectly familiar with the daily unprovoked, personal indignities in the life of an 
American Negro, but I seemed never to have 
seen them before. 
"Well, I have not forgotten them since. 
"Somebody came in and asked to be taken 
up to the fifth floor. Jeff carried us both 
up, and me back again to the ground floor A N AMERICA N CITIZEN 305 
before I could think of anything to say. 
Then I brought out miserably, only because 
I could not endure the silence, 'Well, they 
don't all feel like that. Look at Booker 
Washington. Seems to me you're unreasonable, Jeff.' 
" 'Does it?' he said indifferently, as though 
he cared very little about my opinion. 
"There was another silence. Then he 
added, 'Well, maybe I wouldn't get so sore 
if it wasn't for all the Declaration-of-Independence-business and everybody-beingequal that white folks are always shooting 
off. I reckon it's that, that makes me take 
to drink.' 
"I had no occasion to speak to Jeff for 
some time after that. In fact, he got so 
drunk for once, that he could not run his 
elevator, and was absent for many days. I 
thought about him a great deal, most uncomfortably, and during the morning exercises in my patriotic school, found the words 
sticking in my throat as I tried to pronounce in unison some of the accustomed 
phrases of satisfaction in belonging to the 
country of freedom. Yes, Jeff had cast a 
shadow which was not to lift. 
"He was so long in coming back to his 
work that one day I asked the superintendent about him. He said impatiently that 
Jeff had been off on a terrible bat, but would 
be back soon. He went on, 'But you don't 
want to have anything to do with him. If I 
was your cousin, I wouldn't let you ride up 
and down in the elevator. He's just as bad a 
nigger as any I ever saw, and I've seen 
a-plenty. He's the kind that carries a razor 
in his hip pocket, and don't you forget it!' 
"When Jeff came listlessly back to work, 
with the curious ashy color of a man who 
has been sick, I told him what the superintendent had said about his concealed weapon, half hoping to have the thrill of seeing 
him show it to me. He laughed scornfully, 
'No, I don't carry a razor, but it's not because I'm not a bad nigger, all right. If I 
could kil l what ails me with a razor, I 
wouldn't be long doing it. But suppose I 
cut Mr. Superintendent all to hash with a 
razor, would it keep me from being treated 
like a dog?' He laughed again, and said, 
'No, my razor is a whiskey-bottle. That 
comes the nearest to killing what's the matter with me.' 
"He looked so ill and wretched as he spoke, 
that he made me feel wretched, myself. It 
seemed to me, child as I was, that life was 
an infinitely more puzzling matter than I 
had dreamed it might be. 
"A t it happened, it was almost the last 
time I saw him there, for soon after, the old 
building really was torn down, as had been 
threatened so often, and all the inhabitants 
of the old rookery were dispersed to the four 
corners of the earth. But what could not be 
dispersed was the puzzled uncertainty which 
Jeff's talks had left in my mind." 
She paused, and I murmured, helplessly 
in sympathy with her feeling, "Oh, yes, life 
is puzzling, horribly, distractingly puzzling." 
III 
She went on, "I was sent that next winter 
to a boarding school in Prance, and suffered 
acutely from the indoor confinement of this 
life, so that it was with a bird's joy in freedom that I found myself, the next summer, 
spending the vacation on the Breton seacoast, where I went to visit one of my schoolmates. She was as wild as I with physical 
exuberance long repressed, and we raced up 
and down the broad yellow beach and risked 
our necks on the rocky cliffs, every moment 
that the weather allowed us to be out of 
doors. 
"It was only when one of the big tempests 
of the region kept everybody indoors, that 
we took cognizance of the dull adult life of 
the house and neighborhood. This was 
about the usual life in cosmopolitan seaside 
towns, full of vain idle women, sensual vacationing men and malicious gossip. The old 
aunt of Marcelle, my little school-friend, 
was an invalid who could not walk, but in 
the miraculous way of some shut-in-people, 
she knew all the talk of the small, uncharitable settlement better than any one of us 
who ran about freely among the actors of 
the sordid little comedies and tragedies. She 
not only knew all that was happening that 
summer, but all that ever had happened, apparently, and she was fond of imparting her 
information. It was she, I remember, one 
stormy afternoon when Marcelle and I were 
kept indoors by the weather,—it was she 
who gave to a caller the story of our nextdoor neighbors, a strange combination of 
personalities which had vaguely aroused 
even my child's interest, naturally dull to 
the curious and inexplicable doings of 
grown-ups. 
"The story was not at all meant for little 30 6 TH E CRISIS 
girls, nor did Marcelle and I really listen to 
it, I believe, except with that sort of preoccupied attention which children give to 
ugly, grown-up talk. At least I find there 
are many gaps in it which I can't fill. Perhaps those were the times when Marcelle's 
aunt lowered her voice to a mysterious whisper and spoke in her interlocutor's ear. Al l 
that I really understood from this halfheard story, was that the big, burly, redfaced Hollander, M . Stekkar, whom we 
glimpsed through the iron 
grating of the garden gate, 
lounging about in a purple 
dressing-gown, had somehow, 
some awful power over the 
shabby, thin, gray-faced man, 
M . Levreau, who never went 
anywhere without his silent 
little boy, and who stumbled 
so as he walked. 
" 'They were partners together, out in some Godforsaken place in the far 
East,' said Marcelle's aunt, 
'where Stekkar made his 
money; Java, or Borneo, or 
somewhere where white men 
have little law over them. 
And this poor wretch—they 
say he was a handsome, fine 
fellow in those days,—married, and they say he came to 
blows when Stekkar tried to 
. . .' here the voice went off 
into sibilant whispers and I 
lost the thread, until it rose 
again with, 'And Stekkar was 
so furious at that, they say 
he almost died of his rage, 
and he swore he'd get even 
with Levreau for the humiliation, and Levrea u 
laughed and said he wasn't 
afraid. And then Stekkar 
bided his time, and the year 
after . . . well, some say Levreau really 
did embezzle a lot of the money, and some 
say Stekkar arranged the accounts to look 
as though he did . . . and then he put 
the clamps on. Off Levreau would be 
sent to prison, arrested right there, leaving the young wife, and a baby about due, 
there on the island with Stekkar. And then 
Levreau,' the old woman gloated over the 
spectacular character of her tale, glanced 
sideways at the little girls, and lowered her 
voice again. We heard no more until, '. . . 
the feeling ran high out there, even among 
the natives, so they say, after the wife's 
death, and so Stekkar sold out, retired, and 
brought Levreau and the baby here to live, 
and here he gets all his interest in life out 
of torturing Levreau. You see, he's got a 
death-grip on him, on account of the child. 
Levreau would have given himself up, long 
ago and gone to prison, whether he was 
—glanced sideways . . . and lowered her voice." 
guilty or not, if it wouldn't have meant 
leaving the little boy to old Stekkar, on account of that signed agreement I told you 
about. So there he is, a rat in a trap. 
" 'Stekkar has the legal right any day to 
call in the gendarmes and have him put behind bars. An d he knows it and daren't do 
anything on account of little Jean. Well, 
there's little enough left of him to do anything! The treatment he has had . . . they 
Laura Wheeler 1920 A N AMERICA N CITIZEN 307 
say that when Stekkar is more than usually 
drunk, he makes him . . .' A particularly 
sibilant whisper followed this, accompanied 
by upturned eyes of horror on the part of 
her listener . . . 'and he has taken to drugs, 
too. Oh, he's nothing but a walking corpse, 
physically and morally. Stekkar'll get the 
child all right, before long, in any case. 
They say he's beginning on him now. Our 
maid, Madeleine, was talking to old Nanette, 
the other day, the charwoman who was 
working there, and she said' she saw old 
Stekkar take little Jean out of his bed, right 
before his father, and . . .' 
"The visitor broke in here, crying, 'In 
God's name, why doesn't the father take his 
son and run away . . . just escape! There 
are plenty of forgotten corners of France 
where . . .' 
" 'He's too broken down to try,' said Marcelle's aunt. 'Stekkar has him as a horsebreaker has an animal with a broken spirit. 
And, anyhow, since the drugs have worked 
on him so, he's not more than half there any 
of the time. To drug himself till he can't 
feel anything Stekkar tries to make him 
feel, that's his escape, and his only one, in 
this life.' 
"A t this point the sun showed for a moment through a rift in the clouds and Marcelle and I, feeling fairly stifled in the 
malarial atmosphere of grown-up gossip and 
indoor air, clamored to be allowed to take a 
sandwich .apiece and go down to the beach. 
A few moments later, the great, clean, roaring voice of the sea had drowned out the 
human voice with its gruesome tale of 
human doings. 
"An d yet, I must have taken in, even then, 
something of the story, for I remember 
looking with scared pity at M . Levreau the 
next time I met him in the street. His 
ravaged gray face was lowered towards the 
ground, as he made his painful halting way 
towards the house, his heavy market-basket 
weighing him down to one side and making 
his uneven gait more unsteady. The holloweyed little boy at his side, clung hard to the 
bony hand, and trotted anxiously along in 
unsmiling silence. 
"Fourteen-year-olds have, however, a liberal allowance of self-preserving concentration on their own affairs, and our strange 
neighbors played a very small part in the life 
of the two romping tomboys. Most of the 
summer had passed before we gave them 
more than a passing thought, half aversion, 
half compassion. 
"I had plenty of other things to think of, 
things that bothered my fourteen-year-old 
mentality to the verge of utter bewilderment. 
My troubles began on the day when Marcelle 
and I came in from the beach and found a 
new group of guests, evidently familiars of 
the house; a handsome, white-haired father, 
a magnificently oriental-looking mother, 
two elegant young lady daughters, velveteyed and langorous, and a grave, noble-looking son, with thoughtful, kind, dark eyes 
and long, slim, delicate hands .. . all of these 
things yes, but also unmistakeably with Negro blood. 'Light-colored mulattoes,' I 
diagnosed them with one glance of my American eyes, experienced in such appraisings. 
"I glanced around at the family in astonishment . . . didn't they know that their 
guests were colored people? What ought I 
to do? How could I enlighten them? Perhaps I ought to go and whisper in Marcelle's 
ear and let her devise some way of telling 
her mother. 
" 'Here, my dear,' said Marcelle's mother, 
holding out her hand to me, 'Come, I want 
to introduce you to our friends, Monsieur 
and Madame Perez. They are Americans, 
too, like you, only they have lived in Europe 
so long that we claim them as of us entirely. 
Madame, this is a little American schoolfriend of my Marcelle, but from North 
America .. . it is North America, isn't it, 
dear? The Perez were from South America 
originally.' 
"The Perez smiled down, out of their kind, 
soft, dark eyes, on the awkward crimsonfaced child, who, bewildered and ill at ease, 
stared at them unhappily. Perhaps Marcelle's family did know that their guests 
were . . . 
"The conversation flowed on, urbane, various, facile, and closed over the head of the 
child, who sat miserably trying to readjust 
her notions of things. I was suffering the 
sick uncertainty that comes to children with 
the first sharp encounter with totally new 
standards. The quite matter-of-fact ignorance of Marcelle's family, that there was 
any other standard than their own, inconceivable to me, gave me a dizzy feeling. I 
did not know what I really felt about it; I 
did not even know what I thought I ought to 
feel, and I hated the moral distress that this 
uncertainty gave me. 308 TH E CRISIS 
"But after they had gone, I had a staggering blow, compared to which these little 
pushings and shovings were as nothing. 
Marcelle's mother and aunt broke out into 
panegyrics of their visitors, who were, I 
gathered, very wealthy, very artistic, very 
gifted, very charitable, very distinguished, 
and, said Marcelle's aunt, forgetting my nationality, 'There's such a fineness about 
them, none of that crudeness you see in most 
other Americans. Sometimes I think it is 
their colored ancestry that gives them that 
refinement. I've noticed that Americans 
with a little colored blood often seem more 
gently bred than . . .' 
"But at this point Marcelle's mother remembered I was there and make a quick 
change of subject. 
"Not that I was capable of protesting. I 
was sunk in a stupor of astonishment so 
extreme that I had no words. As I look back 
on the situation now, there was a comic element in my stupefaction, but I felt none at 
the time, only a sore, hurt surprise, as 
though my mind had suffered an attack from 
a quarter which in the nature of things 
should have been secure. 
"It was not long after this, when I was 
still revolving my new impressions furtively, 
that, loitering on the beach with Marcelle, 
we came upon Jefferson Heywood, towering 
up above the Breton fishermen like a black 
portent. He certainly looked like one to the 
little American girl who gazed at him openmouthed, quite sure that it was physically 
impossible that he, of all people, should be 
there. He had preserved all the insolent selfpossession which had been his old defence 
and showed neither the slightest surprise 
nor discomfiture at being recognized, although he was evidently very drunk again. 
" 'Hello there, Miss Ma'gret,' he said. 
'It's a long way from here to the old elevator, isn't it?' 
" 'Well, Jeff'!' I ejaculated. 'How in the 
world did you get here?'" 
(To be concluded in the May CRISIS) 
BIRD ROMANCE 
MAR Y EFFI E LE E 
THER E are birds, a sound from which, a motion from which, suggest a 
of romance: 
A kildeer darting through the air, sowing 
its seed-like song! 
The oboe of the dove has a sad strain, 
like the sound of forest brooks in the fall. 
The oboe of the dove says that in every 
green leaf, there is blue with the gold: for 
every gold day, a blue or gray night. There 
is blue in the violet and blue in the moss; 
for every singing stream, a bed of somber 
brown or gray; for every lament, a waitingwind. Alas! the oboe of the dove has a sad 
strain. 
To the listless lily-like blooms of the 
honeysuckle vines, the dewy sleepy little 
blossoms of cream and Naples yellow, that 
all night have rested in the still shadows, 
comes this impassioned pilgrim from the 
tropics—this ruby-throated humming bird, 
this dwarf of fire, this bird that has traveled more than half a thousand miles in a 
night, crossing the Gulf and leaving South 
America's ardent days for the brief mating 
bliss in the cool drooping vines that seem 
unmindful of the birds and the fire and 
color born so suddenly in the passive arborplant. 
The calm kingfisher, swirling low over 
the lagoon, swirling low above its shadow 
of sepia and silver, losing its shadow when 
it finds the reeds of gold and the shore! 
In the white winter go those wild outlaws, the crows, into the gaunt black woods 
whose tall straight trees shred the sunset:— 
strips of tangerine and gold torn by the 
ebony—and crows flying through a white 
sky and over a ghostly earth to this weird 
paradise! But, oh, the sweeping desolation 
of their call lingers after them, quivering 
in the air, harrying the heart of man long 
after the crows and the sunset are gone! 309 
The Cardinal's Conc
in 
Autumn -- Spring 
and Winte r NATIONALISM AN D EGYPT 
JESSIE FAUSE T 
The demand of Egypt for self-government and freedom has been fanned 
into a mighty conflagration by the wonderful 
pronouncements, made during the war, on 
the rights of small nations to self-determination. But it must not be forgotten 
that this fire itself is not newly created, 
but has lain smouldering on the hearthstones of Egypt for nearly forty years. 
Egyptian grievances date from 1882, 
when England stepped in as adviser of 
Egypt's complicated political affairs. It is 
true that the Khedive Ismail Pasha had left 
great financial disaster in his wake. It is 
true that his successor, Tewfik Pasha, was 
a weak and incapable ruler. Even extreme 
Nationalists will admit that Lord Cromer, 
who became virtually viceroy of Egypt, did 
work wonders with the chaotic finances, besides introducing a system of irrigation 
which has been the fellah's salvation. 
But with all these improvements, there 
came an accompanying train of evils. In 
the first place, the British had stepped in 
uninvited. They made constant pledges to 
evacuate, it is true, and in the early years, 
went to some pains to declare that their control was to be only temporary. Chamberlain 
promised, in 1882, complete independence 
to Egypt, as did also Gladstone in 1882, 
Salisbury in 1889, and Campbell-Bannerman 
in 1894. Mr. Gladstone indeed went so far 
as to say in August, 1882, "Do we contemplate an indefinite occupation of Egypt? 
Undoubtedly, of all things in the world, that 
is a thing which we are not going to do." 
And as long as Mr. Gladstone was in 
power, Lord Cromer bided his time and 
was careful not to carry his authority with 
too high a hand. Even then, asserts Wilfrid 
Scawen Blunt, an authority on English rule 
in Egypt, Lord Cromer never had the least 
thought of encouraging "the prudent development of Egypt's institutions, promised 
in the Queen's speech of February, 1882." 
As soon as Mr. Gladstone went out of 
power. Lord Cromer adopted different tactics. With the death of Tewfik in 1892, 
Abbas Hilmi became Khedive. He was 
eighteen then,—a keen, high-spirited lad. 
Conflict between himself and Lord Cromer 
was inevitable. It came in the choice of 
a ministry, in which the English decision 
stood. Thereafter, all Egypt knew that 
edicts issued by Abbas, had first passed English censorship. But this era marked the 
definite beginning of the New Nationalist 
Party. 
The British still kept up their promise of 
withdrawing from Egypt at the earliest possible moment. But after the campaign of 
the Sudan in 1898-1899, even the most guileless Egyptian knew that the nation had 
taken on its shoulders a veritable old man 
of the sea. The hard work of the campaign, 
concentrating in the affairs at Fashoda and 
at Omdurman, had fallen on the Egyptians 
but the British claimed by " 'right of conquest' to share in the settlement of the administration and legislation of that country." The heavy yearly charges for the 
maintenance of the conduct of Sudanese 
affairs became part, however, of the Egyption Budget. 
Great Britain was in Egypt to stay. The 
very success of Lord Cromer's financial adjustment, which for all its success, worked, 
by taxation, great hardship to the poorer 
classes, showed the immense recuperative 
powers of the country. It was not in human nature to give up such a gold-mine 
Not the least task of the British official, 
was to undertake to prove to the Egyptian 
that it was to Egypt's benefit to remain 
under British rule. 
The Egyptian chafed as much at this 
hypocrisy as he did at the exploitation of 
his country. But even more galling than 
the bearing of these burdens, was the 
British administration of Egyptian Civil 
Service. The British in the Civil Service 
were usually arrogant, self-seeking individuals who would not undertake to instruct 
the native, for fear he might supplant them. 
Native officials were treated with patronage, 
not to say insolence, and often subordinated 
to incompetent English. The big salaries 
and the important positions were understood to be European perquisites; the minor 
positions went to Egyptians, who even then 
310 NATIONALISM AN D EGYP T 311 
received only a third or a half of the salary given an Englishman holding a similar position. 
Egyptians could not be sure of justice 
in the courts. There was the famous Denshawai incident, in which a British officer 
came to blows with a fellah who with his 
friends defended himself. The officer infuriated, rushed off to his camp, some two 
miles distant, but on the way, succumbed to 
sunstroke. This was proved again and 
again by competent medical authority. But 
nothing could keep four of the fellaheen 
from meeting with punishment by death and 
their friends from an extravagant term of 
imprisonment. 
Added to these grievances, was the fact 
that Egyptian activities, such as wheat, 
tobacco and sugar raising, were killed off 
in the interest of British exporters. Less 
palpable, but no less far-reaching in effect, the British administrator rarely tried 
to understand the temper of the people. 
Lord Cromer, although his stay in Egypt 
lasted over twenty years, never troubled, 
according to Duse Mohamed, to learn Ara ­
bic. 
Meanwhile, although Egypt was still supposed to be a part of the Turkish Empire, 
the world became used to the establishment 
of a "veiled" protectorate in that country. 
The outbreak of the World Wa r made this 
condition more apparent. Abbas Hilmi, 
still Khedive of Egypt at this time, showed 
plainly his determination to link Egypt 
with Turkey and to cast in his lot with the 
Germans. The British promptly deposed 
him, and placed Hussein Kamel on the 
throne, December 1914, as the first Sultan 
of Egypt. But with his promotion to 
power, came also the formal declaration 
from Great Britain that she was establishing a protectorate over Egypt. 
The protectorate was merely a "war 
measure", the British said, and beyond that, 
said almost nothing more. This proclamation served to irritate further not only 
those Nationalists who had long since 
chafed under the "temporary" control of 
the British, but also many of the disaffected. Even then, a little tact might have 
saved the day. If the British had had the 
forethought to accept the Egyptians as 
allies, they would have saved much future 
bitterness. But when Hussein and his Ministry offered the services of the Egyptian 
Army to the Allied cause, they were refused. 
It is true that later the Egyptians were 
called on not only to defend the Suez Canal 
against the aggressions of Turkey, but also 
to contribute—to the extent of a million of 
men!—to the Transport and Labor Corps. 
But the great spiritual impetus to be 
gained by the grateful recognition of an 
involuntary offer to aid in a cause which 
by its very nature made all men equals, 
was indubitably lost. 
The slight was felt all the more keenly 
because of England's attitude toward India. 
She too had offered her resources, both 
men and money. And at Lord Hardinge's 
proposal, Indian soldiers had proceeded to 
France and fought side by side with British 
troops. Through the Legislative and Provincial Councils of the Indian Viceroy, Indians were consulted, and although, as every 
body knows, there were discriminations, 
still some show at least was made of taking 
India into account. 
In addition to this very real grievance, 
were the grievances resulting from the exercise by the British in Egypt of an overzealous and unwise military authority 
which completely overshadowed civil authority. Here again, the British made one 
of those errors so surprising to find on the 
part of a people of such diplomatic experience—they removed an official, Sir John 
Maxwell, who, by virtue of his long experience and his great popularity with all 
classes, might have done much to lessen 
the rigor of the British occupation. The 
Anzacs, it may be remembered, were largely quartered in Egypt at this time and 
their intolerable and insolent attitude 
played its share in increasing the irritation 
of the native populace. Some idea of the 
insults endured by the Egyptians at the 
hands of the Australians may be had from 
a report given in the White Book, of a 
statement made by a Miss Durham, and 
published in the Daily News, April 2, 1919. 
I was in Egypt from November, 1915, to 
April, 1916, and can confirm the statement 
of Dr. Haden Guest, that it is to our own 
treatment of the Egyptians that we owe the 
present trouble. The authorities were certainly to blame in landing colonial troops in 
Egypt without carefully instructing them as 
to the population they would meet there. So 
ignorant were numbers of these men, that 
they imagined Egypt was English, and that 
the natives were colored intruders. "Why 312 TH E CRISIS 
I N ANCIEN T EGYP T 
were these—niggers allowed i n here at all? " 
Mor e than one Australia n said that he 
would clear the lot out, i f he had his way. 
They treated the natives wit h cruelty and 
contempt. In the canteen i n whic h I worked, 
a very good native servant was kicked and 
knocked about simpl y because he did not 
understand an order given him by a soldier. 
A n educated native i n the town, was struck 
i n the mouth and had his inlai d walkin g stick 
snatched from him by a soldier who wanted 
it. Mor e than one Englis h resident said to 
me : "It wil l take years to undo the harm 
that has been done here by the army. " Personally, I felt that were I an Egyptian , I 
should have spared no effort to evict the 
British . I felt ashamed of my country,— 
bitterl y ashamed. . . . 
To make matters worse, for the first few 
days after the troops arrive d i n quantities, 
the drin k shops were all open all day, and 
the unlovely results filled the natives wit h 
disgust and contempt. It was reported, I do 
not know wit h wha t truth, that drunken 
men had snatched the veils from Moslem 
women. 
The Armistic e found Egyptia n dissatis 
faction runnin g high . Durin g the course of 
the war, Grea t Britai n had deliberately 
created an independent kingdom of the 
Hedjaz, also Moslems, but inferio r i n Egyp ­
tia n eyes; and their newl y created ruler. 
Emi r Faisal , was to have a seat a t the 
Peace Conference. Armenia , Syria , and 
Lebanon, newly created states, whic h as 
Turkis h provinces, had fo r the most part 
fought against the Allies, also sent delegations. Bu t here was Egypt,—technicall y 
an independent government, assured by 
Grea t Britai n that the establishment of the 
protectorate was only a wa r measure, whic h 
carried the implicatio n tha t it wa s only fo r 
the duratio n of the war,—her e wa s Egyp t 
absolutely debarred from a place at the 
Peace Table . 
Nationalism became an encirclin g fire 
which for the first time touched all classes. NATIONALISM AN D EGYP T 313 
Students of E l Azhar , the famous universit y 
i n Cairo , joined wit h workin g classes; the 
people of the cities joined wit h the fella ­
heen i n an appeal fo r the recognition of 
Egyptia n independence. Finally , the extreme Nationalists got together a deputation of their own to go to Paris and to la y 
claim before the Conference, unde r the hig h 
name of self-determination, to a complete 
an d immediat e autonomy. Th e more conservative element did not approve of this 
deputation, but the hars h treatment received by this body at the hands of Grea t 
Britain , finally brought "even these into line. 
Th e contemptuous regar d i n whic h both 
Englis h and America n representatives held 
this deputation, strikes a chil l to the hearts 
of those who have cherished the belief that 
the wa r was a "holy " one, waged i n the in ­
terest of rea l liberties. The delegates were 
i n no sense undeserving of regard. They 
were chosen by the Legislativ e Assembl y 
whic h ha d been elected b y the Egyptia n 
people before the war. 
Th e members of the Delegation were Saad 
Zaghlu l Pasha , president, Mohome t Pash a 
Mahmoud , and Ismai l Pash a Sidky . 
Zaghlu l is of fellah (peasant) stock and 
received his education at E l Azhar, drinkin g i n al l the beliefs and traditions of its 
thousand yea r existence and fostering and 
promulgatin g the spiri t of nationalism wit h 
the other members of "the faithful " who 
thronged its portals. Mahpme t .Pash a Mah ­
moud, also of fella h origin , was educated at 
Oxford , i n England , where he wa s popularl y styled "the Prid e of Balliol. " Mah ­
moud at one time published a nationalisti c 
journal , i n Cairo , whic h was suppressed 
because of the stan d whic h he took against 
the foreign invasion. The thir d delegate, 
Ismail Pash a Sidky , has been least heard 
of iri the West. H e alone, of the three, is 
said to be of noble birth , and is reputed to 
have the greatest ability . 
O n Novembe r 3, 1918, this Delegation 
called on Sir Reginal d Wingate , Britis h 
Hig h Commissione r i n Egypt , and asked for 
passports to London . Their request was 
repeatedly set aside and the men themselves virtuall y imprisoned i n Cairo . Mean ­
while , Rushd i Pasha , Egyptia n Prime Min ­
ister, also sought access to Londo n to confe r wit h Grea t Britai n on the futur e of 
Egyptia n affairs. 
O n bein g refused, he tendered his resignatio n which , after some delay, wa s accepted Marc h 2, 1919. The Britis h Govern ­
ment, finding it difficult to form a new min ­
istry , put the blame on Zaghlul's deputation and ordered them to headquarters. 
Ther e they were accused, according to Ma ­
homet Pash a Mahmoud , who later visited 
this country, of causing a delay i n the formatio n of a new ministr y and menaced wit h 
dire penalties under martia l law. 
O n Marc h 8, Zaghlul , Mahmoud , Sidk y 
and Hama d Pash a El-Bassi l were arrested, 
secretly entrained, and deported to Malta , 
where they were detained fo r some time, 
until the Britis h allowed them to proceed to 
Paris. The period of the exile of these men 
was marke d by broadcast riotin g i n whic h 
even the women shared. This was met by 
the most merciless severity on the part of 
the British . 
Al y Chaaraoui, Vice-Presiden t of the 
Delegation and member of the Legislativ e 
Assembly , says i n a letter to Genera l Allen -
by : 
The most distinguished women i n Egyp ­
tia n society were not able to see their fellowcountrymen treated i n this way , and keep 
silent about it. Th e curtai n tha t ordinaril y 
separates our women of the upper classes 
from the outside world , did not prevent them 
from expressing their sentiments. I n fact 
nearly three hundred women of the most important familie s of Cairo , organized on 
Marc h 20, a simpl e and dignified manifesta ­
tion, after they had read i n the mornin g 
newspapers tha t permission had been 
granted them. Bu t when they got out of 
their carriage s and reached the home of 
Saa d Zaghlu l Pasha , the Britis h soldiers 
surrounded them on all sides, wit h fixed bayonets pointed towards them, and compelled 
them to remain two hours under a broilingsun, without allowin g them to wal k or to go 
home i n their carriages. 
One of the Egyptia n women said, "Mak e 
of me, i f you will , a second Miss Cavell! " 
N o pains were spared to keep the members of the Peace Conference i n touch wit h 
the aspirations of the Egyptia n Delegation. 
Fo r instance, this telegram was sent on 
December 4, 1918, to Mr . Lloy d George : 
Wha t is happenin g i n Egypt , is so directly 
i n opposition wit h the traditions of Grea t 
Britai n and wit h the libera l policy of whic h 
your Excellenc y has alway s been the champion, that the Egyptian s have come to ask 
themselves whether the principle s that the 
statesmen of the Empir e do not cease to proclaim i n their dail y declarations, are applic ­
able to certain fractions of humanit y only, 
—to the exclusion of others less favored. 
Whe n you r grea t country has just come 314 TH E CRISIS 
victoriousl y out of a struggl e that it entered 
only fo r the sake of liberty, does it permit 
that, i n its name, this same libert y is denied 
us? 
An d on Januar y 11, 1919, the Delegation 
sent this message to Georges Clemenceau: 
To the President of the Peace Conference 
whic h wil l decide the fate of the small na ­
tions, not on the basis of internationa l compensations, but on that of absolute justice, 
the Egyptia n Delegation, charged to defend 
before the Conference the cause of Egypt , 
declares tha t i n contradiction to the new 
principle s born of the Allie d victory—brut e 
force prevents us from leavin g our country 
to submit to the Conference our demands 
and nationa l aspirations. . . . 
I n the name of liberty, of whic h you have 
been durin g your whole life , by wor d and 
pen, the untirin g champion ; i n the name of 
justice, whic h yo u have promised to make 
the basis of the deliberations and decisions 
of the Conference; i n the name of humanit y 
which cannot permit that a people pass from 
hand to hand like vulga r merchandise, 'we 
implor e you not to interpre t our silence and 
failur e to appea r i n person at Paris as our 
acceptance of the domination imposed upon 
us nor to decide the futur e of our nation 
without havin g heard us. 
None of the letters and telegrams sent to 
these authorities brought any response, 
though one letter was left i n person by a 
friend of the Delegation, at Downin g Street. 
The purpose of the Delegation on arriv ­
in g i n Paris, was to la y their case before 
Mr . Wilson . The y knew that he wa s the 
author of the "Fourtee n Points " and the 
father of the doctrine of self-determination 
for small nations. The y could not but believe i n his sincerity. Accordin g to the 
Egyptia n Whit e Book, whic h the Delegation published on finally reaching Paris, 
four telegrams, dated December 14, 1918; 
December 27, 1918; Januar y 3, 1919; and 
Januar y 13, 1919, were sent to Mr . Wilso n 
from Cair o by the Delegation. No t one of 
these received an answer. 
On Apri l 22, 1919, the Delegates, now i n 
Paris, sent Mr . Wilso n the followin g letter: 
I have the honor to submit that the entry 
of the Unite d States into the Worl d Wa r in 
1917, and her wonderful and inspired leadership durin g the past two years, have given 
the Egyptia n people confidence that their 
claims to independence, guaranteed by the 
• new Society of Nations, would receive a 
hearin g from the Peace Conference and the 
support of all who are longin g for a durable 
worl d peace. 
Fro m the beginnin g of the war, the Egyp ­
tia n nation has never faltered i n its loyalty 
to the Entent e Alliance , and especially to 
Grea t Britain . To avoid the raisin g of embarrassin g questions, the Egyptia n leaders 
decided to wor k whole-heartedly fo r the 
winnin g of the war, and postpone discussion 
of the futur e of Egyp t unti l the Peace Con ­
ference. 
A delegation has been sent to Paris b y the 
Egyptian s to present their case. W e represent al l elements of the Egyptia n population, 
Mohammeda n and Christia n alike . 
I quite understand tha t you r Excellenc y is 
over-burdened wit h demands fo r audiences. 
Bu t the importanc e of our cause justifies 
the request tha t one of my colleagues an d I 
be received by you on the day an d a t the 
hour when you are able to gran t us a 
hearing. 
I have the honor to be, Sir, you r obedient 
and humbl e servant, 
SAA D ZAGHLUL , 
President of the Egyptia n Delegatio n and 
Vice-Presiden t of the Legislativ e Assembly . 
On Apri l 24, the President of the Dele ­
gation received this reply : 
I beg to acknowledge receipt of you r letter 
of Apri l 22, and to say tha t i t wil l be 
brought to the President's attention. 
Sincerely yours, 
GILBER T F . CLOSE , 
Confidential Secretary to the President. 
Thre e days after the arriva l of the Dele ­
gation i n Paris, wor d wa s sent everywhere , 
that Mr . Wilso n recognized the Britis h protectorate of Egypt . I n this connection, the 
account of Mr . Bullitt's report to the Chairma n of the Committe e on Foreig n Affairs 
(in this country ) is most interesting. Ac ­
cordin g to Mr . Bullitt , Mr . Wilso n wa s 
urged by the Britis h to put an end to the 
Egyptia n difficulty by acknowledgin g the 
protectorate, since i t wa s his "Fourtee n 
Points " whic h had caused the whol e trou ­
ble. Th e matte r Mr . Bullit t recalled, wa s 
settled the mornin g on whic h it was brought 
up, before luncheon. 
Senator Kno x opined at this point, wit h 
obvious sarcasm, tha t "Tha t wa s a good 
deal of time to spend on the affairs of a 
small state like Egypt" ! 
Mr . Bullit t rejoined tha t Senator Kno x 
ought to know how i t wa s done, since he 
1 ad been Secretary of State. 
"Yes, " replied Senator Knox , "bu t we 
never chewed them up tha t fast" ! 
In spite of the declaration of the President's recognition of the protectorate, the 
Delegation kept their splendid, i f somewhat 
inconvenient, fait h and on Apri l 29, and 
Tune 6, 1919, two more letters wer e sent 
to President Wilson . In one of these letters Saa d Zaghlu l says: I N MODER N EGYP T 
315 316 TH E CRISIS 
Th e principles—whic h were declared i n 
the name of the America n people as the 
basis of a democrati c and a durabl e peace 
—have become so deep-rooted i n the hearts 
of the whole Egyptia n people, tha t they revolted, unarmed , fo r the applicatio n of these 
principle s to their country. Their absolute 
fait h i n the fourteen points, i n the speech of 
September 27, last, and i n other declarations 
wa s unshakable . An d the bullets of the 
Britis h Arm y i n Egypt , were powerless to 
shake their firm belief i n your ability—an d 
i n the abilit y of the America n people—to 
realize the principle s for whic h they ha d 
fought and won. I n the deportation of my 
colleagues and myself, the Egyptia n people 
saw an attempt on the part of the Britis h 
authoritie s to deprive the country of the 
benefit of your consideration. 
Their wil l prevailed. W e were released 
and our first duty on arrivin g a t Paris, was 
to request your Excellenc y for an audience. 
This honor wa s denied to us, and a few days 
later, the recognition by the government of 
the Unite d States of Americ a of the Britis h 
protectorate over Egypt , wa s published 
throughout the world . 
Accordin g to informatio n received, the 
news i n Egyp t fell on deaf ears. The Egyp ­
tians could not imagine tha t the principle s 
whic h promised to the worl d a new era of 
politica l freedom and politica l equality 
woul d consecrate the servitude of a whole 
nation. 
The decision of the Peace Conference wit h 
regard to Egypt , resulted i n a policy of 
systematic revenge by the Britis h militar y 
authorities throughout the country. Town s 
and village s have been submitted to most 
awfu l exactions. Some village s have been 
completely burned, and thousands of families are without shelter. People who do not 
salute Britis h officers are court martialled . 
Th e koorbash * is being most freely used. 
Notables are being maltreated and imprisoned. Wome n were violated, and i n one 
case a husband (who was present) wa s shot 
dead by the troops whil e attempting to defend the honor of his wife . 
An d all this because the Egyptia n people 
have dared to demand their politica l emancipation ! 
The answe r came i n a few days: 
Paris, Jun e 9, 1919. 
I am writin g you on behalf of the President, to acknowledge the receipt of you r letter of the 6th and to express regret that 
the President's time has been so completely 
taken up tha t he has not had an opportunity 
to make an appointment to see you. 
Sincerely yours, 
GILBER T F . CLOSE . 
England , thoroughly alarmed by the persistent rioting , first recalled Lor d Allenb y 
•Th e lash. 
from Syri a an d pu t hi m i n charge of affairs i n Egypt . The n she determined to 
send Lor d Milne r a t the head of a stron g 
mission to inquir e into the causes of the 
various outbreaks. Accordin g to Lor d 
Curzon , the mai n object of Lor d Milne r and 
his associates was—"i n consultation wit h 
the Sulta n and his ministers an d representative Egyptian s of al l classes—to devise 
the details of a constitution b y whic h al l 
these partie s shall be able, i n their severa l 
spheres and i n a n increasin g degree, to cooperate i n the management of Egyptia n affairs " 
The promis e of the specia l missio n faile d 
to calm Egypt . Extrem e Nationalists 
pointed out tha t this promis e ha d been 
wrun g from Englan d only by din t of threats 
of violence. Others objected, on the groun d 
that Egyptia n affairs were internationa l 
and dealing wit h the missio n reduced them 
to the status of England's domestic interests. Ther e was a prett y genera l determinatio n to boycott the missio n on its arrival . Thus, matters have come to a n impasse. 
Th e East and the West are clashin g not 
only over separate and distinc t ideas, but 
also over ideas whic h are practicall y similar. Eac h is determined to gai n an d main ­
tai n its own supremacy. England , havin g 
once seized Egyp t i n her grip , is holdin g on 
wit h all he r bulldo g tenacity. Egypt's re ­
quest for autonomy means practicall y nothin g to England . Grea t Britain's sovereignty must be maintained . "Le t nobody, " 
says Mr . Balfour, "i n Egyp t or elsewhere, 
make any mistake about that. " 
Bu t Egyp t is thoroughl y aroused now. 
She sees Englis h motives clearl y and estimates their worth . "Th e abyss, " says Saa d 
Zaghlul , "between the aggressors and their 
victims, has become deeper. Th e struggl e 
becomes fiercer. This struggl e is unequal, 
if one judges from the viewpoin t of bruta l 
force against unarme d right ; but it is a 
struggl e from whic h Egypt , sooner or later, 
wil l come fort h victorious, because she defends an ideal, an d there is n o force on 
earth tha t can indefinitely conquer a n 
idea. " 
Wh o doubts tha t Egyp t is reall y speakin g fo r the whole dar k world ? Thu s is the 
scene bein g staged fo r the greatest and 
most lastin g conflict of peoples. TH E NATIONAL 
Y.W. C. A. AN D 
TH E NEGRO 
M Y DEA R SIR : 
ON December 31, 1919, the 
International Student Volunteer 
Convention met i n Des Moines, 
Iowa . Th e secretaries of the Y . M . 
C. A . and Y . W . C. A . did the recruitin g of student delegates i n the 
colleges and universities. 
Previous to the opening of the 
convention, the colored secretaries 
had been assured of no discrimina ­
tion ; Mr . De Frant z of the Internationa l Committe e of the Y . M . 
C. A . saw Dr . Penfield of the Hospitalit y Committe e i n Des Moines, 
personally, and wa s assured tha t 
the secretaries of the Y . M . C. A . 
and Y . W . C. A . woul d be accommodated i n the hotel, wit h their 
respective staffs. 
I arrive d i n Des Moines, three days before 
the convention opened, to help allocate colored students; on my arriva l the local Y . W . 
C. A . secretary told me tha t Dr . Penfield 
said tha t the hotels would not receive colored guests. I immediately took the matter 
up wit h the Y . W . C. A . secretary, who was 
workin g wit h the Convention Committee, 
and wit h Mr . Wilbu r Smith , Executiv e of 
the Convention, demandin g that as a member of the staff of the Nationa l Boar d of the 
Y . W . C. A. , I be accommodated i n the same 
hotel i n whic h the staffs of the Y . M . C. A . 
and Y . W . C. A . were to be housed. 
Th e next mornin g the colored secretaries 
of the Y . M . C. A . arrive d and were, also, 
informed tha t there were no accommodations 
fo r the colored secretaries—they also took 
the matte r up wit h the officials of the convention, who i n tur n took the matte r up wit h 
the hotel manager. The mornin g that the 
convention opened, the matte r was settled 
wit h the hotel manage r and the men secretarie s of the Y . M . C. A . and Dr. George 
Haynes, one of the speakers on the convention program, were admitted to the hotel. 
The Senior Secretary of the Y . W . C. A. , 
however, informed Mr . Turner, of the Student Voluntee r Convention, tha t she would 
allocate he r colored women secretaries. Miss 
Conde. called the four colored secretaries 
into a conference. In spite of the fact that 
the men secretaries had been admitted to 
the hotel, Miss Conde. told me that i n demandin g tha t I be accommodated i n the 
hotel wit h the rest of my staff, I was actin g 
contrary to the customary policy of the Y . 
W . C. A . She furthe r stated tha t it was the 
policy of the Y . W . C. A . to take the middle 
ground, that they could make no demand of 
the hotel association that they admit us, 
and furthe r stated that, had the Executiv e 
of the Colored Wor k been i n Des Moines, she 
would never have taken that stand or allowed me to have taken that stand. She also 
clearly stated that they could not afford to 
do such, because they migh t alienate the 
whit e constituency of the Associatio n i n that 
state, and informed us that she had made arrangements fo r the colored secretaries to be 
housed i n the whit e local Y . W . C. A. , as we 
were. 
Followin g the convention, a staff conference of the secretaries was held, for which 
we had to remai n i n the cit y two nights. 
The local Associatio n refused to accommodate us for the remainin g two nights after 
the convention had closed,—saying tha t the 
convention being over, they could not establish a precedent by keeping us i n their 
MIS S CATHARIN E D . LEALTAD . 
317 318 TH E CRISIS 
dormitory, and we were forced to move out 
and find other accommodations fo r the remainin g two nights. Durin g tha t staff conference, I made a publi c statement that the 
Christia n spirit, for whic h they stood, had 
been put to the acid test i n Des Moines, and 
that they ha d failed us utterly. I furthe r 
stated that I could not keep my self-respect 
nor the respect of the people of my race i f I 
remained wit h the Y . W . C. A.,—therefore , 
I resigned. 
Because of my attitude and action i n Des 
Moines, the Genera l Secretary of the Na ­
tiona l movement called a meeting of all the 
colored Fiel d Workers i n Ne w York , on our 
return from Des Moines, because she felt 
that the Triennia l Convention, to be held i n 
Cleveland, Ohio, wa s so near tha t there had 
to be an understanding wit h the colored secretaries, so tha t there woul d not be another 
situation such as there was i n Des Moines. 
In that conference she told the colored secretaries tha t even i n Cleveland, Ohio, if 
there were hotels whic h were willin g to accommodate colored guests, she thought tha t 
it was best tha t the colored secretaries un ­
derstand tha t colored delegates to the convention should not go to the hotels, because 
their presence there, migh t be offensive to 
their southern white delegates, and the 
Association did not wish to alienate that 
group. The secretaries present made no protest—in fact, Miss Adel e Ruffin proceeded to 
explain , fo r the benefit of those of us who 
had not been there, tha t at the time of the 
Louisville , Ky. , convention, the colored women ha d consented to go no faste r i n their 
wor k than the attitude of the southern whit e 
women woul d warrant . 
I thin k tha t such a polic y of compromis e 
and a policy whic h caters to the whims and 
prejudices of souther n whites, is anythin g 
but Christia n and tha t the publi c at large 
should know of the attitude an d policy of 
this organization. 
Yours ver y truly , 
CATHARIN E D . LEALTAD . 
TH E NEGRO FACES AMERICA 
(Excerpts from a forthcoming book of that 
title by HERBER T J. SELIGMANN ) 
THE chief problem of race relations i n 
the Unite d States, is the education of 
white people to decency i n their attitude towar d colored citizens. The nation wil l 
never be made whole i n its own conscience 
while overt lawlessness stalks i n the Unite d 
States Senate and the House of Representatives. 
An y group whic h desires materia l advantage from the exploitation of another 
group, always takes pains to characterize 
its victims as inferior. Ther e have been 
times when Englishme n were as assured of 
the inferiorit y of the Iris h as man y a white 
ma n now is about the "nigger" . The Tur k 
is, doubtless, convinced of the inferiorit y of 
the Armenian ; the Magya r and the Czech, 
the Rumania n and the Magyar, the Polish 
noble and the Jew, all furnis h examples of 
oppression, justified by spurious "inferiori-
*Published by Harper and brothers 
ties". Unde r cover of these appeals to contempt and passion, the huma n relations, 
whic h make civilizatio n possible, are ruth ­
lessly violated. 
I n al l the disorders tha t took place i n 
1919, the Negr o fought i n self-protection. 
H e no longe r relied on promise s or on protection, even of the federa l government. 
Wit h a Democrati c administratio n i n power, 
the Negr o had littl e to hope from federa l 
protection durin g an d immediatel y after the 
worl d war. I n the nationa l capital, Jim -
Crowism ha d crept in . Negroe s were not 
served i n the restaurants of the Capitol , 
and they found the attitude of the South 
reflected everywher e i n Washington . The y 
found the Departmen t of Justic e being used, 
not to examine into deplorable conditions 
whic h had brought about race riots, but to 
trace the tenuous connections between 
"reds" , I. W . W. , and the Negro , an d to pro-TH E NEGRO FACES AMERIC A 319 
claim Negr o insurrection and radicalism to 
a willin g press and a credulous public. It is 
emancipatio n to distrust others and to rely 
upon oneself. Never, perhaps, i n the history 
of the country, was there more distrust of 
America n whit e men by Negroe s than after 
the worl d war. The y had taken the measure 
of the whit e press and its news distributin g 
organizations. The y had seen local government crumbl e and brutalit y reig n almost unchecked, except by their own bullets. They 
had seen the federal government, through its 
one department articulat e on their affairs, 
pursue not their oppressors, but those who 
were voicin g their heart-felt, burnin g sense 
of injustice. 
I n the pla y of politica l life , whic h has 
consisted i n endeavoring to make recalcitran t fac t fit the mold of men's desire, the 
colored Unite d States citizen has been the 
victim of extraneous issues, created and 
constantly invoked by those who i n effect 
wan t to divorce the practice of America n 
government from the affirmations upon 
which , presumptively, it rests. 
I n fifty-four years Negroes i n the Unite d 
States demonstrated tha t not only could 
they acquire the fundamentals of education 
necessary to participatio n i n the processes 
of democratic government, but they have 
made progress that woul d be considered extraordinar y when measured by any standards. Against the initia l opposition and disbelief expressed i n the Blac k Codes and subsequent disfranchisement i n the Southern 
States, against the repression, most violentl y imposed b y the Ku-Klu x and still a 
part of the code of man y whit e Americans, 
they have wit h relentless determination built 
business enterprise, gone to the land and 
made it yield to them, fought their wa y by 
sheer wor k and talent, into the closed ranks 
of the professions, furnished to the Unite d 
States government distric t attorneys, consula r and diplomati c officers, and against 
most determined opposition, militar y leaders 
and soldiers. I n the commerce between cultured representatives of the Negr o and 
whit e races, where the Negr o is freed from 
the attitude of defense and awkwar d apprehension and the whit e ma n has progressed 
beyond the savage canon whic h says that 
strangers are enemies, a reciprocity becomes possible, tha t has a sligh t zest of adventure and challenges perception. Fro m 
the point of view of such friendships, whic h 
the southern code would bar, distinctions of 
color are as extraneous as those of nationality. It is at once tragi c and laughable 
that the meanest white man , whose universe 
is bounded by his local newspaper and his 
own hates, should take precedence over the 
colored student and artist; it is one of those 
ironies of whic h the worl d is prodigal, tha t 
by a rigi d dogma enforced wit h all the conviction of inquisition, bounds should be set 
to the wor k of the scientist, that people 
should be misinformed, hates perpetuated 
and introduced i n new fields, creative spirits 
checked and frustrated. 
To no small degree is the development of 
America n musica l comedy, its intriguin g 
rhythms and its popula r songs, due to colored composers and librettists. I n the gap 
between America n idealism and the hardboiled soul of America n practicality, the 
America n Negr o has interposed his warmt h 
and vivacity . 
The first step i n an approach to the problems of race relations, wil l be a demand upon 
the part of Unite d States citizens for in ­
formation, exact informatio n not only of the 
anthropologist, but wit h regard to the treatment of colored men and women by whit e 
men and women i n the Unite d States. Whe n 
those facts are made known , America n public opinion wil l demand a change, amountin g 
to revolution. If such a demand is not made, 
antagonism between whit e and colored people, played upon for politica l and chiefly for 
economic and industria l purposes, bolstering 
inefficiency, ignorance, and Prussianism i n 
the South, infecting the entire people wit h 
intolerance, wil l become one of man y forces 
disintegratin g an y orderly processes of civilization. 
It rests wit h informed and intelligent 
minorities, wit h class-conscious laborites, 
colored and white, to rescue the relations 
between white and colored American s from 
the embitterment into whic h they threaten 
to gravitate . Meanwhile , the America n Ne ­
gro, disillusioned, newly emancipated from 
reliance upon any whit e savior, stands 
ready to make his unique contribution to 
wha t ma y sometime become America n 
civilization . National Association • for • the 
Advancement of Colored People. 
MEMBERSHI P CAMPAIG N 
THE Marc h CRISI S contained a summar y 
of the work of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
for the yea r 1919 , whic h we are sure wil l be 
of the utmost interest to CRISI S readers as 
indicatin g a yea r of great activit y and 
progress. W e would remin d our readers 
that every live organization lives i n the 
present rathe r than in the past, tha t whil e 
it ma y "poin t wit h pride " to past achievements, it must liv e i n the present and pla n 
wisely for the future. Th e Nationa l Asso ­
ciation is not satisfied wit h havin g achieved 
a membership of more than 91,00 0 i n 1919 , 
but wants to retain this membership and 
increase it. 
Durin g 1919 , Associatio n members and 
contributors backed the nationa l wor k to the 
extent of $61,775.70 ; $34,266.2 5 of this 
amount came from branc h memberships, bein g approximatel y 5 0 per cent, of the 
amount of minimum membership fees received by the branches; $8,364.6 3 wa s received from contributors to the Genera l 
Fun d of five dollars and over; $18,130.3 7 
came from contributors to the Anti-lynchin g 
and Lega l Defense Funds. 
It is interesting to note that approximate ­
l y 62,30 0 individuals contributed to the Association's support as follows: 
Contributors General Special 
of Fund Funds 
$100 0 and over 1 5 
50 0 to 99 9 3 1 
10 0 to 49 9 2 4 3 9 
2 5 to 9 9 6 2 10 5 
1 0 to 2 4 11 8 19 0 
2 to 9 1,03 1 32 3 
Less than 2 60,41 1 2 3 
The proportion of each Branch 
Membership usually remitted to the National Office 
is fifty cents per member or one-half the 
minimum membership fee. 
In 1920 , $78,00 0 must be raised to meet 
the Nationa l Office budget requirements. 
Throug h the Branch Bulletin, the branches 
of the Associatio n have been informe d of 
plans fo r the 192 0 Membershi p Drive , whic h 
is to be known as the One Hundred Per 
Cent Democracy Drive. Th e mor e tha n 
three hundred Associatio n branche s wil l be 
engaged i n enrollin g recruits to the N . A . 
A . C . P . banners durin g March , April , an d 
the earl y part of May , culminatin g at the 
Atlanti c Conference at whic h final reports 
are to be made. 
It wil l readil y be realized tha t the one 
dolla r minimum membership fee does not 
go as fa r i n actua l support of the wor k as 
before the present era of increasin g prices. 
Consequently, specia l efforts are being made, 
through the branches and otherwise, to secure a n increased numbe r of members who 
wil l contribut e large r amounts tha n the one 
dolla r minimum. Particula r attention is 
called to the campaig n to be carrie d on for 
Gol d Certificate and Blu e Certificate members who contribute ten dollars and five dollars, respectively. 
CRISI S readers who have not affiliated wit h 
any branc h an d who ar e not now regula r 
Associatio n members or who usuall y contribut e the minimu m fee, are earnestly in ­
vited to become certificate members. Checks 
and post office orders fo r $10 , or $5 , ma y be 
sent to J . E . Spingarn , Treasurer, 7 0 Fift h 
Avenue , Ne w York . Certificate members 
wil l receive these special certificates, whic h 
are suitable fo r framin g i f desired and entitl e the member to al l publications of the 
Associatio n for one year, i.e., TH E CRISIS , the 
Branch Bulletin and all pamphle t publica ­
tions issued durin g the year, thus enablin g 
the member to keep in touch wit h every 
phase of the Association's campaig n as i t is 
being carrie d on from mont h to month. 
A t a meeting of the Chicag o Branch , held 
on Februar y 22 , at whic h the Rev . Joh n 
Hayne s Holme s of the Communit y Churc h 
of New York, Vice President of the 
Association, was the principal speaker, and at 
whic h $1,02 8 wa s raised an d pledged, mor e 
than $80 0 was raised and pledged i n five and 
ten dolla r memberships alone. This is the 
first report received of a n organized effort 
32 0 WOMAN' S WA R RELIE F CLUB , Syracuse, N . Y . 32 2 TH E CRISIS 
to secure certificate members and is distinctly encouraging. 
Responses are beginnin g to come i n from 
a special appea l sent to a selected list of 
colored men who were asked to contribute 
up to $100 annuall y for the next three years 
(1920, 1921, and 1922). U p to Marc h 1, 
two pledges of one hundred dollars have 
been received; others, who were unable to 
pledge one hundred dollars a yea r for three 
years, have pledged as follows: Two , fifty 
dollars a yea r fo r three years; three, twenty-five dollars a yea r for three years; two, 
ten dollars a yea r for three years; and one, 
five dollars a yea r fo r three years. The 
Associatio n is deeply gratefu l for this response and hopes tha t the numbe r of such 
pledges wil l be considerably increased i n the 
near future. 
TH E ATLANT A CONFERENC E 
T
H E Elevent h Annua l Conference of the 
Associatio n wil l be held some time i n 
Ma y (the exact date is yet to be fixed) at 
Atlanta , Ga . Th e followin g invitations from 
Governor Dorsey of Georgia , Mayo r Ke y of 
Atlanta , the Chambe r of Commerce of At ­
lanta , and the Committe e on Churc h Cooperation of Atlanta , have been received: 
"Mr . Moorfield Storey, 
President, N . A . A . C. P . (In session at 
Cleveland, Ohio.) 
Yo u are urged to hold your 1920 Convention i n the Cit y of Atlanta . It is believed 
that you r meeting here wil l be helpful to 
our state and especially to the colored people 
of the section. 
HUG H M . DORSEY , Governor. " 
"Rev . A . D . Williams, 
Georgi a Delegation, N . A . A . C. P . (In 
session at Cleveland, Ohio.) 
Cit y of Atlant a would be delighted to have 
you r Convention meet here i n 1920. We 
have a very large progressive citizenship 
among the colored people and there is a distinc t harmony and cordia l relation between 
white and colored. We would feel that your 
meeting here would help us i n meeting the 
problem and we would be happy i f we can 
help you. 
JAME S L . KEY , Mayor. " 
"Rev . A . D . Williams, 
Georgi a Delegation, N . A . A . C. P. (In 
session at Cleveland, Ohio.) 
We extend a cordia l invitatio n to you r organization to hold next Convention i n At ­
lanta . 
ATLANT A C HAMBE R OF COMMERCE. " 
"Mr . Moorfield Storey, 
President, N . A . A . C P . Boston , Mass. 
Dea r Sir : 
We have learned wit h interest of the possibilit y of you r Associatio n holdin g its annua l convention i n our city , nex t June . 
Permi t us to add our cordia l invitatio n to 
others whic h have gone to yo u from Atlanta , 
to come. 
In addition to the large membership of the 
local branc h of you r Association , Atlant a is 
ideally situated, both geographicall y and 
climatically , fo r such a gathering . W e hope 
you wil l come. 
Ver y trul y yours, 
COMMITTE E O N CHURC H CO-OPERATION . 
B y Jame s Morton , Executive Secretary." 
Th e Governo r has consented to address 
the conference at one of its sessions, i f he is 
i n the state a t the time, Mayo r Ke y wil l 
speak, and the Chambe r of Commerc e wil l 
send a representative who wil l also address 
the conference. In a late r issue of TH E 
CRISIS , the exact date of the conference and 
an outline of the program wil l be given. 
LEGA L DEFENS E 
CHICAGO 
T N the Januar y CRISIS , mention wa s made 
of the wor k of the Nationa l Associatio n 
in co-operation wit h the Chicag o Branch , in 
the lega l defense of the colored rio t defendants and victims of the Chicag o riots who 
migh t wis h to avai l themselves of the services of counsel provided by the N . A . A . C. 
P. and who otherwise migh t not have had 
adequate lega l protection. Counse l secured, 
the Hon . S. S. Gregory , forme r President of 
the America n Ba r Association , forme r Senator Jame s T. Barbour, and members of the 
Cook Count y Ba r Association , conducted the 
lega l defense unde r the genera l auspices of 
the Join t Committe e to Secure Equa l Justic e 
for Colored Rio t Defendants, composed of . 
representatives of the Cook Count y Ba r As ­
sociation, the Chicag o Urba n League , the 
Chicago Federatio n of Colore d Women's 
Clubs, the Chicago Branch , N . A . A . C . P. , 
and the various churches of the city. 
Sixty-nin e cases were trie d up to Marc h 
1, i n whic h 59 of the defendants wer e acquitted. Fou r cases, i n whic h lif e sentences 
were meted out, are being appealed. 
HILL EXTRADITION CASE 
On 21, Robert L . Hill , alleged 
president of the Progressiv e Farmers 
and Household Unio n of Arkansas, wa s arrested in Topeka , Kan . Governo r Broug h of N. A . A . C. P. 
32 3 
Arkansa s requested his extraditio n to 
Arkansas, to be tried on charges of fomentin g a n alleged uprisin g of Negroe s against 
whites, wit h whic h readers of TH E CRISI S 
ar e alread y familiar, an articl e on the subject havin g appeared i n the December, 1919 , 
CRISIS . Th e Nationa l Office immediately got 
i n touch wit h Governo r Henr y J . Alle n of 
Kansas, requesting the Governo r not to 
gran t extraditio n unti l the Associatio n could 
be represented by counsel to fight the extra ­
dition. Senator Arthu r Cappe r of Kansas, 
member of the Boar d of Directors of the 
Association , joined the Nationa l Office i n 
the appeal to Governo r Allen . Mr . H . T. 
Fishe r of Topeka , Count y Attorne y of 
Shawnee County , Kansas, at the request of 
Senator Cappe r and Nationa l Headquarters, 
volunteered his services as chie f counsel. 
Associated wit h him are three colored attorneys, Messrs. Elish a Scott, Jame s H . 
Guy , and A . M . Thomas. Th e Associatio n 
i n its telegram to the Governo r requesting 
him to deny or withhol d extraditio n unti l 
the Associatio n could be represented by 
counsel, urged that Hil l could not receive 
a fair tria l i n Arkansas; that this fact had 
been conclusively proved by the record of 
tria l and conviction, growin g out of the 
same charges, of the ninety-one colored defendants accused of murder, rioting , nightriding , etc., withi n five days by a jur y from 
whic h al l colored men were excluded, although there were qualified Negr o jurors 
i n the county ; tha t five of the men sentenced 
to death wer e trie d i n one proceeding with ­
out severance, the tria l takin g only fortyfive minutes; tha t counsel appointed by the 
court pu t no witness on the stand i n behalf 
of the defendants and did not ask for any 
change of venue. The precedent of 
Governor McCall of Massachusetts was cited, 
i n his denial, i n 1918 , of the extraditio n of 
Joh n Johnson, a Negro , to West Virginia , 
on simila r grounds. 
A t this writin g (Marc h 1) , the final hearin g of the Hil l case has not been had, so that 
we cannot report wha t Governo r Allen's decision wil l be. Befor e this issue reaches 
the readers, however, Governo r Alle n undoubtedly wil l have rendered his decision. 
W e can assure ou r readers that every effort 
is bein g made b y ou r attorneys i n Hill's behalf. N o expense is being spared to present 
his case adequately and to prevent his extra ­
dition. 
TH E CALDWEL L CAS E 
IN the Januar y CRISIS , the case wa s reviewed of Sergeant Edga r C . Caldwell , 
who had been condemned to die by the 
Alabama courts and in whose behalf legal proceedings had been instituted by the Nationa l 
Associatio n to secure his remova l from the 
jurisdictio n of the State, to the federal 
courts. A n appeal has since been carried to 
the Supreme Court of the Unite d States. 
O n Marc h 4 an d Marc h 5, 1920 , the case was 
argued before that Court on Caldwell's behalf by his Alabam a counsel, Senator 
Charle s D . Kline , and by the Hon . Henr y G. 
Davis, forme r Unite d States Attorne y of 
the Distric t of Columbia , and James A . 
Cobb, counsel for the N . A . A . C. P . The 
Solicito r Genera l of the Unite d States appeared on behalf of the Federa l government, i n the position of amicus curae, filing 
a brie f asserting the jurisdictio n of the 
Unite d States i n the case. 
CLEVELAN D CONFERENC E PLEDGE S 
DURING the three months intervenin g 
between the publication in the 
December CRISIS, of the amounts paid in on account of pledges made at the Cleveland 
Conference, the followin g additiona l payments (up to Marc h 15 ) have been made : 
Branches 
Philadelphia , P a $200.0 0 
Beaumont, Texa s 125.0 0 
Dayton , Ohio 100.0 0 
Toledo, Ohio 100.0 0 
Newark , N . J 100.0 0 
Gary , Ind 70.0 0 
Pensacola, Fl a 50.0 0 
Charleston, W . V a 50.0 0 
Akron , Ohio 40.0 0 
Quincy , Ill. 35.0 0 
Bloomington-Normal, Ill. 26.0 0 
Pueblo, Co l 20.0 0 
Individuals 
C. B. Charlton , Beaumont, Texa s $ 50.0 0 
E . G. Covington , Bloomington, Ill. 25.0 0 . 
Mrs. Butle r Wilson , Boston, Mass. . . 25.0 0 
LYNCHIN G BEFOR E TH E UNITE D 
STATE S CONGRES S 
THE shame of lynchin g has agai n been 
writte n into the record of the Congress 
of the United States. The House of 
Representatives has published the record of the 
hearin g before its judiciar y committee in 
Washington , on Januar y 29 , 1920 , when 
representatives of the Nationa l Associatio n 324 TH E CRISI S 
fo r the Advancemen t of Colored People and 
other organizations speaking fo r the colored 
people of the Unite d States, demanded of the 
federal government tha t a stop be put to the 
shame of America—lynching . 
Th e members of the judiciar y committee 
wer e deeply impressed wit h wha t the speakers had to say—an d wit h reason, as the 
record shows. 
Captai n Arthu r B . Spingarn , representing 
the Nationa l Associatio n for the Advance ­
ment of Colored People, began wit h a forcefu l address as follows: "Th e greatest blot 
on America n civilizatio n today is its record 
for lynching , a crime whic h is unknown i n 
any civilize d country of the worl d other tha n 
America , and a crime whic h has been accompanied by brutalitie s and excesses not 
known even in barbarous Mexico or in 
Turkey during the worst Armenian massacres. 
"Her e is the greatest cancer, eating at the 
vitals of America n civilisation , whic h makes 
Americ a sneered at all over the world . Personally, I have myself seen our civilizatio n 
sneered at i n Europe , i n South America , i n 
Mexico , and even i n Turkey . I n Turkey , I 
heard a lecture delivered by a Turk , and he 
showed pictures of America n lynchings to 
show that Americ a was not a civilize d nation. " 
The constitutionality of anti-lynchin g 
laws came into question at the hearing. Mr . 
Spingar n disposed of the question as follows : 
"Th e government of this country is very 
wisely divided into the executive, the judicial, and the legislative body, and it is not 
for the legislative body to determine, ultimately, whether a bil l is constitutiona l or 
not. If it is probably constitutional, there 
is one prope r wa y of finding it out: by 
puttin g it up to the body whose business it 
is to find out whether it is constitutional.— 
If the la w should be passed, let us pass 
wha t we think is the best law and, if it is 
not constitutional, then for Heaven's sake, 
let us change the Constitution.—We have 
changed the Constitution three times i n the 
last few years and there is another change 
pending, whic h wil l probably go through. 
"I f the America n people can stop long 
enough to change the Constitution to decide whethe r the America n people shall 
drin k or not, or whether 6,000,000 people 
shall vote (Woma n Suffrage Amendment), 
they can at least stop long enough to change 
the Constitutio n to say whethe r 12,000,000 
people can live i n safety. " 
Besides Captai n Spingarn , the Nationa l 
Associatio n fo r the Advancemen t of Colore d 
People ha d five other speakers—Archibal d 
H . Grimke , Dr . Willia m H . Wilson , Jame s 
Weldo n Johnson, Neva l H . Thomas, an d 
Professor George W . Cook, to represent it, 
and one ardent sympathizer, Miss Esthe r 
Morto n Smith , representing the Religiou s 
Society of Friends, of Philadelphia , Pa . Th e 
Nationa l Equa l Rights Leagu e wa s represented by its secretary, Mr . Willia m Monro e 
Trotter. 
Mr . Trotte r asked tha t the Unite d States 
harmoniz e the practices withi n the country 
wit h the democracy fo r whic h the country 
was said to have gone into the worl d war. 
H e protested against allowin g questions of 
constitutionality to hinde r necessary legisla ­
tion, and demanded tha t the best possible 
bil l be frame d and passed. 
"An d then, " he said, "whe n you have tha t 
kin d of a bill , let i t be up to those who wan t 
this country to be disgraced by lynching s 
and wan t the colored people to be the vic ­
tims of lynchings, to rais e the question as to 
the constitutionality of such a law. " 
Dr . Willia m H . Wilson , a membe r of the 
Distric t of Columbi a Branc h of the N . A . 
A . C. P., drove home the emergency whic h 
confronted the nationa l legislature . 
"I n the final analysis, " he said, "govern ­
ment has no reason for bein g except the 
protection of the people who constitute it. 
Al l things else submerge themselves into 
that. A government whic h fails to protect 
the people who constitute it, to tha t extent 
is no government at all. " 
Professor Cook, last of the speakers fo r 
the N . A . A . C. P. , told the Congressiona l 
Committee tha t the best wa y to drive loyalt y 
to their country out of colored people wa s 
to allow lynchin g to continue. 
"Some people speak of the unrest of the 
Negro, " said Professor Cook. "Th e Negr o 
has alway s been the most quiet ma n i n the 
Unite d States. Ther e are a few criminals 
who are among us, naturally , just lik e the 
white criminals, but the unrest i n this na ­
tion is not only wit h Negroes, and I pra y 
to Almight y God tha t when the time comes 
for you to put down unrest i n the form of 
anarchy, that the 12,000,000 of Negroe s 
wil l have a just cause to be on the side 
of the Unite d States. " TH E COLORED DUNBAR THEATRE . PHILADELPHIA , PA. 
Erected by the Dunbar Amusement Corporation, E. C. Brown, president, at a cost of $400,000. It 
seats 1,600 people and is the prettiest theatre in the city The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
IN the beauty of the lilies, Christ wa s bor n 
across the sea, 
Wit h a glor y in His bosom, that transfigures 
you and me. 
A s H e died to make men holy, let us die to 
make men free! 
Julia Ward Howe. 
Harcourt, Brac e and Howe , Inc., have 
published Darkwater, by W . E . B . DuBois. 
The Manchester, England , Guardian publishes "Th e Race Problem I n the Unite d 
States", by Herbert G. Seligmann . This 
same author also writes in the March 
Harper's, on "The Menace of Race Hatred". He 
says i n part: 
If the creation of an alien, race-conscious 
group withi n the Unite d States, resentful, 
and justl y so, of grave injustice and discrimination , is not to loom as a threa t 
against the progress and continuance of our 
civilization , there must be some honest attempt to overtake wit h fact the current 
mythology about the Negr o and about race 
relations. 
Clarenc e C. Whit e write s i n the Musical 
Observer, on "Negr o Music , A Contributio n 
to the Nationa l Musi c of America. " 
We have received the Magazine of the 
Children of the Kingdom, Triangle, Life and 
Labor, The Foundation, The Music Master, 
and a pamphlet, "The First Race Riot 
Recorded in History". 
DARKWATER 
COLORE D people are constantly being 
urged to be cheerful. "Avoi d pessimism" is the slogan which , being interpreted, 
means, "Avoi d the tellin g of unpleasant 
truths" . Bu t it is the truth that sets free. 
In a recent issue of the New Republic, excerpts appeared from Dr. W . E . B . DuBois' 
new book, Darkwater, (Harcourt , Brac e 
and Howe , Inc.), setting forth certain plai n 
facts. The statements were frank, the facts 
were black, the arraignmen t stern. Ye t the 
result has been a host of letters, showin g 
that some, indeed, have been "set free". 
We prin t extracts from two of the most 
striking : 
Dea r Mr . DuBois: 
It seems tha t every environmenta l influ 
ence upon me since m y birth , an d al l 
heredity, wer e consistent factors, conducive 
to the most arrogan t conviction of the superiority " of the whit e race. M y famil y on 
both sides were southerners, Mississippian s 
at first, and then migrate d to Texa s durin g 
the war—t o save their "chattels" , I believe. 
... . A t the age of fourteen, I could prove 
by constructions of the Constitution , tha t the 
South had a lega l righ t to secede. I conscientiously, believed tha t the Negr o wa s 
happie r and better off i n slavery ; tha t he 
was incapable of bein g educated, because he 
was limite d i n intelligence . I wa s simpl y 
the typica l arrogant, superior Southerner. 
The n I went off to college. I learned to 
think. No w I see tha t attitude (my "con ­
scientious convictions" ) i n its true light. I 
despise it. 
In my literar y society I attempted, i n a n 
oratorica l contest, to point out to m y fellow 
whites, the terribl e injustic e we were in ­
flicting upon a whole race, wholl y because 
of intolerance, of senseless prejudice . A s 
you can easily imagine , I wo n the last place, 
—though I had represented m y school successfully several times before. I have argued, 
pleaded, and discussed at grea t length, this 
issue—justice to this fellow race, but wit h 
little success. M y friends considered i t a n 
idiosyncrasy—an d either became angr y or 
smiled. One of m y gir l friends said I could 
not call on he r i f I retained m y friends of 
color. Neve r since have I called upo n her. 
I had begun to feel i t fruitless to secure 
justic e i n this cause. The n a few days ago 
I read the excerpts from you r book, tha t 
were printe d i n The New Republic of 
Februar y 18. This has give n me a new enthusiasm, a greate r determination o f spirit. 
I feel confident tha t I can go back to m y 
communit y and speak agai n to m y neighbors 
i n behalf of justice ; tha t is, i f I do not become a mora l coward. Neve r before have I 
read such effective presentation of the utte r 
cruelty, the terribl e consequences of tha t 
senseless prejudice. 
Likewise , I am beginnin g to have a new 
hope—in the younge r generation—I can, at 
least, talk to them. Fo r myself, I ca n say 
that I feel a new freedom. I have no barriers to restric t me i n the choice of m y 
friends—no limitation s whatsoever. I have 
never found more genuine, kindly , cultured , 
and interesting friends than m y friends of 
color. To have known some of them has 
been a new revelation. Than k God, I am not 
restricted—I am a free man , not enslaved 
by irrational, unjust prejudices. . . 
Yesterda y a few of my Texa s friends 
gathered to celebrate the independence of 
326 TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 32 7 
our state from Mexico , which , i f you recall, 
wa s declared Marc h 2 , 1836 . Eac h of us 
contributed some reading or discussion to 
the occasion. Upo n my turn , I read your 
article . It wa s quite a bomb explosion, as 
al l the others ha d glorified the strides our 
state had taken towards progress and reform. One of the gentlemen present 
ejaculated, "M y God, wh y don't they rise up 
and exterminat e us? " So a livel y discussion ensued. Ther e wer e only five present, 
but I feel tha t each of them has looked upon 
the whole situation from a new angle. The 
hostess, an old southern lady, wit h al l her 
bundle of prejudices intact, is hopeless. Bu t 
her daughter, who takes he r Ph . D . this year, 
offers some encouragement. One of the 
men, too, wa s impressed. 
I tell yo u this, Mr . DuBois, because I believe i t wil l illustrat e the method I hope to 
use—to show tha t it wil l be effective. Tha t 
is, I wan t to present the issue to the people, 
on grounds of justice , expediency, and reasonableness, wholl y withou t bitterness or 
satire, animadvertin g only upon the altruisti c phases. 
I writ e this to let you know that your 
work s have been of muc h value and encouragement to me. J hope that this knowledge 
wil l give yo u some littl e satisfaction, that 
you wil l feel from this evidence and the 
other you receive, that your endeavors have 
been worthwhile . I look forwar d eagerly to 
the publication of the book. 
Sincerely, 
DA N KELLY , 
Ne w Yor k City . 
Dea r Mr . Harcourt : 
I have received a copy of Dr . DuBois' 
"Darkwater, " but I do not know to whom 
I am indebted for the book. I shall be much 
obliged i f yo u wil l let me know. 
I have been a member of the Nationa l 
Associatio n fo r the Advancemen t of Colored 
People and a reader of TH E CRISIS , since 
191 0 and have a profound respect for Doctor 
DuBois and admiratio n for the astounding 
results whic h he has so fa r obtained. I 
am prou d -to have ha d a n opportunity to 
help a littl e i n support of his great work. 
H e is indeed "the chie f spokesman of the 
two hundred millio n men and women of 
Africa n blood " and the whit e man is compelled to listen to him whether he likes the 
talk, or no. One thin g is certain : the white 
ma n has neve r been talked to i n this wa y 
before DuBois' time. 
Wit h kin d regards, I am 
Sincerely yours, 
WM . R . FISHER . 
Swiftwater, Pa . 
WHO SHALL KEEP THE 
KEEPERS? 
LOUISIAN A has a n efficient method for 
bringin g recalcitran t juryme n to reason. Th e Sa n Francisc o Call and Post says: 
Dow n i n Tallulah , Louisiana , a few days 
ago, the communit y was prosecuting a Ne ­
gro for the murde r of a young whit e farmer. 
Bu t the jur y disagreed; one of the twelve 
couldn't see that the Negr o was guilty—no t 
at first. Bu t a mob took the juryma n out into 
the night and whipped him. The n they 
threw him into a mudhole and brought him 
back to the courtroom where—freely and 
willing ly , i n accordance wit h his sworn 
oath, "So help him, God"—he agreed to a 
verdict of murde r i n the first degree. Then 
they ordered the juro r to leave town and 
never to come back. 
The wanderin g juro r ma y find a littl e 
stray consolation i n Voltaire's Candide 
writte n nearly two hundred years ago. 
Candide was caught and put i n the Bulga r 
ian army . One day he decided to take a 
walk, but he was followed and seized by six 
stalwarts, who brought him back to camp 
where he was told he ha d two free choices 
H e could take thirty-two bullets i n his 
brain , or he could ru n naked down the en 
tire line of the regiment, armed wit h sticks 
and stones. H e wished to do neither, but 
finally, by virtu e of a splendid quality of 
free choice implanted i n al l men, he chose 
to be whipped. 
Th e Tallula h juro r was i n no better situa ­
tion ; i f he hadn't obeyed the mob, he would 
probably have dangled from a telegraph pole. 
Bu t one thin g is certain. There is one 
forme r juro r i n the Unite d States, who wil l 
never have any great amount of respect for 
the law. It is a pleasant piece o f news for 
a democracy. 
* * * 
We are glad to note that they do things 
differently i n Lexington , Ky . The Phila ­
delphia, Pa. , Record comments as follows on 
Governor Morrow's stand : 
This shows tha t i n a t least one state, the 
mob is not to be allowed to override the 
orderly processes of the law. . . . 
In upholding the majesty of the law, even 
at a considerable loss of life , Kentuck y has 
set a splendid example to sister states, both 
Nort h and South, for it must not be forgotten that i n the recent past northern 
communities, notably Chicago, Omaha , and 
East St. Louis, have shown an even more 
barbarous spirit than southern mobs. Con ­
gratulations are i n order to the soldiers and 
court officials at Lexington , who so fearlessly did their duty. 
GOOSE AND GANDER 
ANTAGONIST S of Prohibition , point out 
that the Eighteent h Amendmen t is just 
as capable of nullification as the fifteenth . 
Wh y not point out that the same power, 
whic h enforces the Eighteenth , should be 
brought to bear on the Fifteenth ? -The 
Pittsburgh , Pa. , Chronicle argues: 
A Democrati c contemporary remarks: 
"N o matte r wha t individua l views ma y be 328 TH E CRISI S 
held against prohibition , the fac t of the outlawing of the liquor traffic by Federal 
Constitutional amendment makes the chief concern now one of respect fo r the la w of the 
land. A s long as prohibitio n remains a part 
of the fundamenta l law, obviously, there is 
no other course for the government and 
law-abidin g citizens tha n to see tha t it is enforced. The change wa s brought about i n 
the manne r prescribed b y the Constitutio n 
and no encouragement should be given to 
those who woul d set aside prohibitio n i n an 
irregula r way, " etc., etc. 
No w i f the Democrati c press of the countr y would only give its vigorous support to 
another amendment to the Federal 
Constitution, and demand its enforcement without 
fea r or favor, wha t a pleasant sight i t woul d 
be. Reference is made to the Fifteent h 
Amendment, whic h reads as follows: "Th e 
righ t of the citizens of the Unite d States 
to vote shall not be denied or abridged by 
the Unite d States or by any state, on account of race, color, or previous condition 
of servitude. The Congress shall have power 
to enforce the provisions of this articl e by 
appropriat e legislation. " 
* * * 
P. E. A. indicates in the New York 
Evening Post, other inconsistencies: 
A t Madiso n Squar e Garden , on the evenin g of Januar y 28, ex-Unite d States Senator Hardwic k (counsel for Ludwi g C. A . K . 
Martens, the Soviet Ambassador), of the enlightened State of Georgia , protesting 
against the Socialist investigation, said : " I 
thin k such action is on a pa r wit h the burn ­
in g of witches, and we ma y expect one along 
wit h the other." Th e State of Ne w Yor k 
should heed the words of this Democrati c 
ex-Senator. Durin g the period of thirt y 
years, ending i n 1918, Georgi a led the States 
of the Unio n (happil y still a Union ) wit h 
386 lynchings, and the South totals the 
modest numbe r of 2,834 persons, colored and 
white , burned, shot, hung, etc., by mob violence. In this last year, 1919, Georgi a 
lynched twenty-two persons, givin g force to 
Mr . Hardwick's splendid admonition to the 
Assembl y of Ne w Yor k State, i n the matte r 
of burnings. (Durin g the last thirty-one 
years, there have been three lynchings i n 
this state.) 
Mr . Hardwick , i n his stingin g rebuke to 
the Republicans of our Assembly , (all but 
two Democrats voted to oust the Socialists) 
exclaimed: "Th e righ t of the average man 
to vote as he sees fit, is attacked by this 
autocratic action of the Legislature . Bu t I 
still believe that the ballot box is the remedy 
of the free man for his public ills. Don't 
be discouraged, folks, fo r the great mass of 
America n people wil l not permit such a 
gross injustice as this to be perpetuated. " 
Ha s the ex-Senator in mind , the fact that 
i n the South, and i n his home state, hundreds of thousands of America n free men 
are refused the ballot and are denied the 
righ t of suffrage guaranteed to 'hem by the 
Constitutio n of the Unite d States ? Does he 
raise his voice i n angr y protest because the 
Democrats of the entir e South now nullify , 
and have fo r years nullified, the Fifteent h 
Amendment ? Does he protest because there 
are hundreds of thousands of citizens of the 
Unite d States, absolutely unrepresented and 
without a voice i n the government of this 
country? Does he protest because of the 
fact tha t whil e the solid South is represented 
on the basis of population, million s of the 
population ar e not allowed to registe r a n 
opinion at the polls ? 
ZEAL VS. COMMON SENSE 
A SUBSCRIBE R writes: 
I am sending yo u a prospectus of a 
book I have written , The Negro Exodus. 
This prospectus wa s printe d i n a loca l whit e 
shop i n Memphis. I wa s arrested on account of it, by the States Attorney , Mr . 
Bates, and a ban has been pu t on the book. 
* * * 
We have the author's permissio n to publis h these extracts from the prospectus: 
I have learned tha t a southern whit e ma n 
is you r best frien d whe n yo u tal k to him 
instead of talkin g about him. The Negr o 
needs to talk to the whit e people of the 
South and not go Nort h to talk about them. 
If the Welfar e Leagu e wants the Negr o 
i n the South to stay, and the Negr o i n the 
North to come back—go before the 
Legislature of Mississippi and have an enactment 
penalizin g a county i n whic h a lynchin g occurs, have the Negr o vote protected at the 
ballot-box, have Negr o teachers better pai d 
and give them better publi c school accommodations and equipment; break up the 
peonage system i n so man y places i n the 
Delta , let a Negr o sell his own cotton seed 
and cotton instead of sending wage hands to 
hau l i t out of his cotton house and field to 
the gin , and puttin g all of the seed i n you r 
seed-house. 
Democracy is hypocrisy and mobocracy 
when it is not governed by law and Christianity. Lawlessness is not our sectional, but 
our national, crime. 
* * * 
Th e Raleigh , N . C , News and Observer 
gives another instanc e of the law's interference wit h a man's fundamenta l rights. 
W e read : 
Dr . G. W . Locklear, Indian , of Pembroke . 
Robeson County , must leave the state i n 
order to live wit h the whit e woma n whom 
he marrie d i n Atlanta , Ga . Locklea r wa s 
indicted by Solicito r S. B . McLean , on the 
charge of fornicatio n and adultery, the in ­
dictment being brought, upon the grounds 
that the laws of Nort h Carolin a do not permi t the intermarriag e of races. Locklea r 
pleaded guilt y of the charge and praye r fo r 
judgment was continued upo n paymen t of 
the cost, Locklea r and his wif e to retur n to 
the state i n whic h they wer e married . PRESIDENT L. E. WILLIAMS , AN D BANKIN G ROOMS OF TH E WAG E EARNERS ' SAVING S 
r
 BANK , SAVANNAH , GA . 
This bank has just bought $200,000 worth of real estate i n Harlem, New Yor k City . 
329 330 TH E CRISI S 
FAIR PLAY 
T. I. FITZPATRIC K write s i n the At -
lanta , Ga. , Constitution: 
Colored people ought to have the same 
rights i n our courthouses as the whites have. 
Le t all of us whit e folks resolve to treat 
the forme r slaves, and their issue, better 
tha n they have been treated. Let's give 
them better dwellings and better schools. 
The n they wil l live wit h us, and wor k fo r us. 
'This does not mean socia l equality. They 
do not ask and do not wan t it. It woul d 
simpl y be justice. 
* * * 
The Constitution, i n an editorial, evidences 
its own desire fo r fair play : 
A correspondent, a native Georgian, 
writes to The Constitution, from a northern 
city, where he now resides, askin g us to protest against the capita l being made by norther n critic s out of the South's lynchin g 
record. 
Ou r correspondent writes— 
"Ther e seems to be an organized propaganda up here i n the North , to defame our 
beloved state and the South. " 
A s evidence supportin g tha t conclusion, 
he sends an article appearin g i n a recent issue of a well-known periodical, i n whic h the 
South is mercilessly lambasted, ridiculed, 
and excoriated because of its record of mob 
violence and outlawry . 
H e wants The Constitution to "answer " 
this "base slander. " 
Ho w are we to do it ? 
Wha t are we to say? 
The record—cold-blooded, uncontrovertibl e 
statistics—confront us! 
The South leads all the rest of the country, put together, i n the numbe r of lynchings that annuall y take place, and durin g 
1919, there were nearly twice as man y lynch ­
ings i n Georgi a as i n an y two other states, 
even of the South. 
The Constitution woul d be most happ y i f 
this were not so; nothin g could please us 
more than to be able to soundly chastise the 
South's alleged slanderers, to say that they 
are malignin g us, and then to be able to 
cite proof to back us up. 
Bu t the record is against us, and it cannot be dodged. 
The remedy lies i n the hands of the people themselves, and nowhere else! 
Whe n public sentiment says tha t there 
must be no more lynchings, mob law wil l 
cease. 
The n there wil l be no more damnin g 
lynchin g statistics to support criticism 
against the South. 
AMERICA'S BLOT 
M. LOUI S MAFFER T administers a 
stingin g countercheck i n the Paris 
Victoire, to a defender of lynching : 
Ou r esteemed confrere, the Edito r of the 
Intransigeant, who has launched so man y 
successful campaigns, has published a n article signed "Shamrock" , which , unde r pretence of explainin g the attitude of whit e 
American s wit h respect to their blac k compatriots, makes a series of statements whic h 
flatter our civilizatio n quite as littl e as they 
do our conduct. 
Afte r explainin g tha t American s must defend their daughters against the instinctive 
aggressions of black men, b y frightenin g 
them off wit h lync h law, "Shamrock " observes tha t i f we Frenc h have ha d no occasion to complai n of cases of rape, whic h the 
Frenc h staff anticipated i n its secret distribution of warnings, it is because the black 
soldier found from the class of wome n who 
refraine d from the business of "camp-following " merely to save the good name of the 
army , a welcome whic h left him triumphant. 
H e think s he has made a conquest whic h has 
blanched his native blackness. 
Muc h gratitud e is due such whit e women ! 
The editor of the Intransigeant selects, to 
prove his thesis, black men hardl y even i n 
the initia l stages of civilization , and he is 
speaking of a class of colored men whic h has 
its exact counterpart amon g whites. Whe n 
instinc t commands, there is no guarant y of 
self-restraint amon g an y race. 
Grante d tha t there ar e black brutes, there 
are just as man y and worse amon g the 
whites—the boches bea r witness to that! 
Bu t tha t is no argument, tha t a n act of 
pure savagery,—whic h is wha t lynchin g 
reall y is,—is excusable. 
W e have had horrible , almost inhuma n 
criminals, but there isn't a single French ­
ma n who woul d support their bein g executed withou t due process of law . . . . 
It is m y observation, that, black men fro m 
Americ a and everywher e else who have ha d 
the benefit of an education, ar e capable of 
achievin g as muc h distinction as- any of us 
of a pale r hue. 
I should like to assert, too, tha t the colored personnel of the America n Arm y is 
quite as stron g intellectuall y as tha t of any 
other army i n the world , if, indeed, i t is not 
better. A s fo r Negr o troops, we ca n never 
admir e them enough, and we can never forget those who fo r one straigh t week fought 
withou t the aid of cannon, and fel l wher e 
they had stood, rathe r than retreat. 
I am not refusin g admiratio n to whit e 
Americans—the y meri t it i n man y respects. 
Bu t we shall never allow ourselves to base 
justic e on etiquette. 
Lync h law is enough i n itself to dishonor 
a civilization . 
THE N. A. A. C. P. 
THE National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People is dominated by the most dangerous class of agitators ever brought together i n this country, its sessions being marke d by gatherings 
of extremists, whose motive is not so much 
the welfar e of the Negr o as the disruptio n 
of the friendl y relations so lon g existin g TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 33 1 
between the white s and the blacks of the 
South. The y are false leaders i n every respect and are so recognized by the better 
an d large r class of the colored population 
i n the South, a population which , happily, 
is quite wel l safeguarded by a n intelligent 
pulpit and one whose solicitation fo r the 
welfar e of the race has the active sympath y of the whit e people as a whole. Wel l 
ma y the Negr o leaders i n the South give 
their people protection from contamina ­
tio n wit h such doctrine as is being preached 
by this miscalled organizatio n fo r the advancement of the Negro.—Charlotte 
Observer. 
* » * 
Organize d to fight wrongs against the 
Negr o race, to keep the public informed 
of injustices perpetrated against colored 
people and to correct such conditions whenever possible, the Associatio n has been a 
persistent investigator and a conscientious 
enemy of .wrongdoers. It has promoted 
anti-lynchin g conferences and campaigned 
against the sentiment tha t tacitl y justifies 
this form of murder. It has secured a 
Supreme Court decision against the Grand ­
fathe r Clause , and got the Segregation Ordinance of Louisville , Ky. , declared unconstitutional. 
It is a n Associatio n militan t fo r justice. 
It seeks politica l and civi l equality, equal 
justic e i n the courts, an equitable expenditur e of publi c funds fo r education, sanitation, health and police protection. These 
are aims whic h any fair-minde d America n 
should be ready to grant. Ther e is no color 
line i n an honest democracy.—Cleveland 
Plaindealer. 
SOUTH AFRICA 
A DEPUTATIO N of colored people has 
waite d upon the Actin g Prime Min ­
iste r of Cape Colony. Their spokesman, 
Dr . Abdurahman , says, accordin g to the 
Cape Times: 
"W e regar d the Fre e State, " said Dr. 
Abdurahman , "as nothin g better than a 
Slaver y State. " Ther e was not a single law 
there, he continued, whic h tended to uplift 
the native ; on the contrary , they were 
frame d to keep hi m down. 
Th e most importan t part, however, was 
the franchise . It wa s regrettable, he 
thought, afte r all the services rendered by 
the colored man , tha t they should be forgotten. Ther e wa s no justification whatever, he maintained , fo r man y of their 
grievances, except on the grounds of sentiment. The y ha d been deprived of their 
greatest right—tha t of sending one of their 
own race to Parliament , and they now 
claimed tha t i n the Cape Provinc e the time 
wa s ripe fo r ful l politica l rights to be restored, whic h should never have been taken 
away . H e hoped tha t the Cape had succeeded i n convincin g the people from the Nort h 
tha t there wa s no justification fo r takin g 
away that part of the franchise i n 1903, 
when Unio n took place. It was true that 
the colored communit y never exercised that 
right, because they believed i n the justic e 
of the white man . 
H e would conclude by askin g the Actin g 
Prime Ministe r to do an act of justice. H e 
could assure the Government it was a serious matter, as the time had arrive d when 
the colored people and natives would have 
to reconsider their position. The y did not 
wan t an immediate reply, as they felt it wa s 
a matte r that should be discussed by the 
Cabinet, when Genera l Both a and Genera l 
Smuts returned, but they desired to get a 
reply i n person. H e would rathe r never 
have a reply at al l than tha t it should be 
unfavorable, because he knew wha t the consequences would be. The time migh t come 
when control of the colored people, natives, 
and non-Europeans, would be lost, and foolish things would be done whic h they did 
not wan t doing. H e could assure the Government tha t the futur e good relationship 
of the colored and white races depended on 
these unjustifiable grievances being redressed. He would not remin d the Actin g 
Prime Ministe r of the services rendered by 
the Cape Corps, because they had only done 
wha t it was their duty to do. Bu t they 
could not forget tha t the people of India , i n 
the early days of the war, and the black 
men of America , i n the late r stages, played 
so importan t a part. 
THE BALLOT 
THE great mass of the race i n the South 
do not wan t the ballot. The y are not 
prepared to exercise it. The y are satisfied 
to do withou t it i f thereby they can go about 
their dail y tasks free from the agitation 
and disorder whic h characterized our elections unde r manhood suffrage. 
It is false leadership, therefore, which 
appeals to the Negr o to organize, and urges 
tha t through the ballot he can protect himself against wrongs; and least of al l should 
this bad advice be offered i n these critica l 
days, on the heels of the war, when the difficult problems of readjustment are before 
us, and when nothin g wil l so benefit the 
people of the South, regardless of race, as 
freedom from political agitation.—New 
Orleans States. [White.] 
W e are urging-, in a word , fullest cooperation of the Negr o vote W e must 
register. W e must get our youn g men to 
pa y their poll taxes whil e it costs little , 
and we must prevail upon our older men 
to pa y up and qualify, whethe r it costs little or much. N o man who fails or neglects 
to pay his taxes is worth y of the privilege s 
of citizenship, nor is he capable of bearin g his due portion of the citizenship responsibility. We must reach the point i n 
our social and politica l development' where 
the unqualified wil l be i n contempt. 
Whethe r the obstacles are wit h the law 33 2 TH E CRISI S 
or the tax gatherers and registrars who 
appl y it to Negr o men, the obstacles must 
be removed, and we believe the spirit of the 
people is more determined on this issue today than ever.—Savannah Tribune. 
[Colored.] 
ANOTHER CARNEGIE HERO 
THE Carnegi e Her o Fun d Commissio n 
sends us an account of the brave act 
of Milto n Carter, a colored ma n of Ne w 
Haven , Conn . Mr . Carter, aged twentytwo, died i n an attempt to save Arthu r 
J. Truly , aged nineteen, also colored, from 
drownin g at East Haven , Conn., August 
7, 1919 . Trul y got into difficulty i n Lon g 
Island Sound, near a rock tha t projected 
from the shore, and called for help. 
Carter ran out on the rock to a point near 
Truly , an d as Trul y was sinking , Carte r 
dived beside him. The two men rose together, wit h Carter's back towar d Truly . 
Carte r told Trul y to grasp him, and Trul y 
seized him about the waist. Bot h men 
sank immediately, and were drowned. 
A bronze medal has been given to the 
widow of Mr . Carte r and also a death 
benefit, at the rate of twenty-five dollars 
a month. This is not to extend, however, 
beyond a period of five years, or the date 
of her re-marriage . 
* * * 
A n annoyin g typographica l error occurred i n the article, "Dar k Heroes of 
Peace, " whic h appeared i n the Marc h 
CRISIS . The statement that forty-two recipients of the Carnegi e medal formed 
22.5 % of the entire numbe r is obviously 
an error. It should have read 2.8% . 
THE NEGRO PRESS SPEAKS 
Eugen e L . C. Davidso n write s 
O N i n the Ne w Yor k Commoner: 
ECONOMIC S The Negr o has awakened economically . 
This awakenin g is not a fancy nor a 
theory. It is a fact. A glance at the economic history of the Negr o for 191 9 must 
thril l this race of ours that loves, accomplishes, and fights on hope; and must terrorize, as nothin g else can, those thinkin g 
beings of the other race who stubbornly embrace the dvin g theory of inferiority . A 
$200,00 0 Trust Compan y in Chicago, a $125, -
00 0 Ban k in Pittsburg , a Trust Compan y 
capitalized at $500,00 0 i n Atlanta , a Millio n 
Dolla r Steamship Company, a $25,00 0 Dy e 
Company, a $75,00 0 Broom Manufacturin g 
Company ! Wha t does it al l mean? Ho w 
did the awakenin g happen and whithe r is i t 
leading? 
Consciously or unconsciously, the Negr o 
is beginnin g to realiz e the value of money. 
Whethe r or not he knows or understands 
the school definition of money as a "medium 
of exchange, " he has found from experience 
tha t a ma n wit h a dolla r is not quite so 
black as the ma n without ; tha t i f he is to 
spend tha t dollar, i n some mysterious wa y 
he changes from a "nigger " to a Negro ; 
that i f he knows ho w to make tha t dolla r 
wor k fo r him, i n some stil l mor e mysterious 
way , the whit e ma n forgets entirel y tha t 
there is an y difference at all . 
Accordin g to Willia m Pickens 
O N i n the Ne w Yor k Commoner: 
AMERICANI - TH E AMERICA N SPIRI T IS , FIRS T 
ZATIO N OF ALL a spirit of liberty . It 
necessarily involve s a spirit of 
equality and of brotherhood. It is not a 
shallow matte r of gettin g marrie d and being brothers-in-law. A pure-blooded 
Mongolian can be "American." A white man can 
be "American. " It is not color, i t is a spirit. 
W e claim, therefore, tha t the most dreadfu l need i n the country, is to thoroughl y 
Americaniz e our native-born. We must 
Americaniz e the laws and legislature s of the 
South. If we are ever to Americaniz e the 
foreign-born, we must have something to do 
it with , and tha t something must be the na ­
tive product. Those who come to us wil l 
tend to become wha t we are. Hav e we ever 
reflected that perhaps our failur e to make 
the immigran t an American , is due first of 
all to our failur e i n being American ? 
It happens to be tha t the Negr o is the 
most America n group i n the country, both i n 
ancestry and i n point of attitude of mind . 
His line reaches muc h furthe r back than tha t 
of the average whit e ma n of the country. I n 
spirit, he is less arrogant, more libera l and 
democratic, and believes more sincerely tha t 
"al l men are bor n free and equal. " H e does 
not believe tha t he is naturall y entitled to 
more privilege s tha n other breeds of men. 
Tha t is of the ver y essence of the spiri t tha t 
made America . Th e Negr o does not lynch , 
and does not act by virtu e of the mob, except i n self-defence against whit e mobs. H e 
wants the case trie d i n court. H e wants 
la w and order to be supreme—and as a 
group, he does not ask an y artificia l advantage of any other group. Tha t is of the 
essence of America . 
* * * 
Th e Savanna h Tribune says: 
O N TH E This yea r we are to elect a 
ELECTIO N President of the Unite d States; 
and at a time when the incumbent of that lofty position needs to be a ma n 
of more than extraordinar y qualitie s and 
powers, because of the momentous problems 
wit h whic h he wil l be confronted, problems 
affecting not only domestic affairs, but the 
internationa l relationships as well. . . . TH E LOOKING GLASS 333 
Negro delegates, committeemen, and 
Negro political organizations, are interested in 
several questions, purel y domestic, but allimportan t to the welfar e of fifteen millions 
of Negroes. The y should see to it that a 
prope r settlement or declaration on these 
questions is writte n into the platforms of 
those they are called upon to support. 
Politically, the Negro vote, particularly in some 
of the large r cities, amounts to a grea t deal. 
It is unde r these circumstance s that leaders 
must secure wha t are our rights and wha t 
we deserve. 
* * * 
Th e Omaha , Nebraska , Monitor— 
. . . desires to call the. attention of our 
readers, to the importanc e of registerin g 
and voting . Man y of our people have recently come from sections of the country 
wher e they wer e not permitted to vote. 
Naturally , they have become indifferent to 
the privileg e of exercisin g their rights as 
electors. W e wan t to make it as plai n as 
we know how, tha t i n Nebraska , every citizen has a righ t to vote and his vote is 
counted. Bu t i n order to vote, citizens must 
register. Ther e wil l soon be announced specia l registratio n days, when voters ma y 
registe r i n their own precinc t or votin g district ; but it is not necessary to wait for 
these special days. Go to the election commissioner's office i n the court house any 
week-day, an d register. Everybod y who 
wants to vote, must register. Elections this 
yea r are tremendously important. You r 
vote, littl e as yo u thin k about it, ma y decide 
wh o shall be the president fo r the next four 
years. 
* * * 
Th e articl e on "Negr o History" , quoted i n 
this column i n the Februar y CRISIS, should 
have been attributed to the Ne w Yor k 
Crusader. 
MISCELLANY 
THE Oklahoma City , Okla. , Black Dispatch, tells this impressive story of in ­
stant retribution : 
This city , (Chickasha ) the county seat of 
Grady , has been put to severe shame since 
the da y durin g the wa r months, that Lieu ­
tenant Charle s A . Tribbett, a Negr o officer, 
wa s taken from the trai n and placed i n the 
county jail , because he refused to leave the 
Pullman , i n whic h he wa s riding , on his wa y 
to Fort Sill, under Government orders. 
Tribbett was insulted, his luggage searched, and 
to cap the climax , wa s even kangarooed i n 
the jai l and a portion of his money taken 
whil e i n the toils of Grad y Count y officers. 
H e wa s finally fined and sent out of the town 
i n a Jim-Cro w coach, the next morning . 
A n idea can be gathered as to the class of 
men who were behind Lieutenan t Tribbett's 
persecution, when it is known tha t the then 
Count y Judge , R. E . Davenport, after being 
charged wit h assault and battery, by a young 
lad y i n Chickasha , was relieved of his position of honor and is now haulin g corn out on 
a farm i n Grad y County ; Osca r Simpson, 
who was the County Attorney , has been convicted of bribery i n the courts of the state 
and his case is now before a special court of 
review. H e is teaching school, and debarred 
from practice. Hodge Bailey , the Sheriff of 
Grad y County , who entered into a humiliatin g search of the person and effects 
of the detained colored officer and who led 
the half mob of thugs who glorified, has been 
removed from office on a charge of bribery 
and is now out on a farm at work ; the whole 
police force of Chickash a has been removed 
since that time, includin g Chie f Be n Phillips, 
on request of the Unite d States government, 
whic h complained of the immora l conditions 
obtaining i n the city of Chickasha , under 
their rule. Th e ONL Y MA N CONNECTE D 
WIT H TH E TRIA L O F TH E UNFOR ­
TUNAT E OFFICER , WH O RETAIN S HI S 
GOO D NAME , IS JUDG E ROBER T L . 
FORTUNE , the Negr o attorney who defended Lieutenant Tribbett; the rest of them 
have been swallowed up i n the gulf of darkness, fashioned by their own hands. Trul y 
'tis a prophetic saying , "A s you sow, so. 
.shall you reap. " 
Edito r Leech write s i n the Memphis 
Press: 
The y brought a seventeen-year-old Negr o 
boy into the jailer's office whil e I wa s there. 
H e is facin g tria l for petit larceny. I understand it carrie s a sentence of from one 
to five years. 
H e stole eighty-five cents from a littl e 
Negr o lad. 
Fo r eighty-five cents, he wil l be locked up 
i n crowded cells, denied his liberty, forced 
into idleness, and vagrancy—an d it's al l 
legal, too. He's only a Negr o boy—black 
as the ace of spades—but he's a boy, a 
huma n being, who can either become a hard ­
working , honest Negro , or a loafing trifler. 
Whic h wil l a yea r i n jai l probably make 
of him? 
Phili p Hal e tells of "Bosto n chivalry " i n 
the Boston Herald: 
A few nights ago, a lady, arrivin g after 
midnigh t by trai n at the Bac k Ba y Station, 
wit h two travelin g bags, saw only one cab 
fo r passengers. Tw o men were getting into 
it. The y looked at her and—got in . Th e 
driver, a Negro , seeing the lady's plight, 
asked her where she wished to go. She answered: "Th e Chilto n Club. " H e said : 
"Woul d you mind , ma'am, sittin g up here 
wit h me? " Th e two men inside heard this 
talk. The y did not ask her to shar e the cab 
wit h them; they were not shamed by the 
Negro's courtesy and solicitude. One said to 
the other: " I thin k I'll tr y the Algonqui n 
Club. " The y al l drove off, the men inside ; 
the lad y on the box, sittin g next a gentleman . Men of the Month. 
SINC E his retur n from France , where he 
was a captain i n the A . E . F. , Dr . 
Charle s H . Garvin , i n Cleveland, Ohio, has 
been appointed a clinicia n of the Out-Pa -
tient Departmen t of Lakeside Hospital , being, the first appointment of a colored physician to a Cleveland Hospital . 
Dr. Garvin was born in 1889, at 
Jacksonville, Fla., where he received his elementary 
education; he took his academic wor k at 
Atlant a Universit y and his professional 
degree at Howar d University , i n 1915; he 
served for one year as interne at 
Freedmen's Hospital and then as Assistant in 
Surger y on the Visitin g Staff. His medica l 
honors are the Edwi n Hira m Reede prize 
for excellency i n physica l diagnosis, and 
the Perr y priz e i n obstetrics. Fo r two terms 
he served as Genera l President of the Alpha 
Phi Alpha Fraternit y and is now Genera l 
Secretary. 
Dr. Garvi n wa s commissioned a First 
Lieutenant, Medica l Reserve Corps, Jun e 
8, 1917, havin g the distinction of being the 
first colored officer commissioned i n the 
Medica l Corps and also the first to be sent 
to the Arm y Medica l School at Washington . 
He was promoted to a Captaincy, 
November 6, 1917, and served over-seas as 
Battalion Surgeon, 367th Infantry (The 
Buffaloes) and as Commanding Officer, 360'th 
Ambulanc e Company, 92nd Division . 
MILLI E JAN E HENDERSO N was born 
a slave, May, 4, 1842, near 
Williamsburg, Mo. She belonged to Mr. Dyson, and 
served as a worke r in the house and sometimes in the field, to substitute for a man . 
Spinnin g yar n and weavin g goods fo r clothing was her principa l work. Fiv e yards of 
linsey and three of jeans was her task per 
day, and she was not allowed to do anythin g 
for herself until this task wa s finished. 
Durin g the last yea r of the Civi l War , she 
marrie d Mr . Thoma s Henderson, a slave, 
who was hired by Mr . Arnold , about five 
miles away. 
Durin g the first yea r after freedom, Mr . 
Henderson farme d for part of a crop, and 
Mrs. Henderson hired out, receiving as 
salary, thirt y dollars a year. The next 
three years, they cropped on shares at the 
Gilbert place, and the yea r following , they 
bought a far m of 120 acres i n Montgomer y 
County, Mo. , where five childre n were born. 
Fou r childre n finished the norma l course 
at Lincol n Institute. Later, one wa s grad ­
uated as Bachelo r of Philosoph y from 
Drak e University , and is now principa l of 
a school at Watonga , Okla ; another is prin ­
cipa l of a school at Beggs, Okla. ; an d a 
third , after completin g the medica l course 
at Meharr y Medica l College, is now practisin g i n Dallas, Texas. One daughte r is a 
teacher i n the Cit y Schools of Guthri e 
Okla. , and the other died at thirteen. 
The fathe r of these childre n died i n 1909, 
at the age of sixty-nine years. Th e mothe r 
still lives, and has a far m i n Loga n County , 
a home i n Langston , an d propert y i n 
Fulton , Mo . 
AT Toronto, Canada , friends have un -
veiled and placed i n the Cit y Hall , a 
portrait of Alderma n Hubbard , a ma n of 
Negr o descent, i n recognition of his man y 
years of service. This is Mr . Hubbard's 
record: Alderman , 1894-1903, War d 14; 
Comptroller, 1904-1907; Alderman , 1913, 
War d 1. Th e paintin g is the wor k of W . 
A . Sherwood. Amon g those wh o participated i n the unveilin g were Mayo r Hocken , 
the Honorabl e Ada m Beck, ex-Comptrolle r 
Church , who said of Mr . Hubbard : "H e is 
one of the pillars of public ownership" , 
whil e the Honorabl e Mr . Bec k summed up 
Mr . Hubbard's characte r as tha t of a "consistent friend and supporter, earnest and 
conscientious. " 
* * * 
THE staff of the Nationa l Associatio n 
fo r the Advancemen t of Colore d People 
was recently made stronge r b y the addition 
of Willia m Pickens, who resigned the position of Vic e President of Morga n College 
to become Associat e Fiel d Secretar y of the 
N . A . A . C. P . 
Mr . Picken s wa s bor n of slave parents 
i n Anderso n County , S. C , Januar y 15, 
1881; in 1899 he wa s graduated from hig h 
school i n Littl e Rock, Ark. , as valedictorian . A s a railroa d laborer, he earned money 
334 DR. C. H . GARVIN MRS. M. J. HENDERSON 
ALDERMA N WILLIAM P. HUBBAR D 
WILLIA M PICKENS E. K. JONES 
335 336 TH E CRISIS 
wit h whic h to enter Talladeg a College, from 
whic h he was graduated i n 1902; he went 
to wor k agai n and earned his tuitio n to 
Yale , where i n April , 1903, he won the 
Henr y Jame s Te n Eyc k Oratorica l Priz e 
from his class of three hundred. His 
scholarship wa s ranke d i n Class A , whic h 
standing as lon g as maintained, entitled 
hi m to free tuition. I n 1904, Mr . Pickens 
received the Bachelo r of Arts degree from 
Yal e and was elected a membe r of the Phi 
Beta Kappa; he was also made Philosophica l 
Orato r wit h "honors i n all studies." 
Mr. Pickens taught ten years at 
Talladega College and one year at Wiley 
University. He became Dean of Morgan 
College in 1915 and Vice-President in 1918. 
He was a member of the "Niagara 
Movement", and has been a member of the N. 
A . A . C. P . since its beginning. 
I n 1913 Mr . Pickens traveled i n Grea t 
Britai n and continenta l Europe , and wrote 
a seria l of thirty-seven articles on the arts 
and sights of the old world . H e is author 
of The Heir of Slaves, an autobiography; 
The New Negro, a collection of his addresses and essays, an d of numerous 
pamphlets. 
EUGENE KINCKLE JONES is 
Executive Secretary of the National Urban 
League . H e wa s born i n Richmond , Va. , i n 
1885, being the son of Professo r J . E . Jones, 
of Virgini a Unio n University , and Ros a K . 
Jones, teacher of music in Hartshorn 
College. Mr. Jones received the degrees of 
Bachelor of Arts from Virginia Union 
University, 1906, and Master of Arts in Social 
Sciences, Cornel l University , 1908; he 
taught fo r three years i n Louisville , Ky. , 
at the State Universit y and a t Centra l Hig h 
School; then he became Secretar y of the 
Committee on Urban Conditions among 
Negroes, in 1911, being associated at first with 
Dr . George E . Haynes. 
The wor k of the Leagu e now embraces 
activitie s i n 32 cities, employs upward s of 
125 workers i n nationa l an d loca l offices, 
and durin g the yea r 1920 Is expending 
$220,000, of whic h amoun t $40,000 is the 
budget for the nationa l organization . 
Unde r Mr . Jones' direction, article s are 
contributed to standard magazine s and addresses are made to conferences and publi c 
gatherings on the ideals for which the 
League stands, which are to secure opportunity 
fo r the Negr o and encourage cooperation 
between the races. 
A N EASTER MESSAGE 
CARRIE W . CLIFFORD 
Now quiverin g to life, all natur e thrills 
A t the approach of tha t triumphan t 
queen, 
Pink-fingered Easter, trailin g robes of 
green 
Tunefull y o'er the flower-embroidered hills, 
He r hair perfumed of myria d daffodils: 
Upo n her swellin g bosom now are seen 
The dream-frail lilie s wit h their snowy 
sheen, 
A s lightl y she o'er-leaps the spring-time 
rills. 
To black folk choked withi n the deadly 
grasp 
O f racia l hate, wha t message does she brin g 
O f resurrection and the hope of spring ? 
Assurance their death-stupor is a mask— 
A sleep, wit h elements potential, rife , 
Ready to burst full-flowered into life . The Horizon 
COMPILED BY MADELINE G. ALLISON . 
THE CHURCH 
DELEGATES to the joint meeting of 
the M . E . Churc h an d the Methodist 
Churc h South, have agreed to unite the 
two churches, under the name of the 
Methodist Church , wit h a distric t devoted 
to colored membership. This action remains to be ratified by the General 
Conference. The colored membership is over 
300,000. 
A t St. Louis, Mo. , Lan e Tabernacl e 
C. M . E . Churc h has purchased at $30,000 
the First Unite d Presbyteria n Church , a 
stone edifice i n the exclusive whit e West 
En d section. Negroe s are buyin g residences 
in this section. The Rev. H. H. 
McConnell is pastor. 
The Rev. Russell S. Brow n has resigned 
the pastorate of Lincol n Memoria l Church , 
Memphis, Tenn., to become pastor of First 
Congregationa l Church , Atlanta , Ga . Th e 
Rev. Brow n succeeds Dr . H . H . Proctor. 
A congregation of the C. M . E . Churc h 
has been established i n Ne w Yor k City , 
wit h the Rev . W . Y . Bells, a forme r Arm y 
Chaplain , as pastor. Propert y has been 
purchased at $48,000 an d the churc h named 
Williams' Institutiona l Church , i n honor 
of Bisho p Williams. 
Connected with the work of First 
Baptist Church in Norfolk, Va., is an 
Employment Bureau, Information Bureau, 
Reading-room, Playground , Kindergarten , 
Da y Nursery , Mil k Station, and Clinic . 
Th e pastor of this churc h is the Rev. R. 
H . Boiling . 
St. Luke's Methodist Church , Buffalo, 
N. Y. , i n a six weeks' rall y realized $2,825, 
fo r the establishment of a communit y house 
fo r colored girls. Th e pastor of this church 
is the Rev . Henr y Durham . 
Mor e tha n 200 of the 277 members of 
St. Michae l an d Al l Angels Protestant 
Episcopa l Church , of Philadelphia , left 
tha t organizatio n i n a body when the Rev. 
Elliot t White , i n charge of Episcopa l missions, requested the resignation of the 
Rev . J . DaCost a Harewood . N o charges 
337 
were brought against Fathe r Harewood , 
but it is generally understood tha t the post 
was wanted for a whit e incumbent. St. 
Michael's congregation an d their priest 
have, wit h the permission of the Bisho p 
and Standin g Committe e of the Diocese of 
Pennsylvania , started a new church, i n an 
"uppe r room, " a t 5219 Marke t Street, hereafter to be known as the "Churc h of St. 
Joh n the Divine. " 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
Troy P . GORUM , a colored baritone 
and a pupi l of the publi c school musi c 
course, Ne w Englan d Conservatory of 
Music , has given a public recita l i n Steinert 
Hall , Boston. A s an encore, he sang a 
composition by his classmate, Leonar d 
Williams, who was i n the audience. 
"Sonata Virginianesque," by John 
Powell, is built upon Negro themes, whose spirit 
it expresses wit h muc h fidelity. 
The annual concert of Morehouse 
College Glee Club and Orchestra has been 
held, wit h Kempe r Harreld , director. The 
orchestr a rendered "Morehous e College 
March " b y Mr . Harreld . 
Otto L . Bohana n has opened a voca l studio i n Ne w Yor k City . Mr . Bohana n is 
a colored pupi l of Fran z H . Armbruster, of 
Europea n reputation. Mr . Armbruste r 
personally endorses Mr . Bohanan's art and 
teaching. 
Amon g paintings exhibited by the Fin e 
Arts Associatio n at the Cit y Librar y i n 
Des Moines, Iowa , are seven canvasses by 
Henr y O. Tanner, the colored artist. 
C Met a Warric k Fuller, the colored sculptress, has the honor of havin g a statuette 
accepted by the Academy of Fin e Arts, 
Philadelphia , the subject of whic h is Mau d 
Cune y Hare , the author-pianist. The 
statuette was exhibited at the 115th exhibition of the Academy . 
A t Lo s Angeles, Cal. , the Pep Comedy 
Compan y has been organized by Negroes, 
wit h Mme . Sul-Te-Wan , a pioneer colored 
movie sta r who has appeared i n D. W . 338 TH E CRISIS 
Griffith's productions, as assistant manager. 
The company wil l use scenarios by colored 
authors. 
Th e Musi c Lovers' Chorus of Baltimore , 
Md. , rendered the oratorio "Elijah, " i n 
honor of the Africa n Methodist Episcopa l 
Bishops' Council, at Bethe l A . M . E . 
Church . Joh n Willis Brow n wa s the director, wit h Ulysse s Garriso n Chambre s at 
the organ ; the soloists were Rut h Lee 
McAbee , soprano; Carri e Ma e Smith , contralto ; Clarenc e Lowery , tenor; Garfield 
Warre n Tarrant , baritone. 
Mau d Cune y Hare , assisted by Willia m 
H . Richardson , gave a concert i n Steinert 
Hall , Boston. Phili p Hale , the critic , says: 
"Mrs. Har e talked i n an instructive and 
interesting manner, about the origi n and 
character of the music. She is a fluent 
speaker, fortunate i n her choice of words. 
No r is she too didati c i n givin g informa ­
tion. " Musical America adds: "Th e accompaniments to most of the songs wer e 
arrange d by Mrs. Hare , who is makin g a 
special study of our southern musi c and 
thereby doing a valuabl e wor k i n bringin g 
to ligh t these folksongs, whic h have so fa r 
been neglected, but whic h are well wort h 
knowin g for enjoyment as wel l as fo r the 
appreciation of their importanc e i n our na ­
tiona l musica l development." 
A t Columbus, Ohio, Negroe s have financed and built the Empress Theatre . It 
has twelve boxes an d a $5,000 pipe organ. 
The owners and managers are Messrs. J. 
A . Jackson and J . E . Williams. 
Creame r an d Layton , colored composers 
i n Ne w Yor k City , wrot e the lyric s and 
music of "Thre e Showers, " a comedy presented by the Coburns at the Empir e 
Theatre , Syracuse , Ne w York . It is reported that: "Al l ha d cause for gratifica ­
tion at the enthusiastic reception accorded 
their efforts by a large an d enthusiastic 
audience. The musi c was especially popula r and man y of the song numbers were 
encored a number of times. " 
Geral d Tyler, a Negr o teacher of St. 
Louis, has writte n a manuscrip t song, 
"Ship s Tha t Pass i n the Night, " of whic h 
the Louisville , Ky. , Herald says: "It is 
practicall y a recitative , wit h almost no 
piano support; its melody strikingl y unusua l 
and very difficult, is fa r from being enough; 
the profound inne r meanin g of the song 
throbbed i n every tone—its longin g and 
tragedy and heart-break hel d the audience 
as b y a spell, and at its conclusion, a sin ­
gula r thin g happened—there wa s a pause 
of death-like stillness, and then a sigh, the 
release of pent up emotion, before the conventiona l applause. It wa s a recognition 
so rarel y accorded, tha t it deserves mention. " 
INDUSTR Y 
THE Federated Clubs of colored women 
i n Philadelphia , Pa, , have organized a 
buildin g and loan association. Mrs. Jame s 
Howar d wa s elected president. 
A t Seattle, Wash. , there has been organized the Attuck s Realt y an d Investment 
Company , wit h a capita l stock of $100,000 
full y pai d in . Th e president is Mr . E . R. 
James. 
The Southern Beaut y Products Concer n 
has been established by colored people i n 
Savannah , Ga . It wil l carr y fourteen 
"Gloria " products, an d conduct courses i n 
hair an d beauty culture . Amon g the promoters of this business are Mrs. Simpkins, 
Mrs. Seabrook, R. A . Harper, J. H . Doyle , 
A . B . Singfield, Natha n Roberts, Rufu s 
Baker, E . H . Burke , C. H . Haywood , T. 
McPherson , J . G. Lemon . 
ft A t the annua l stockholders' meeting of 
the Tidewate r Fai r Associatio n of Suffolk, 
Va. , a 10% dividen d wa s declared and the 
capita l stock wa s increased from $10,000 
to $20,000. Mr . J . T. Rei d wa s elected 
president. 
Colored undertakers and business men 
i n the South have organize d a t Memphis, 
Tenn., the Tri-Stat e Caske t an d Coffin 
Company , a $200,000 project, an d have 
plans fo r a plan t whic h wil l employ 150 
men. Amon g those interested i n the compan y are R. R. Church , C. E . Bush , J. C. 
Martin, Dr. R. A. Williams, Weyman 
Wilkerson, and John L Webb; the president 
an d genera l manage r is Mr . T. H . Hayes. 
A s a result of the lynchin g of two Ne ­
groes at Jacksonville , Fla. , by agents of a 
whit e insuranc e company—wh o accused the 
Negroe s of the murde r of an employee— 
16,000 Negroe s have withdraw n their policies an d incorporated a $10,000 organiza ­
tio n of their own—the People's Industria l 
Insuranc e Company . 
A t Omaha , Neb., Negroe s have incorporated the Kaffir Chemica l Laboratories, 
as a $500,000 enterprise . Its preparation s 
include a pyorrhe a preventive tooth paste, TH E HORIZON 330 
a face cream, an antipholgisti c compound, 
a blood antiseptic, a hair tonic, etc. The 
president is Madre e Penn. 
The colored real estate firm of Nai l and 
Parker, i n Ne w Yor k City , handles over 
a millio n dollars a yea r i n rentals and 
commissions. 
Thre e ex-colored officers of the U. S. 
Army—J . William s Clifford , Natha n 0 . 
Goodloe, and Charle s M . Thompson—ar e 
launchin g a $200,000 colored motion picture corporation at Washington , D . C. 
Withou t previous newspaper announcement or advertising, colored people i n 
Portsmouth , Va. , have organized and chartered the Communit y Saving s Bank , wit h 
a paid-i n capita l of $50,000; it has over 
500 stockholders. The president of the bank 
is Mr . J. F . Proctor. 
G Negroe s i n Charleston, S. C., have opened 
their first bank—the Charleston Mutua l 
Saving s Bank . It gives interest a t 4% and 
conducts departments i n commerce, loans 
and discounts, and rea l estate. The president is Mr . E . T. Edwards. 
C W. F . Cozart, a colored man in Atlanti c 
City , N . J. , has been appointed Interna ­
tiona l Organize r of Colored Waiters by 
the Hote l and Restauran t Employee s In ­
ternationa l Alliance , affiliated wit h the 
American Federation of Labor. Mr. 
Cozart is author of the "Waiter's Manual." 
C Scott Bond , the well-known colored farme r of Madison , Ark. , has purchased the 
Captai n Joh n Youn g farm, containin g 900 
acres, at a pric e of $145,000. 
G Hug h M . Burkett, a colored real estate 
dealer in Baltimore , Md. , has bought at 
auction, a four-story apartment house on 
a lot 33x85 feet. The price was $34,700. 
G In Maryland , there has been incorporated 
the Reisterstown Colored Cemetery 
Company of Baltimore County, to acquire and 
develop lan d fo r buria l lots. Nichola s A . 
Madden , W . H . T. Johnson, and Joshua 
Dett are the prompters. 
C Th e Southern Ai d Society of Virginia , 
Inc., at Richmond , in its twenty-sixth annua l statement, reports as cash balance, 
December 31, 1919: $145,076; capita l and 
surplus, $429,131. Mr . A . D. Pric e is 
President. 
C Mrs. Xenopho n Jones, a colored woma n 
i n Checotah, Okla. , has 4,800 acres of oil 
land , wit h 21 producin g wells, and an income of $3,000 pe r day. He r husband is 
the son of the late Wile y Jones, a ric h an d 
noted Negro . 
( Th e Douglass Lif e Insurance Compan y 
is being organized by Negroes in St. Louis, 
Mo., as a $10,000 project; over 70% of the 
stock has been subscribed. Amon g the 
promoters are J. M . Wei l and Willia m H . 
Mosby. 
G The 1'raternal Savings Ban k and Trust 
Company, a colored business i n Memphis, 
Tenn., has purchased a $50,000 estate for 
the erection of a modern ten-story office 
building , to cost $200,000. The deposits 
of the company are near the $500,000 mark , 
according to Mr . A . F . Ward , cashier. 
C A t Drewryville , Va. , there is a colored 
farmer, W. B. Turner, and his five sons, 
who own over 1,000 acres, half of whic h is 
under cultivation. Their last peanut crop 
sold for $13,000; last season they grew 
62,000 pounds of cotton. 
G A t Chula , Va. , there has been formed by 
Negroes, the Chula Commercial and 
Improvement League. Last season colored 
people bought, through this League, ninety 
tons of fertilize r a t $23.35 per ton, a tota l 
of $2,101.50. This fertilize r was worth , 
outside of the club, $27.75 per ton, or a 
total of $2,497.50—a difference of $396. 
G Willia m Solder, a Negr o i n Boston, 
Mass., who has perfected his invention of 
a combination of cooking stove and hot 
wate r heater, has become president of the 
Solder Improved Stove Company, a $500,-
000 corporation. 
C The Savannah , Ga. , Savings and Rea l 
Estat e Corporatio n has commenced work on 
a $200,000 structure, to comprise a bank, 
office building, and movin g picture theatre, 
on West Broa d Street. The president of 
the corporation is Walte r S. Scott. 
NATIONA L URBA N LEAGU E 
THE Milwauke e Urba n League has been 
included i n the Centralize d Budge t for 
1920, a city plan of financing acceptable 
organizations. The Wisconsin AntiTuberculosis Association has asked A. B. Nutt, 
the Milwauke e League's Executiv e Secretary , to present the wor k of the Urba n 
League as carried out locally and nationall y 
to its students who are trainin g as public 
health workers. 
C The State Department of Chil d Hygiene 
has asked William Ashby, of the New 
Jersey Urban League, to secure competent; 340 TH E CRISIS 
graduate nurses who wil l be used to teach 
Negr o mothers methods of chil d care i n 
various municipalitie s of the state. The 
Newar k Boar d of Healt h has requested 
space i n the offices of the Urba n League , 
to be used for a clinic . Amon g the results 
of the League's industria l efforts durin g 
the month of January , was the opening of 
two new factories to colored women. 
The Industria l Department of the East 
St. Louis Urba n League , of whic h E . 
Champ Warric k is Executiv e Secretary, is 
conducting a co-operative grocery and mercantile store as one of its activities. It 
promises to be a profitable as well as a use' 
fu l addition to the community. 
The St. Louis Urba n League , of whic h 
W . Buckne r is Executiv e Secretary, has 
ventured into a new field—that of operatin g a free dental clini c i n a congested 
Negr o district, as a means of health education as well as relievin g immediate discomfort. Durin g a drive conducted the 
first week of December, the colored people 
alone contributed $2,200 to the support of 
the League . 
Fo r three years, the Auxiliar y of the 
Associated Charitie s of Charlotte , N . C , 
affiliated wit h the Nationa l Urba n League , 
has supported a trained social worke r for 
the colored people of that city. Recently, 
Governor T. H . Bickett, who is much in ­
terested i n Negr o welfare, addressed the 
organization. Its Boar d is composed of a 
splendid group of white and colored citizens. 
The Cleveland organization, under 
Willia m R. Conners, is conducting a communit y class i n foremanship, i n response 
to a growin g demand for Negr o foremen 
i n industria l plants of Cleveland. It is 
also conducting a class for social workers, 
i n co-operation wit h the Trainin g Department of the Associated Charities. 
The Boston Urba n League's Women's 
Committee, wit h Mrs. Clement Morgan , 
Chairman , is furnishin g friendly visitors 
fo r the Associated Charitie s i n two districts i n Boston. 
Dr . Joh n Graham Brooks, Chairma n of 
the Cambridg e Urba n League , semi-monthl y calls together i n informa l conference a 
group of representative white and colored 
men to discuss problems of vita l importance to both races. The Women's 
Department of the League is active in the 
Associate d Charitie s an d i n the Cambridg e 
Healt h Council. 
Two large Chicago firms have accepted 
the welfar e program of the Industria l De ­
partment of the Chicag o Urba n League . 
Throug h the League , Montgomery , War d 
and Company , who employ 600 colored 
girls as clerks and stenographers, has 
employed Mrs. Hele n Sayr e as welfar e 
secretary; the Nationa l Maleabl e Casting s 
Company , whic h employs 200 colored men, 
has engaged Lloy d Stone, formerl y Boys' 
Secretary of the Y . M . C. A. , as welfar e 
worker. 
POLITICS 
The Republica n Nationa l Committee , 
wit h W . H . Hayes, Chairman , has 
numbered amon g 171 members of a special 
advisory committee on politic s and platform, five Negroes—Dr. S. A . Furniss of 
Indianapolis, R. R. Churc h of Memphis, 
Roscoe C. Simmons of Kentucky , Jame s 
Weldon Johnson of Ne w York , an d 
Willia m H . Lewis of Massachusetts. 
G The Democrati c part y at Tuls a County , 
Okla , elected two Negroes—Fre d Dougla s 
and E . J. Sadler—a s delegates to the 
State Convention, durin g February . 
G The Honorabl e Charle s W . Anderson , 
in Ne w Yor k City , has for the fourt h time 
been re-elected delegate at large fo r the 
Republica n State Convention. 
C A t Chicago, Ill., Alderma n Jackso n has 
won re-election i n the Second Ward , by a 
5,133 vote; his whit e Democrati c opponent 
carrie d only two precincts, wit h 700 votes. 
WA R 
HARRISBURG , a colored villag e i n 
Baldwi n County , Ga. , has unveile d a 
memoria l to its soldiers. 
A t the Militar y Carnival , a platoon of 
the colored 24th Infantr y from Columbus, 
N . M. , wo n the cup for infantr y dril l and 
was awarde d first place. 
C Accordin g to the Negr o Yea r Book, 
$225,000,000 was contributed by Negroe s 
durin g the wa r i n Libert y Bonds, Re d 
Cross, and other drives. 
C In Ohio, the Hamilton County ExService Men's Welfare Committee has invited 
the colored Ear l Stewart Post, numbe r 127, 
America n Legion , to elect a representative 
to attend their meetings. TH E HORIZON 341 
GHETT O 
LOUIS E . FLEMIN G has been awarded 
a verdic t of five cents against the 
Louisvill e an d Nashvill e Railroad . Mr . 
Flemin g charged tha t transportation was 
furnishe d over a rive r fo r whit e passengers, but not fo r Negroes. The court held 
tha t five cents wa s the transportatio n fee 
across the bridg e and refused to allow furthe r claim fo r damage. 
C Attorne y Genera l Fran k Roberson of 
Mississippi , has rule d tha t Chinese children 
cannot attend schools wit h whit e children. 
C Colore d ministers i n Norfolk , Va. , recently declined to invit e their congregations to a "special " service of the "Billy " 
Sunda y campaign . 
C A t Tampa , Fla. , the Cit y Council has 
recommended the purchase of a par k for 
Negroes; its cost is $10,000. 
G A t Petersburg , Va. , mai l wa s delivered 
two an d three times dail y i n whit e sections an d i n colored sections once a day, 
regardless of the fac t tha t 98% of the 
Negroe s pa y taxes on houses an d lots. The 
Negroe s protested an d now receive mai l 
twic e daily . 
MEETING S 
FOU R HUNDRE D delegates from thirty -
three states attended the first annua l 
convention of the Lincoln League of 
America, and four national characters participated—Willia m H . Hays, Chairma n of the 
Republica n Nationa l Committee ; Governor 
Fran k 0 . Lowde n of Illinois; Mayo r 
Willia m Hal e Thompson of Chicago, and 
Majo r Genera l Leonar d Wood . Amon g the 
subjects discussed were "Shoul d Southern 
Representation Be Cu t Down, " "Jim-Cro w 
Cars" and "Lynching." Roscoe C. 
Simmons presided. 
The Ol d Nort h Carolin a State Denta l 
Associatio n has held its first annua l convention, at whic h over 60% of the dentists 
of Nort h Carolin a were enrolled. Dr. C. 
A . Dunsto n of Raleigh , N . C , was elected 
president. 
Th e Nationa l Associatio n of Negr o 
Tailors wil l hold its annua l convention i n 
Ne w Yor k City , August 4-6. Mr . R. R. 
Burt , of Ne w Yor k City , is president of this 
organization . 
At the first Conference of Negro 
Industrial and Personnel Workers, which 
wa s hel d i n Pittsburgh , Pa. , forty-seven 
industria l plants wer e represented by whit e 
and colored delegates and fifty students of 
Negr o industria l problems. A pamphlet of 
the proceedings of this conference wil l be 
printed for distribution. 
G The first meeting of the Inter-racia l 
Conference of Baltimore , Md. , has been 
held. Dr. Peter Ainsli e was chairman . 
Resolutions were adopted, for the provision of playgrounds, a community house, 
a parenta l school for truants, a vocational 
school, and the appointment of capable 
colored men as police magistrates. 
EDUCATION 
THE first colored male teacher to be 
appointed i n the Chicago Hig h Schools 
is Osca r J. Jordan , who wil l teach fifth 
year students. Mr . Jorda n is a Bachelor 
of Arts from the Universit y of Illinois and 
has taken post-graduate wor k at the Uni ­
versities of Michiga n and Chicago. 
Twelve years ago, seven supervisin g 
colored teachers were employed as an experiment i n the State of Virginia ; sixty -
three counties are now employing such 
teachers and payin g one-third of the expense. Seven years ago there were no publi c county schools for Negroes above the 
seventh grade ; there are now sixteen rura l 
Junio r Hig h Schools. However, less than 
two-thirds of the colored children of school 
age are in school; the majorit y of rura l 
colored .schools are i n one-room buildings; 
in fifty-five counties, six months or less is 
the average school term; and fifty-seven 
per cent of Negr o children at school are 
in first and second grades. 
C The followin g salary schedule has been 
granted colored teachers by the School 
Boar d at Ne w Orleans, La. : First year, 
$70; second year, $75; thir d year, $80; 
fourth year, $90; fifth year, $100; sixt h 
year, $110; principals in elementary schools 
for first year, wit h graduated increase 
for five years: Less than 100 pupils, $100; 
less than 250 pupils and over 100, $110; 
between 250 and 400, $120; between 400 
and 550, $130; between 550 and 800, $140; 
over 800, $150; the salary of the principa l 
of the hig h school, $165 per month. 
Colored college men i n Atlanta , Ga. , 
have established the Et a Chapte r of the 
Omega Psi Ph i Fraternity . Harol d H . 
Thoma s was elected as basileus. 
Withi n two weeks, 308 colored illiterates, rangin g i n age from 18-70, enrolled 342 TH E CRISIS 
a t the fou r publi c evening schools for adult 
illiterate s i n Savannah , Ga . 
A school, to cost $20,000 and to be furnished from the Pierr e D u Pon t Fund , has 
been approved for colored children at 
Milford, Del. 
A scholarship to the Rockefeller 
Institute of Medical Research has been awarded 
to Victo r Vallon , a graduat e wit h honors of 
Howard , the Universit y of Pennsylvania , 
and Ne w Yor k State Medica l College. His 
average fo r three years at Howar d was 
98%. 
Throug h the Scoti a Scholarship Society 
i n Jersey City , N . J. , a "Bat h Room Fund " 
of $2,547 has been raised for Scotia 
Seminary, at Concord, N. C. 
d Th e colored town of Moun d Bayou , Miss. , 
has let a contract for a modern school 
building , to cost $58,000. 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION O F COLORE D 
WOME N 
AT Des Moines, Iowa, in the recent 
Combined Charity Chest, the colored women's clubs received $5,000 fo r their work, 
as their share from the public funds. 
A t Omaha , Neb., 150 colored women have 
been employed by an overall factory. So 
successful has been the experiment, that a 
simila r factory wil l be opened i n Minneapo ­
lis. 
Th e club women of Denver, Colo., announce that their Home fo r Colored Wome n 
is free from debt. 
A t Pueblo, Colo., on Lincoln-Douglass' 
birthday, the Orphanage ta g day netted 
over $1,000. 
The Minnesot a State Federatio n held 
their annua l meeting i n February , at 
Minneapolis. 
Wit h delegates from Nort h and South 
Carolina , Georgia , Florida , Mississippi , and 
Tennessee, the Southern Federation of 
Colored Women's Clubs has been formed 
at Daytona , Fla . Mar y McLeo d Bethune 
wa s elected president. 
FRATERNITIES 
ST. LUKE' S PENN Y SAVING S BAN K 
at Richmond , Va. , has declared a dividend of 5% and reports for December 31, 
1919: resources, $433,691; receipts for the 
year. $2,563,233; gross profits, $21,419; i t 
has $30,090 in Libert y Bonds. Maggi e L . 
Walke r wa s re-elected president. 
C The Union Brotherhood Benevolent 
Association in Savannah, Ga., has bought property costing $10,000, fo r its home. The organizatio n has over 400 members, not in ­
cludin g its branche s fo r women and children. Mr . Bonapart e Whit e is the president. 
d A three-story bric k structur e has been 
purchased by colored Mason s i n Pittsburgh , 
Pa. , for a temple. 
C Colored Knights of Pythia s at Ho t 
Springs, Ark. , are buildin g a bath-house and 
sanitarium, to cost $135,000. 
d The Mosai c Templars of Americ a have 
purchased a $20,000 piece of propert y i n 
Memphis, Tenn., where a twelve-story steel 
an d concrete structure , costing $500,000, wil l 
be erected fo r the organization . Ther e are 
28,000 Templars i n Tennessee. Durin g the 
war, the Templars invested $200,000 in 
Liberty Bonds. 
SOCIA L PROGRES S 
COLORE D bankers i n Virginia , have 
formed the Virgini a Negr o Bankers' 
Association , to acquir e and disseminate 
bankin g informatio n and promote thrift, in ­
dustr y and business building . Willia m M . 
Rich , of the Brow n Saving s and Bankin g 
Company , Inc., at Norfolk , Va. , wa s elected 
president. 
d A t Baltimore , Md. , colored physicians 
and nurses have received appointments for 
service i n the publi c schools, throug h Healt h 
Commissione r C. Hampso n Jones. Th e physicians wil l give their services gratis this 
year; the nurses, however, wil l be pai d $100 
a month. The appointees ar e Doctors W . 
S. Jackso n and Ja y G. McKae ; the nurses, 
Mesdame s Mar y Fernandis, Anni e M . 
Barnes, Florenc e Bennett, Jessie Smith , 
Corneli a Weaver, and B . N . Cole . 
Sixty-five of Pittsburgh's 786 policemen, 
ar e Negroes. Superintendent of Police , R. J. 
Alderdice , says: "The y have been on the 
force fo r the past twenty-five years, are 
given no special beats, and are courteous and 
perform their duties as wel l as officers of 
other races. " 
Th e Mayo r and Cit y Counci l at Cordele , 
Ga., have appointed Dr. W. S. Pace, a 
Negro, as City Physician for the colored population. Dr . Pac e is a graduat e of Meharry , 
1907. 
A piece of propert y 65x75, costing $10,-
000, has been purchased for a colored Y . M . 
C. A . i n Savannah , Ga . TH E HORIZO N 343 
Th e Shorthan d Writers' Associatio n of 
the Cit y of Ne w York , fo r the first time 
has admitted Negroe s to its contest. Si x 
students of the Ne w Yor k Academy , a colored institution , took the test,—Edit h Wil ­
son and Mrs. Kennet h McPherso n won 
Pitma n medals wit h certificates, and Misses 
E . M . Ra e an d C. Gogla s wo n certificates 
of merit. 
Willia m Jefferson and Wrigh t Branch , 
colored letter carriers at Savannah , Ga. , 
have been given clerkships, after a twelve 
years discontinuance of appointments of 
colored men to this branc h of the post-office 
service. 
Estell e M . Truman , a colored nurse , is 
employed by Sears, Roebuck & Compan y i n 
Chicago, Ill. She has direc t oversight of 
1,400 persons. I n Civi l Servic e examinatio n 
Miss Truma n wa s second on a list of fifty. 
She is a graduat e of the Chicago School of 
Civic s and Philanthropy . 
Eigh t colored base-ball teams have organized the National Negro Baseball 
Association. Rube Foster, of Chicago, was elected president. 
During the past year, the colored 
Charity Hospital and Training School for 
Nurses, at Savannah , Ga. , served 902 patients, wit h a death rate of 6.7%. The in ­
stitutio n wa s established nineteen years ago 
by the late Dr . C. McKane ; Dr . W . C. 
Blackma n is superintendent. 
A t Baltimore , Md . out of twenty-eight 
pla y guild s and story centers, four are for 
colored children , who, also, have four school 
play-grounds. Negroe s form 15.2 pe r cent 
of the population. 
A t Charlestown , W . Va. , $20,000 wa s 
raised i n a seven-day campaig n fo r the 
Matti e V . Le e Home fo r Colored Girls; Dr . 
H . F . Gambl e and C. H . Jame s gave $1,000 
each. Amon g the speakers i n the campaign , 
were Mayo r Gran t P . Hall , Mrs. Lydi a S. 
Poffenbarger, and Rabb i Israe l Bettan . 
Verdicts of $250 each have been awarded 
the Rev . Willia m N . DeBerry , pastor of 
St. John's Congregational Church, 
Springfield, Mass.; the Rev. Alex. C. Garner, 
pastor of the Plymout h Congregationa l 
Church , Washington , D . C ; and the Rev. 
Charle s W . Burton , pastor of the Lincol n 
Memoria l Congregationa l Church , Chicago, 
Ill; against the Livingstone Cafeteria, 
Detroit, Mich. 
Ro y D . Fowle r of Cleveland, formerl y a 
Lieutenant in the Ninth Ohio Battalion, 
National Guard, has been appointed Federal 
Prohibitio n Agen t for the distric t comprisin g 
Pennsylvania, Delaware, Ohio, and 
Virginia. His salary is $2,400 a year. 
Th e Newport, R. I., Branc h of the N . A . 
A. C. P., which was organized last 
November, has a membership of over 100. Mr. W. 
J . Luca s is president. 
Colored welfar e workers i n Atlanta , Ga. , 
have organized the Socia l Workers' Club , to 
serve as a clearin g house and confidential 
exchange for the various welfar e agencies 
of the city. Jesse O. Thoma s is president. 
George Clayton , a colored pharmacist employed by the Liggett Dru g Compan y i n 
Ne w Yor k City , has been placed i n charge of 
a Prescriptio n Department. 
The Recreation Cente r established at 
East St. Louis, Ill., by the Wa r Wor k Coun ­
cil of the Nationa l Boar d of the Y . W . C. A . 
is now under the supervision of the loca l 
whit e organization. Esthe r E . Fulk s is i n 
charge of the work. 
The Sunbeam Theatr e i n Lo s Angeles, 
Cal. , has been fined $200 for discriminatin g 
against a Negro,—Joh n H . Bates. 
A s exercises i n current events and classification, the pupils of the colored Howar d 
Hig h School at Wilmington , Del. , have made 
the followin g survey of the occupations of 
Negroes i n tha t city : hair culturists, 51 ; 
haulin g and transfer, 22; contractors, 17; 
barber shops, 16; restaurants, 11; bootblack 
parlors, 10; ciga r stores, 8; employment 
agencies, halls, physicians, beauty parlors, 
and confectionary shops, 7 each; tinsmiths, 
roofers and stove repairers, caterers, and 
ice and coal dealers, 6 each; undertakers 
and grocers, 5 each; bakers, garages, proprietors, jun k dealers, pool-rooms, and tailor-shops, 4 each; second-hand clothing dealers, shoe and harnessmakers, photographers, 
paperhangers, dentists, and cabinet makers, 
3 each; auto-trucking, automobile tir e repairin g and vulcanizing , club houses, dru g 
stores, doll hospitals, fish dealers, hospitals, 
insuranc e companies, news dealers, novelty 
and notion shops, real estate dealers, tobacco factories, upholsterers, 2 each; theatre, settlement house, poultr y market, mil ­
liner, manufacture r of toilet articles, frui t 
and produce dealer, chiropodist, communit y 
house, blacksmit h and liver y stable, 1 each. 
Th e grave of Joh n Brown , the abolition-344 TH E CRISI S 
ist, at Nort h Elba , Ne w York , is included 
in the sale of 1,200 acres, for lumberingoperations. 
Ta x Collector Willia m B . Harriso n reports that Negroe s i n Georgi a returned fo r 
taxes durin g 1919, $54,858,301, as against 
$47,423,499 durin g 1918, representing an 
increase of $7,434,852, or nearl y 15%. Th e 
value of automobiles owned by Negroes, in ­
creased from $946,031 to $1,860,261. 
Mr . A . W . Reason, principa l of Bartlet t 
Hig h School, St. Joseph, Mo. , wa s elected 
by the Boar d of Educatio n to attend the 
conferences of superintendents and principals at the convention of the National 
Educational Association, held in Cleveland, 
Ohio. Mr . Reason is the first colored prin ­
cipa l to be delegated from Missouri . I n the 
assembly of over 8,000 educators, not more 
than a dozen were Negroes. 
Transylvani a Universit y at Lexington , 
Ky. , recently invited a Negro , Professor 
W . H . Fouse, to address the students on 
"Rac e Riots. " 
The colored Frederick Douglass 
Memorial Hospital and Training School in Philadelphia, Pa., of which Dr. N. F. Mossell is 
i n charge, has burned its second mortgage, 
amountin g to $16,000. I n less than ten 
minutes, $2,000 i n cash was subscribed towar d a Maintenanc e Fun d of $50,000. Mr . 
Joh n T. Gibson of the Standar d Theatr e 
has given $900 to the institution. 
C A t Lo s Angeles, Cal. , Pau l R. Williams, 
a Negro , won first prize, $300, offered by 
the Los Angele s Pressed Bric k Company, 
for the best design for a house to cost not 
more than $5,000, includin g heating, plumbing , electric wiring , and painting . The contest was open to architects i n Californi a 
and Arizona . 
C Thre e thousand Negroe s i n Chicago, Ill, 
who had signed pledges to support a fight 
against residentia l segregation, have held 
a meeting at the 8th Regiment Armory ; 
over $2,000 was collected to aid the movement. Amon g the speakers were Dr. 
Charle s E . Bentley, the Rev. Joh n W . 
Robinson, and M . C. B. Mason , Jr . 
PERSONA L 
RICHAR D W . THOMPSO N of Washing -
ton, D . C , is dead, at the age of fiftyfour. Fo r thirty-seven years he did active 
service as a colored newspape r correspondent. 
( Fre d R. Scott, 62 West 131st Street, Ne w 
Yor k City , would lik e to know the whereabouts of Joh n Pigeon , a frien d of his whe n 
they were a t the Orpha n Asylu m at 143rd 
Street and Amsterda m Avenue , Ne w Yor k 
City . 
A t Philadelphia , Pa. , Danie l M . Baxte r 
has succeeded W . Basi l Web b as Messenge r 
to Mayo r Moore . Mr . Web b retires, afte r 
twenty years' service i n the Mayor's office, 
to devote his time to rea l estate business. 
Professor J . W . Peele, fo r twelve years 
assistant principa l of the Goldboro, N . C , 
Colored Grade d Schools, is dead. 
Ex-firema n Charle s H . Brown , a Negr o 
at St. Paul , Minn. , is dead. O n Ma y 7, 
1887, he wa s appointed to the Cit y Fir e 
Department, where he served continuously 
for twenty-five years; on Jun e 1, 1912, he 
was retired on a pension. 
The marriag e of Miss Carolin e Stewart 
Bond , a graduat e of Atlant a Universit y and 
Radcliffe College, to Captai n Aaro n Day , 
Jr, a graduat e of the Universit y of Chicago 
and instructo r of chemistr y at the Prairi e 
View , Tex., Norma l School, is announced. 
Dr . George W . Cabaness, a wel l know n 
colored physicia n i n Washington , D . C., is 
dead. 
FOREIG N 
At Monrovia , Januar y 5, Charle s D . B . 
Kin g wa s inaugurate d Presiden t of 
Liberia, and Samuel A. Ross, Vice 
President. In connection with the ceremony, the 
Britis h Government sent its cruise r Thistle 
and the Frenc h Governmen t a warship , 
wit h Blais e Diagne , Deput y of Senega l at 
Paris, as special representative of France . 
Dr . M . L . Moody , a colored Jamaican , 
has been appointed Bacteriologist and 
Lecturer in Biology at the hospital of the 
University of London, England. 
Seven whit e and seven colored men have 
been elected to the Legislatur e a t Kingston , 
Jamaica , B . W . I. 
G Th e Africa n Co-operative Corporation , 
Limited, has been chartered at London, 
England, with an authorized capital of $486,-
000. Th e directors are whit e an d colored 
business men of London , wit h a consultin g 
committee in West Africa, composed of 
Negroes of Sierra Leone, Gold Coast Colony, 
and Nigeria . Th e purpose of the company, 
is to make possible the entrance of the 
Negro upon the international world of commerce unde r a co-operative plan . THE CRISI S ADVERTISER 345 
"JUS T TH E PLAC E FO R YOU R GIRL " 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla . 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary , Grammar , High , Normal, Vocational. 
Nurs e Trainin g at McLeo d Hospital a specialty. Term s reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MARY McLEOD BETHUNE, - • Principal. 
Bell Phone Spruce 1924 30-D.y System Position 
Derrick 
Shorthand School 
Childs' Building 
1435 Chestnut Street 
PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
Only School of its Kind 
in America 
STATE UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. 
Founded 1879. 
The only Institution In tlio Stale having for its objer-t 
Collegiate, Ministerial, Med leal, und Legal training for Colored citizens In Kentucky. 
Special training in Insurance, Social Service, Nursing and 
Hospital Work. 
Normal, Commercial, Music, Domestic Science, Missionary 
training class. 
Evening classes, correspondence course. Degrees offered. 
Presiden t C . H . Parris h 
Bell Phone Spruce 1924 30-D.y System Position 
Derrick 
Shorthand School 
Childs' Building 
1435 Chestnut Street 
PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
Only School of its Kind 
in America 
BEREAN MANUAL TRAINING 
AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
Founded 1809 Incorporated 1904 
Non-Sectarian 
Winte r Ter m opene d Tuesday , Jan . 6, 1920 
Sprin g Ter m open s Tuesday , Apri l 6, 1920 
Primaril y a Trade s School; Excellen t College 
Preparator y Department, Elementar y Englis h 
Department. Ne w Trades; Electrica l Engi ­
neering, Blue Prin t Reading , Textil e Work , 
Aut o Hepairs. 
Join now, or writ e the Principal , 
MATTHEW ANDERSON 
1926 Sout h Colleg e Ave. , Philadelphia , Pa . 
Visitor s Welcom e Alway s 
Efficiency Our Ai m Helpfulness Our Object " 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers t o young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincol n Hospita l and Hom e 
New York, N.Y . 
MOTHER S 
FI T YOU R DAUGHTE R FO R LIF E 
No w is the Tim e to "STUDY " the School to 
whic h you are going1 to send your daughte r 
next Fall . 
THI S INSTITUTIO N IS 
DEEPL Y CHRISTIA N 
It Permits No Shabby Wor k and Tolerate s 
No Loose Habits 
SIXT H GRAD E THROUG H TH E NORMA L 
Togethe r Wit h 
VOCATIONA L TRAININ G 
MUSI C ATHLETIC S 
Ou r AI M is to turn out well-rounded women, 
trained in intellect 
and 
Disciplined in self-reliance 
TH E TRAININ G SCHOO L GIR L GOE S 
BAC K T O HE R COMMUNIT Y PREPARE D 
T O HEL P LIF T TH E STANDARD S O F 
LIVING . 
REQUIREMENTS : 
Sound in Healt h and Mora l Characte r 
No t UNDE R FIFTEE N Year s of Ag e . 
ABOV E the FIFT H GRAD E 
Good record in institution formerl y attended. 
SEN D FO R CATALO G 
NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL FOR 
WOMEN AND GIRLS 
Miss Nanni e H , Burroughs, President 
Lincol n Heights Washington , D . C . 
HALE INFIRMARY AND NURSE TRAINING 
SCHOOL 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. 
Offers to Hig h School graduates and young 
women of higher education and good moral 
character, between the ages of 18 and 35, a 
three years' course in the profession of nursing. Fo r further information apply to the 
Superintendent enclosing a stamp. * 
MOTHER S 
FI T YOU R DAUGHTE R FO R LIF E 
No w is the Tim e to "STUDY " the School to 
whic h you are going1 to send your daughte r 
next Fall . 
THI S INSTITUTIO N IS 
DEEPL Y CHRISTIA N 
It Permits No Shabby Wor k and Tolerate s 
No Loose Habits 
SIXT H GRAD E THROUG H TH E NORMA L 
Togethe r Wit h 
VOCATIONA L TRAININ G 
MUSI C ATHLETIC S 
Ou r AI M is to turn out well-rounded women, 
trained in intellect 
and 
Disciplined in self-reliance 
TH E TRAININ G SCHOO L GIR L GOE S 
BAC K T O HE R COMMUNIT Y PREPARE D 
T O HEL P LIF T TH E STANDARD S O F 
LIVING . 
REQUIREMENTS : 
Sound in Healt h and Mora l Characte r 
No t UNDE R FIFTEE N Year s of Ag e . 
ABOV E the FIFT H GRAD E 
Good record in institution formerl y attended. 
SEN D FO R CATALO G 
NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL FOR 
WOMEN AND GIRLS 
Miss Nanni e H , Burroughs, President 
Lincol n Heights Washington , D . C . 
WANTE D 
2 Bod y maker s and Woodworkers. Colored 
men only. Steady work. Good wages. 
TH E 0. R . PATTERSO N SON S CO. , 
Greenfield, Ohio 
MOTHER S 
FI T YOU R DAUGHTE R FO R LIF E 
No w is the Tim e to "STUDY " the School to 
whic h you are going1 to send your daughte r 
next Fall . 
THI S INSTITUTIO N IS 
DEEPL Y CHRISTIA N 
It Permits No Shabby Wor k and Tolerate s 
No Loose Habits 
SIXT H GRAD E THROUG H TH E NORMA L 
Togethe r Wit h 
VOCATIONA L TRAININ G 
MUSI C ATHLETIC S 
Ou r AI M is to turn out well-rounded women, 
trained in intellect 
and 
Disciplined in self-reliance 
TH E TRAININ G SCHOO L GIR L GOE S 
BAC K T O HE R COMMUNIT Y PREPARE D 
T O HEL P LIF T TH E STANDARD S O F 
LIVING . 
REQUIREMENTS : 
Sound in Healt h and Mora l Characte r 
No t UNDE R FIFTEE N Year s of Ag e . 
ABOV E the FIFT H GRAD E 
Good record in institution formerl y attended. 
SEN D FO R CATALO G 
NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL FOR 
WOMEN AND GIRLS 
Miss Nanni e H , Burroughs, President 
Lincol n Heights Washington , D . C . 
Mention THE CRISIS , 346 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUT E 
1227 S. 17th STREET , PHILADELPHIA , PA . 
SHORTHAN D TYPEWRITIN G BOOKKEEPIN G 
Al l shorthand and bookkeeping classes are closed. Ne w classes •will he organized Apri l 1st. 
Durin g the months of Januar y and Februar y the Advance d Class i n Shorthand wrot e and 
transcribed "Si r Roge r De Coverley Papers, " "Th e Visio n of Si r Launfal, " "Autobiograph y of 
Benjami n Franklin " and excerpts fro m Irving's "Sketch Book. " A Specia l Class i n Secretaria l 
Bookkeepin g organized Februar y 9th. Classes in Typewritin g organized every Monday . 
JO B WORK—I f you have a hundred or 10,000 circula r letter s to send out—don't worr y 
youB stenographer—we can do the m in a hurr y and SAV E you TIME , MONE Y and "WORRY . 
Mentio n ribbon and type on your typewrite r and we wil l fix the m so your stenographe r can fill 
in name and address, makin g the m appear as personal letters. "Work for CHURCHES , SOCIETIE S and BUSINES S ME N a specialty. Attractiv e typewritte n notice-forms on cards and 
half-sheets. Distanc e make s no difference, if you are wher e you can hear the whistl e of a 
steam-car, we can reach your railoa d station. 
EDWAR D T . DUNCAN , President. 
YOUNG WOMEN 
HERE IS YOUR CHANCE 
GOOD POSITIONS—GOOD SALARIES 
Answe r the Cal l for Social Worker s . and 
Ente r the World's Greatest Fiel d for Service 
Efficient, Earnest, Constructive Leader s are 
i n 
DEMAN D 
W e Trai n for Christia n Leadership—Th e 
Only Kin d of Leadership Tha t Wil l Stand 
the Test in the 
NE W DAY . 
Departmen t open to those who have had. at 
least, one year of trainin g i n a good Hig h 
School. 
Ge t Read y Fo r Service 
Th e Worl d Needs YOU 
SEN D FO R CATALO G 
NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOO L 
FO R WOME N AN D GIRL S 
Miss Nanni e H . Burroughs, President 
Lincol n Heights, Washington , D . C . 
VA. UNION UNIVERSITY 
RICHMOND , VA . 
Founde d 1865 
College , Academi c and Theologica l departments. Th e . school of Arts an d Sciences 
offers classica l and scientific courses. Special 
emphasis on Pre-Medica l Work . Theologica l 
department confers B.Th . and B.D . Fore ­
most in Debatin g and Athletics. Fo r furthe r 
information, address WM . J , CLARK , President, 
EAR N $50.0 0 A WEE K 
Durin g You r Spar e 
Tim e 
SELLIN G OU R 
Photo Novelties 
Enlarge d Portraits, 
(16x20);' Phot o Me ­
dallions, Phot o Jew-' 
elry, Enlarge d Phot o 
Clocks, Phot o Mir ­
rors, Negr o Picutres, 
Negr o Post Card s 
and Scott's Official 
Negr o Wa r Histor ­
ies. Agents Enlarge d 
Sampl e Photo s 50c. 
Writ e for Fre e Catalog. Agents and 
Dealer s Wanted . 
BETHEL ART CO. 
9 7 Sout h St. , 
JAMAICA , N . Y . 
TWO GREA T BOOKS fo r $2.50 
N O LIBRAR Y COMPLET E WITHOU T THE M 
(1) Th e Histor y of the Negr o Rac e and Negr o Soldier s i n the 
Spanish-America n War , Dating Back to Egyp t and the 
Pharoas —40 0 pages, 5 0 illustrations. (Retails alone for 
$1.25. ) Wa s adopted as a textbook by Nort h Carolina 
State Board of Education. 
(2 ) Th e Pictoria l Histor y of the Negr o in the Grea t Worl d 
War , giving a brilliant historical sketch, a description of 
battle scenes by Colonel Haywood , of the Fighting Fifteenth New York , Capt. Marshall, Sergeant Steptoe, Ralph 
Tyle r and others, with 15 0 excellent pictures of officers 
and men and war views. (Sells alone for $2.00. ) 
Just Think , only $2.50 for these two great books. 
Agents wante d everywhere , large commission s pai d 
ADDRESS : E . A . JOHNSON , 17 West 132nd Street, Ne w York , N.Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 347 
TEACHER S 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida , 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland , Mississippi^ Missouri, New York, 
North Carolina , Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, 
Rhode Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Vir ­
ginia and West Virginia . 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1403 Ne w Yor k Avenue Washington , D . 0. 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Wil l Hel p Yo u Get a Better Paying Position. 
REGISTE R NO W SEASONABL E TERM S 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Bo x 22, Wilberforco , 0 . 
A MONE Y GETTE R because It Is A CROW D GETTER . 
Churches and Clubs looking for a play that will afford an 
rteiiing of Side-Splittin g Fun . should have 
The Slabtown Convention 
A n entertainmen t i n on e act ; ful l o f wi t 
an d goo d humor . Scores of churches hav e cleared from 
On e to Tw o Hundre d Dollar s In On e Nigh t PRICE , SOc . 
MIS S NANNI E H . BURROUGHS , Autho r 
Lincol n Heights . Washington . D . C . 
BENJ . FRANKLI N SAID : 
"A n investment in knowledge always pays, the best 
interest." W e furnish an original New Yor k City 
Negro news column for one dollar weekly! Wh y not 
increase the circulation of your paper by letting us 
increase your New York City news? We have never 
failed a newspaper or an advertiser since we have 
been in business! 
NEWSPAPE R SERVIC E BUREA U 
Fiftee n telephones, 309 Broadway , Ne w York , N . Y . 
THE CURSE OF RACE PREJUDICE 
B y Jame s F . Morton , Jr. . A . M . 
One book which you cannot afford to be without. 
Al l the arguments on the subject and an arsenal of 
overwhelming facts. It is thorough without being 
tedious. Ever y colored family and every white 
friend of justice needs it and will enjoy it. Send 
order at once to 
JAME S F . MORTON , JR. , 
211 West 138th Stree t Ne w York , N . Y . 
A Thrillin g Negr o Romanc e 
"Th e Immediat e Jewe l of His Soul" 
by 
Herma n Dree r 
Illustrated 31 7 pages of reading matter 
Pric e $1.60 Postpaid 
AGENT S WANTE D 
Make from $5.0 0 to $8 .0 0 a day selling this unique 
book. Fo r particulars address the author, 
2413 Goode Avenue , St. Louis, Mo . 
WANTE D WANTE D 
Liv e Agents A t Once T o Sell 
DUDLEY'S FAMOUS AUTO POLISH 
for furniture , pianos, church pews, hardwood floors and hundreds of other things 
tha t have a varnished surface. Make s them 
look like new. Agents can make $50.00 to 
$75.00 per waek selling Dudley's Polish to 
furnitur e dealers, dru g stores, hardwar e 
stores, churches, housekeepers, automobil e 
stores, paint stores and grocery Btorcs. 
Specia l Offer : Fo r 90 days we wil l ship to 
al l new agents $10.00 worth of Dudley's 
Polis h for $5.00. Tak e advantage of this 
special offer at once. 
Dudle y & Porte r Manufacturin g Co . 
11 6 Sout h Mai n St. , Muskogee . Okla . 
Wanted 
A family consisting of three 
adults and two children and living 
in a suburb of New Yor k City is 
desirous of securing a competent 
woman for general household 
work. The wages are $50.00 per 
month and there is a pleasant room 
with private bath for her use. The 
home is one of refinement and offers an exceptional opportunity 
for the right person. 
ADDRESS: 
Competent, c/o TH E CRISIS , 70 
5th Avenue, New York , N . Y . 
100 FIN E CALLIN G CARD S 50 CTS . 
Neatly printed with your name and address. 
Most fashionable styles and sizes for ladies or 
gentlemen. You r card represents you, therefore only the best quality should be used. 
Business and Professiona l Cards 
furnished in several styles appropriate for 
any business or profession at the following 
prices: 100 for 85 cents, 250 for $1.50, 500 
for $2.25. 
Below are a few styles of our lettering: 
Mr. Cliffor d Roy Langford 
MR. FREDERICK A . HARRINGTON 
AGENT S WANTE D 
Good pay can be earned taking orders for 
our cards. Pleasant, dignified and profitable 
spare time work. Ther e is a big demand 
everywhere for Calling and Business Cards 
and you will have no trouble in getting orders. N o experience necessary as we furnish 
instructions with outfit. Al l orders filled 
promptly and sent prepaid. Writ e now for 
samples and agents' terms. 
The HOUSE OF CHOWNING, Indianapolis, Ind. 
AGENT S WANTE D 
$60.00 to $100.00 Pe r Wee k 
Al l or spare time selling our New Household Specialties. Lightning sellers, in roaring demand, needed 
in every home; every woman a prospect; quickest and 
biggest money maker for agents. Ncwmye r of Ohio 
made $37.60 in one day. Energetic men and women 
wanted everywhere. Writ e quick. 
Dept. C , WORL D SUPPL Y CO . 
West 96th Street, Ne w York , N . Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 34 8 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
26TH ANNUAL STATEMEN T 
of 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, INC. 
j ^ * >^ « X » X * 
SOUTHER N AI D SOCIET Y OF Va. .INC . 
527 N. 2nd Street, 
Richmond, Va . 
RECEIPT S 
Jan. 1, 1919—Cash Balanc e 
Brough t Forwar d 
Dec . 31, 1919—Annual In ­
come 
$102,656.72 
632,335-15 
Gross Receipts for 
1919 $734, 991.87 
DISBURSEMENT S 
Dec . 31, 1919—Total Disbursed durin g year (in -
cludin g investments 
made durin g year) 
Cas h Balanc e Jan . 1, 
1920 
Jan. 1, 1920—Total Assets. 
Jan. 1, 1920—Total Liabili ­
ties (includin g Capita l 
Stock ) 
$589,914.93 
$145,076.94 
$452,i55.36 
53,024.28 
Jan . 1, 1920—Surplus Fun d $399,131.08 
Tota l Amoun t Pai d to 
Policyholders to Dec . 31, 
1919 $1,898,764.19 
Th e splendid achievement shown above is the result of merited confidence 
and libera l support of the people in the Goo d Ol d State of Virginia : A Superior 
Polic y of Protectio n issued by the Society: An d a Superior Service efficiently 
rendered by a Loya l and Conscientious set of Officers and Employees. 
W e are proud of this Record—ou r Policyholders, our Officers and Employees. 
W e extend to each and all our sincere thanks, and pledge our utmost in Pro ­
tection, Service and Co-operation. 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, INC. 
527 NORT H SECOND STREE T 
RICHMOND , VIRGINIA 
OFFICER S AN D DIRECTOR S 
A . D . Price, Pres. A . Washington 
Edw. Stewart, 1st Vice-Pres. W . E . Randolph 
las. T. Carter, 2nd Vice-Pres. & Atty. Chas. N . Jackson 
B. A. Cephas, 3rd Vice-Pres. B. L . Jordan, Sec. 
W. F. Baker, Trcas. W. A . Jordan, Asst. Sec. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 349 
Darkwater By W. E. B. Du Bois 
Author of "The Souls of Black Folk," etc. 
Dr . DuBois's new book is a companion volume to "Th e 
Souls of Black Folk. " It deals with the place of the darker 
races in the modern world . 
No t a dr y contribution to sociology, but a human document of extraordinary intensity and insight, describing the 
awakened conscience and aspirations of the darker races 
everywhere , how it feels to be a black man in a whit e 
world , and how the solution is to be found in considering 
the Negr o problem, not apart from the problems of wor k 
and wage , government, domestic service, sex, and education, 
but as an integra l part of them and havin g no reality outside of them. Eve n more than the late Booke r Washington , 
Dr . D u Bois is now the chief spokesman of the two hundred 
millio n men and wome n of Africa n blood. $2.00 net. 
The Shadow By Mary White Ovington 
Author of "Half a Man," etc. 
Th e story of a beautiful southern girl of aristocratic 
family, who m a strange fate has placed in childhood on the 
doorstep of a Negr o cabin, and whom fate again sends into 
the whit e worl d whe n she discovers the secret of her birth. 
Th e novel, whic h deals wit h Negroes in their cabins, wit h 
the master in the great house, and in the Nort h wit h the 
factory and the workshop , is unusua l in its theme, and sane 
and sympatheti c in its treatment of northerner and southerner, of black and white . $1.75 net. 
The Chicago Race Riots By Carl Sandburg 
With an introductory note by Walter Lippmann 
Thes e articles, reprinted from the Chicago Dail y News, 
describe the Chicago Rac e Riots of July , 1919, and the 
economic and social forces whic h produced them. 60 cents 
net. 
For sale by 
The Crisis 70 Fifth Ave., New York, N. Y. 
or by the publishers 
Harcourt, Brace and Howe, 1 West 47th St., New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 350 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Scott's official History of the American Negro in the 
GREA T WA R 
Bishop Hartsell of the Methodist Episcopal Church writes as follows: 
"I have read your history of The American Negro in the Wa r and want to congratulate you on having issued so quickly a volume of so much value. The official records wil l 
have a very wide circulation and be assured a permanent place among the masses. Th e 
candid and fair spirit which characterizes all your public utterances is manifest." 
A Proud Chapter 
in the History of 
the Negro Race 
The official and authentic 
history of the true part 
played by the Negro i n the 
great Worl d War, written 
by a man whose valuable 
experience, intimate connection with every phase of 
the direction of the great 
struggle, makes it possible 
to publish the true facts. 
A great historical volume 
that should be in every 
Negro home. Gives inside 
facts and accurate and official data and pictures 
which will appear in no 
other book. Ever y chapter 
is full of the very information which you have been 
anxiously waiting to know. 
This Great Boo k tells 
all about the Negr o Every ­
where in the Worl d Wa r 
— Ho w H e Di d Hi s Duty , 
in every capacity — from 
right up in the front line 
trenches and on the battlefields—clea r bac k to 
the wor k of keepin g the 
home fires burning ; on the 
farms; in the mills and 
munitio n plants; on the 
railroads and steamships; 
in shipyards and factories. 
Me n and wome n wit h the 
Re d Cross, the Y . M . C. 
A. , the Y . W . C. A. , the 
Wa r Cam p Communit y 
Service, the Libert y Loa n 
Drives, etc. 
Scott's Official Histor y 
was written for the Negr o 
by the Negr o that the 
wonderful record of daring deeds, gallant bravery 
and undyin g heroism of 
our black troops migh t 
never perish. A great tribute to the patriotism of 
the Negr o Race. 
Emmett J. Bcott, 
A.M. , L.L.D. 
Agents Wanted 
MAK E $8.00 TO $20.0 0 PER 
DAY — RIGHT NOW — SELLING 
SCOTT'S OFFICIAL HISTORY — 
BEST BOOK, BIGGEST SELLER, 
QUICKEST MONEY-MAKE R for 
live agents. Ne w FROM 
cover to cover. Be FIRST IN 
you r territor y and get THE 
orders. W e pay YOU HIGHest commissions. 
FREE Write TODA Y 
includin g AGENTS' SAMPLE 
book and full INSTRUCTIONS. 
Send 25 CENTS TO PREPAY 
postage. 
Copy mailed to any address 
upon receipt of $2.90 for 
cloth binding or $3.75 
for Morocco binding 
Written by 
EMMET T J . SCOTT, A.M. , 
LLD. , SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO 
SECRETARY OF WAR , NEWTO N 
D . BAKER . 
Assiste d b y THE FOLLOWin g notable individuals: 
DR . CARTER G . WOODSON , 
Directo r of Research, Th e 
Associatio n for the Study 
of Negr o Lif e & History , 
Inc . RALP H W . TYLER , Ac ­
credited Representative OF 
the Committee-o n Publi c 
Information , WH O ACCOM ­
panied the colore d troops 
to wa r fronts i n France . 
WILLIAM ANTHON Y AERY , 
Publicatio n Secretary , 
Hampto n Norma l AND Ag ­
ricultura l Institute. MON ­
ROE N . WORK , Directo r Di ­
vision of Record s and Re ­
search, Tuskege e Norma l 
and Industria l Institute, i 
MRS . ALICE DUNBAR NEL ­
SON (formerl y Mrs. Pau l 
Laurenc e Dunbar) leader 
i n the mobilizatio n OF COLored wome n of the COUNtr y for wa r wor k under 
the auspices of the Wo ­
men's COMMITTEE , Coun ­
cil of Nationa l Defense. 
MIS S EV A G . BOWLES, Ex ­
ecutive Secretary , i n 
charge of the colore d 
wor k of the Youn g Wo ­
men's Christia n Associa ­
tion. LIEUT. T . T . THOMP ­
SON, Historia n wh o ACCOM ­
panied the famous 92d Di ­
vision , U . S. A . to France . 
OVE R 600 LARGE PAGES 
(equal to 800 ordinar y 
pages). 
Profusel y Illustrated 
with nearly 160 official 
French and American 
Negro War Photographs, 
showing all sides of War 
Activities and Negro soldier Life, from the Call 
to the Colors on Through 
the Training 0 a m p a. 
Then to th e Battl e 
Fronts and back to the 
Happy Home Coming. 
TH E NEGRO HISTORICAL PUBLISHING COMPANY 
P. O . Drawe r I WASHINGTON , D . C . "U " St . Statio n 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 351 
LULA ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
Available for Concerts 
Telephone 6393 Morningsid e 
126 W. 134th Street New York, N. Y . 
Cleota J . Collins 
Lyric Soprano 
Recitals. including compositions by Negro composers, 
and short, snappy lectures 
on Negro music. Your community and young people 
will be musically inspired. 
Address: 
156 Hamilton Avenue 
COLUMBUS , OHIO 
Clarence Cameron White 
VIOLINIST 
Critics are one in their 
high estimate of the splendid 
attainment* of Clarenc e 
Cameron White and his Concert appearance in your city 
means the musical event of 
the season." For terms and dates address 
616 COLUMBUS AVENUE BOSTON, MASS. 
WILLIA M H . RICHARDSON , - Baritone 
"On e o f the agreeabl e features of liis singing waa his 
distinc t enunciation. " Phili p Hal e i n Th e Boston Herald . 
ADDRESS : 
170 WALNU T AVENU E ROXBURY , MASS. 
E. ALDAM A JACKSO N 
Graduate of Institute of Musica l Art 
Organist-Director of Music of St. Marks M . E. 
Church; Concert Accompanist; Piano, Voice, 
Theory, Instruction, Conducting, Coaching. 
Harmony taught from beginning to completion. Private or correspondence. 
Geothius system. 
Studio : 185 W . 136th St., New York , N . Y . 
Telephone Morningside 1708. 
Important Notice 
Th e increased cost o f advcr'lsing 
an d the trebled coat of raw ma ­
terial compe l us to raise the 
pric e of our bustij or close our 
studio. 
Busts of Booke r T. Washington . 
Fre d Douglass. Pau l Laurenc e 
Dunbar , Bisho p Itichard A.len . 
{2.00 each Four busts, {7.00 
Agent write for neu- term* at once. 
TH E ISAA C HATHAWA Y 
AR T COMPAN Y 
718 S. Hickory St., Pine Bluff, Ark. 
The Greater Invincible Concert Co. 
HIGH CLASS ENTERTAINERS 
EDMONI A MACKEY , Coloratur a Soprano 
CAULYN E MOSELY , Sopran o an d Reade r 
T . W . LANGSTON , Violinist an d Baritone Soloist 
Churches Schools Lodges Y . M . C. A.'S 
For dates and terms write: 
1910 E. 24th Street, Kansas City, Mo . 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS. L. JONES, Pres. 
N . E. Cor. 8th and Plum Sit., Cincinnati, Ohio 
TWlpAofU), Barlnl T7I4 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgages 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Phonograph Records of our Foremost Negro Artists 
No w Read y an d o n Sal e 
No . I. "G O DOW N MOSES, " Bariton e Solo , compose d an d 
sun g by HARR Y T . BURLEIGH . 
No . 2 , "VILLANELLE. " Sopran o Solo , sun g b y FLORENC E 
COLE-TALBERT . 
No . 3 , "CRADL E SONG, " Violi n Solo , compose d an d playe d 
by CLARENC E CAMERO N WHITE . 
Pric e SI.2 5 each , an d 25 c extr a fo r mailing , packin g 
an d insurance . 
BROOME SPECIAL PHONOGRAPH RECORDS 
23 Clayton Ave, , Medford, Mass. 
Send name and address for illustrated catalog. 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hil l Cable Address, Epberi 
EDGA R P . BENJAMI N 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
3 + School Street Boston, Mass. 
•Telephone Connection 
Patents secured on easy terms 
Write for particulars. 
. JOS H . STEWART, Attorney-at-Law, 
484 Louisiana ATC . N. W „ Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 352 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TH E BIG DRIVE IS ON! 
ORCHARDVILLE LOTS GOING FAST 
If you want any while you can get them at the introductory price of only 
$49.50 
ON VERY EASY TERMS — YOU MUST ACT QUICKLY 
HER E IS YOU R OPPORTUNIT Y T O TAK E 
ADVANTAG E O F TH E MOS T ATTRACTIV E 
LO T OFFE R EVE R MADE . PEOPL E FRO M 
AL L OVE R TH E COUNTR Y AR E SECURIN G 
THES E LOT S AN D TH E DEMAN D FO R 
THE M IS INCREASIN G B Y LEAP S A N 1) 
BOUNDS . 
Orchardville is located in a HIG H GRAD E 
FRUI T GROWIN G REGIO N and is to he developed into a BEAUTIFU L FRUI T CITY . 
Each lot will have FIV E HIG H GRAD E FRUI T 
TREE S PLANTE D O N IT. also a BEAUTIFU L 
SHAD E TREE , and will be cultivated and taken 
care of hv us for FOU R YEAR S WITHOU T 
EXTR A COS T T O YOU . When the trees come 
into commercial bearing they should earn you 
EXCELLEN T YEARL Y RETURN S O N YOU R 
INVESTMEN T WITHOU T AN Y EFFOR T O N 
YOU R PART . 
The lots are sized 30 x 144 feet and have plenty 
of room for a house, garden, chicken yard, shed, 
etc.. besides the room taken up by the fruit trees. 
Each lot is guaranteed to be high and drv under 
a MONEY-BAC K GUARANTEE , and the contract you get gives you the very protection you 
might want. 
The price of the lots is only $49.50 each and the 
terms are only $6.00 down and $3.00 a month. 
Smaller terms on two or more lots. N O INTER ­
ES T A T AN Y TIME . 
TH E TITL E T O TH E PROPERT Y IS AB ­
SOLUTEL Y CLEA R AN D IS CONVEYE D T O 
YO U P.Y A WARRANT Y DEE D WITHOU T 
EXTR A COST . 
Our beautiful pamphlet gives you all the details 
of the offer and tells you how to secure your 
lots. Simply write your name and address on 
the coupon below and mail it to us RIGH T 
AWAY . As soon as we receive it we will mail 
you the pamphlet and a booklet containing some 
interesting views and testimonial letters without 
any obligation to you. 
BU T YOIT MUS T AC T QUICKL Y BECAUS E 
TH E LOT S AR E GOIN G FAST . TH E SUP ­
PL Y IS VER Y LIMITE D AN D IT IS A CAS E 
O F FIRS T COME—FIRS T SERVED . Mai l the 
coupon TODAY . 
TH E SWAN-ARENSO N REALT Y and DEVELOPMEN T CO . 
1 9 SOUT H L A SALL E STREE T CHICAGO , ILL . 
TH E SWAN-ARENSO N REALT Y & DEVELOPMEN T CO. 
Chicago. Ill. 
Date > 19 
Gentlemen: — 
I am interested in your Orchardville lot offer and would lik e to secure one of your 
pamphlets and booklets without any obligation to me. 
Name 
Address 
Town 
C-4-20 
State 
Mention TH E CRISIS-TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 353 
HOTEL DAL E 
Hotel Dale, Philadelphia, Pa. (already built) 
The Hotel Dale Company, Inc., of Philadelphia, have issued 10,000 shares of its Capital 
Stock for sale, for remodelling and equipping the newly purchased hotel on Broad St., 
Philadelphia, for our Race. 
Excellent dividends are expected from this much needed hostelry based on the facts 
that an average of a thousand colored people pass through Philadelphia every day, and 
it is estimated that $2,000 and more is spent in white restaurants by us daily. 
The Hotel Dale is in the very heart of the city, and within walking distance of all the 
shops, theatres and railway stations. 
The shares are now selling at $10.00 each, cash or deferred payments. A few shares of 
this stock purchased NO W may not only mean financial gain to yourself, but will 
insure self-respect and contentment to your children's children. 
The leading business and professional men of Philadelphia are the promoters of this 
great Race movement. $1.00 will start you off! 
SUBSCRIB E TODA Y 
For full information write: 
BERESFOR D GALE , Fiscal Agent 
HOTE L DAL E COMPANY , Inc . 
1201 Spruce Street, (Room 506) 
PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
Reliable agents wanted. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 354 THE CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
GET THIS SUIT 
Made 
To Your 
Own 
Measure 
FREE 
Don't send one penny, just send 
your name and address. We'll send 
you full details of this wonderful 
offer Absolutely FREE. Don't 
delay because thousands will be 
taking advantage of this "unheard-of" sacrifice. Just think 
YOU R SUI T 
EXPRESS PREPAID 
You can't afford to overlook this 
chance. We are taking on some 
new agents to represent us and take 
orders for our swell tailoring—we'll 
give you your own suit FRE E and 
pay you Bi g Mone y besides . 
No Extra Charges 
of any kind—all the latest fancy 
styles, any size, large or small, 
golf bottoms, fancy belt loops, 
peg tops, pearl buttons, etc 
Everything Free . 
$2,500 a Year for You 
Just for your spare time—many make more. It's dead easy. 
Send us your name and address NO W for our Wonderful Style 
Book and dozens of rich samples to choose from. Pick out 
your suit right away—it won't cos t you a penny. 
THE PROGRESS TAILORING CO., Dept. 1752 CHICAGO 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
WRITE TODAY 
Act Quick 
Don't Delay TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 355 
HOTEL DALE 
CAPE MAY, N. J . 
Comfort and Elegance without Extravagance 
This Magnificent Hotel, Located in 
the Heart of the Most Beautiful 
Seashore Resort in the World, 
fc replete with every modern improvement, 
superlative in construction, appointments, service and refined patronage. Orchestra daily, 
garage, bath houses, tennis, etc., on premises. 
Special attention given to ladies and children. 
Send for booklet. 
E . W. DALE , Owner 
WOMEN, MEN , BOYS , GIRL S 
JOBS—GOO D JOB S 
AR E waitin g fo r yo u 
Phones: 
Drexel 98, 194, 1281 
4702 S. State St. 
Open 
Evenings 
Chicago, 111. 
THE WHITELAW HOTEL 
JOH N W LEWIS . PRES . 
13th and Tea Streets, N.W. 
Washington, D. C 
Appointments Unexcelled 
Rates $1.0 0 and Up per Day . 
WM. D. NIXON, Manager. 
FREE FASHIO N BOO K 
MAILE D 
UPO N REQUES T 
Rea l Huma n Hai r 
All our wigs are 
hand made and 
strictly to order, 
from maker to 
wearer. 
WIGS . Trans 
formations, switches, and Braids and 
all other articles of 
hair goods. 
No. 604—Price Jlu.SO 
We carry the largest selection of Hair Dressers' Tools. 
The celebrated Mme. Baum's Preparations 
which make , the skin velvetlike, the hair 
silklike. 
Mme. Baum's Mail Order House 
P. O. BO X 145, 
Penn. Terminal Station, New York, N . Y . 
When writing, mention this paper. 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
The' most wonderfully Ideal spot wbere young and 
old cast aside for the time all the caree and worries 
of tbelr strenuous, nerve-racking routine lives and 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature In all her wondrous glory. The waters of 
the lake and surrounding irout streams are fairly 
teeming with game fish of ihe best varieties. 
Do you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting? 
Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries? 
Do you want a place to go where you can build up 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency T 
Do you enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, I 
progressive people of the day—people who do things t / 
Do you believe In progress and do you want to j 
have a part In one of the most progressive move- / 
menta of the time? Surely I -
Then you will be Interested In, and want to ' 
own a lot of your own In Beautiful Idlewlld, £ 
Michigan. If you act at once you can se- ' 
cure a beautiful lot for only $35,' 
$6.00 cash; $1.00 per week. When 
payments are completed the lot will 
transferred to you by an absolute 
warranty deed with abstract show- M 
Log clear title. * 
_ 0 ~.- ~ V * 
agents wanted 
Idlewil d Resort /// / 
1110 Hartford Bldg 
So. Dearborn St. / 
Gentlemen: without cost to me please s
Compan y 
Chicago, 111. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 356 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TWO GREAT NEGRO BOOKS 
AGENTS 
MAKING 
$60.00 
Per Week 
We Want 
You 
To Act In 
Your 
County 
Emmett J . Scott's 
War History 
( A Few Interesting Chapters.) 
Colored Officers and How They Were Trained. 
Treatment of Negro Soldiers in Camp. 
The Negro Combat Division. 
Negro Soldiers Overseas. 
Negro Heroes of the War. 
Negro Soldier as a Fighter. 
The Spirit of the Negro at the Front. 
Negro Music That Stirred France. 
When the Boys Came Home. 
Herman Propaganda Among the Negroes. 
What the Negro Got Out of the War. 
The 38 chapters are interesting and instructive. There are 600 pages, size 7x 9 inches; 
price $2.90. 
74 4 Papes—10 0 Page s o f Negr o Soldiers , 5 0 Page s ot 
othe r appropriat e an d interestin g pictures . 
TH E KELL Y MILLE R HISTOR Y 
OF TH E WORL D WA R 
is all that the title can possibly mean. The 
author takes up the Great Conflict, following 
it step by step through the thirty excellent 
chapters, including the Terms of Peace. 
The Negro's Wa r for Democratization—He 
braces Himself and Claims to be the Champion 
of Democracy—Enters the Arena of Combat I 
The German Indigent—The South Sensitive— 
The North Quizzical—The Whol e Worl d Hesitant. 
The Negro Turns the Tide at Chateau 
Thierry—He Helps Hur l Back the Hordes of 
the Hun—Win s His Place and Right to a 
Voice in the Affairs of Mankin d against Prejudice. Ridicule, Race Hatred and almost Insurmountable Obstacles 1 
The book is bound1 in durable cloth, with 
substantial head band, price $2.50. In Ful l 
Kerotol Morocco, $3.50. Copy mailed to any 
address upon receipt of the price. Satisfaction guaranteed or money refunded. 
Emmett Scott, Author 
Prof. Kelly Miller, Author 
Dear Reader—We have sold more of these great books than have been sold by all other 
publishers and jobbers. If you wis h to sell books, send 15 cents In stamps for one prospectus, or send 30 cents and we wil l mai l both of them. Millions of these hooks are being sold, 
BI G MONE Y is being made by our SALE S PEOPLE . Will you join us in the distribution 
of good helpful race books? 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO . 523 9th St., Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. STATE ST STYLES 
TAILORED - TO - MEASURE 
At Agent's inside wholesale Prices 
New Fall and Winter Sample Book Now Ready 
Bigger Samples 
Mor e Fabric s 
Additional Styles 
SENT FREE 
With Inside Wholesale Prices to Agents 
Styles and Samples to please every taste, 
to look well on every age and build. 
Greater cash profits to agents 
Even if you don't want to be our Agent in your spare 
time, be sure to get our new FREE offer and learn how 
we save you one-half on your own clothes. 
TAILORING AGENTS—Be sure to write and 
get our new deal with Bigger Profits, 
Better Attention and Prompt Shipments. 
KNICKERBOCKER TAILORING CO. 
Dept 290, Chicago, ILL 
AMAZING 
CASH PROFITS 
are being made in 
the delightful 
AGENCY 
TAILORIN G 
BUSINESS 
Why Don't YOU 
Get Into the game? 
YOU BET I WAN T THA T 
New SAMPLE BOOK 
please send it to me FREE 
and PREPAID. Here is my address 
Name 
R.F.D Box Postoffice . 
Street & No State . 
Fill in name and address plainly—and mail AT ONCE 
If you can't be our Agent in spare time, please hand this to some ambitious fellow 
Knickerbocker Tailoring Co., Dept. 290, Chicago, Ill. NILE QUEEN 
PREPARATIONS 
for Hair and Skin 
TH E WORLD'S BEST 
Special money-making offer for live, hustling 
agents who wish to represent a high class line. 
KASHMIR 
Chemical Co. 
Dept. K. ( 312 So. Clark St., Chicago, Ill. 