OUR NEW ADDRESS IS 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YOR K 
THE CRISIS 
Vol. 7—No. 4 FEBRUARY , 1914 Whole No. 40 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENTS A COP Y Ihe National Religious Training School 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to all who believe 
in the Negro race and in onr obligation to help promote its intellectual, 
moral and religious uplift." 
—Rr,v. DR. CHARLES H. PARKHURST, New York City. 
IT IS MOR E THA N A MER E SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNIT Y OF SERVICE AN D UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, 
Y. M. C. A. and Y. W. C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced 
co-workers and actual every-day practice through the school's SOCIAL 
SERVICE DEPARTMENT. 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
For catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPARD 
National Religious Training School - - - - - Durham, N. C. 
The school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance 
fund of $15,00 0 for running expenses. Won't you help us this year? 
1914 
Crisis Calendar 
Contains four leaves, neatly 
tied and ready for hanging, 
each leaf bearing a CRISI S 
picture. 
Let each day remind you of 
TH E CRISI S and its creed. 
PRICE 15 CENTS 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Ave., New York City 
Crisis Advertising Rates 
Beginning with the January, 1914, 
issue, and continuing until further 
notice, the rates for advertisements in 
TH E CRISIS are as follows: 
15 cents per agate line. N o less 
than four lines accepted. 
$2 per inch per single column, 
counting fourteen lines to the inch. 
$4 5 for back cover. 
$4 0 for inside cover page, front or 
back. 
$32 per page for other pages. 
These rates arc based upon the 
general charge of $1 per page for 
each thousand net circulation. 
Old contracts at the former rates 
will be honored until the date of 
expiration of said contracts. 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Ave., New York City 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D BY TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 7 0 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducted by 
W. E. BURGHARD T DU BOIS 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, Business Manager 
Contents for February, 1914 
PICTURES 
COVE R PICTURE. By A. B. Jones. 
HIS MAJESTY, TH E LATE MENELIK II., KING OF TH E KINGS 
OF ETHIOPIA, EMPEROR OF ABYSSINIA, 1844-1913 182 
ARTICLES 
TH E PHILADELPHI A NEGRO DENTIST. By J. Max Barber 179 
TH E EPISCOPAL CHURCH 181 
CERTAINTY. A Poem. By Leslie Pinckney Hill 181 
ANNUA L MEETING OF TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR 
TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE 191 
TH E HOODOO . A Story. By Martha Gruening 195 
DEPARTMENTS 
ALON G TH E COLOR LINE 163 
OPINION 171 
ME N OF TH E MONT H 184 
EDITORIA L 186 
TH E BURDEN 199 
A LITTLE PILE OF BOOKS AN D PAMPHLETS 201 
TEN CENTS A COPY ; ONE DOLLAR A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your 
subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the 
wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. Tf found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 160 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, Ga. 
The courses of study include High School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Among the teachers are 
graduates of Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-two years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduates are almost 
universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fall Term Began September, 1913. 
For information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
The Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
Maintained by the governments of North Carolina and of 
the United States. Open all the 
year round. Fo r males only. 
Spring term begins Marc h 2, 
1914. Board, lodging and tuition, 
$7 per month. Best opportunities 
for Negr o youth. Night school 
for indigent but ambitious young 
men. Fo r catalog or further 
information, address 
PRESIDENT DUDLEY 
A. & M. College Greensboro, N . C. 
LINCOLN INSTITUTE 
Jefferson City, Missouri 
Founded by the Negro soldiers of 
the 64th and 65th Regiments. Supported by the State of Missouri. 
One of the best-equipped schools 
in the country for the education of 
Xegro boys and girls. Normal, 
Collegiate, Agricultural and Industrial Courses. Normal diplomas 
carrying with them the degree B. Pd. 
are life certificates to teach in the 
public schools of Missouri. The 
degree A. B. conferred upon those 
who complete the collegiate course. 
Four teachers of Music: Voice Culture, Piano, Violin, Band and 
Orchestra Practice. Elocution and 
Athletics. 
BOAR D $9.5 0 A MONTH . TUITIO N $3.0 0 THE 
YEA R TO MISSOURI STUDENTS. ALL OTHERS PA Y 
$13.0 0 A YEAR. CATALOG FREE. 
B. F. ALLEN , A. M„ LL. D. 
President. 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
An Episcopal boarding and day school 
for girls, under the direction of the Sisters 
of St. Mary. Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
611 N. 43d St. W . Philadelphia, Pa. 
CARNEGIE COLLEGE-HOME STUDY 
"6 0 PAG E BULLETI N FREE" 
COURSE S B Y MAI L 
Grammar School Agricultural 
High School Poultry^ 
Norma Domestic Science 
Professiona Civil Service 
Penmanship Engineering 
Type-writing Drawing 
Short-hand English 
Book-keeping Language 
Law Real Estate 
Reduced rates of tuition to first 
applicants. For "Free Bulletin" 
and 'Special Scholarship," apply 
CARNEGI E COLLEG E 
Pres. GALBREATH ^"o- 19D St., ROGERS. Ohio. 
Negro in American History 
Traces status of the Negro from discovery, colonization and settlement to 
20th century. Also gives biographical 
sketches of eminent men and women. 
To ever}' instructor of colored youth 
and every student in secondary schools 
this work is especially commended. 
Full bibliography, chronology and 
comprehensive index. Illustrations. 
$1.25; by postage, $1.40. Agents 
wanted. Address: 
J. W . CROMWEL L 
113 9 Swann St., N. W . Washington, D. C. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 161 
il/^VADa y 
t| « • FO R YOU R 
IV/ . SPARE TIME 
AGENTS WANTED 
Hammerless/ 
Double-Barrel Shot 
Gun—very superior. Fitted with 
top snap-break, bar side locks, forged' 
frame, case hardened locks and frames. • 
Nicely finished, highly polished stock and " 
fore end. Polished blued steel barrels; a 
choke bored, 12 Gauge and either 30 or 32 
inch barrels. Well balanced and accurate. • 
A perfect beauty. The same model used by ^ 
some of the best shots in the country. We give it mm 
Absolutely FRE E to Our Agents 5 
All that we require is that you show our Zl 
samples and take a few orders for our • 
special made-to-measure clothes. We S 
pay highest cash profits and give extra ^ 
presents besides. Your choice of 628 I 
valuable premiums—such as Leather Suit ^ 
Cases, Musical Instruments, Pipes, I 
Watches, Sporting Goods, Hats, etc. 5 
Write for elegant free outfit and full jmrticulara 
B
SPENCE R MEA D CO. , Dept . 711 , CHICAG O mm 
miwcmmmmmwmmwciE 
I 
i 
I 
1 
I 
fi 
I 
I 
1 
Hundreds of our agents are making SI O A DAY . „ 
their spare time. Many are beating that and are 
getting their own CLOTHES FREE . We are dead 
sure YOU can do it. Such a thing as failure is 
utterly impossible with our new and complete 
outfit which we send you—ALL CHARGES PREPAID. 
Our fine line of stylish, well made, carefully finished clothes, guaranteed fit—BEATS EVERYTHING 
ever offered. Lowest prices. OUR OUTFIT is magnificent—our styles and fashions simply wonderful. 
Strong selling planB that BRING THE ORDORS and 
BIG MONEY for you every week, in hard cash. 
Pants $2i| Suits $9, 
Can you beat it? Be a PROGRESS agent. EARN 
SSTO$LO A DAY IN YOUR SPARE TIME while doing 
other work. Send no money. Everything is FREE . 
No experience necessary. Get the Outfit, order 
blanks, stationery, tape-line and everythingnecessary 
to start you in a BIG MONEY MAKING BUSINESS of 
your own. Write today. Be ready for the largest i 
Spring business ever known. Land the early 
orders in bunches. ^ 
PROGRES S TAILORIN G CO. , DEPT. 682 ,CHICAGO 
$60 A WEEK and EXPENSES 
That's the money you can get this year. I mean It. I want County Sales Managers 
quick, men or women who believe In the square deal, who will go Into partnership with 
me. No capital or experience needed. My folding Bath Tub has taken the country by 
storm. Solves the bathing problem. No plumbing, no water works required. Full length 
bath In any room. Folds in small roll, handy as an umbrella. I tell you It's great I 
GREAT 1 Rivals $100 bath room. Now llstenl I want YOU to handle your county. 
I'll furnish demonstrating tub free. I'm positive—absolutely certain—you can get bigger 
money in a week with me than you ever made in a month before—I KNOW IT! 
TW O SALES A DAY $300 A MONTH 
That's what you get—every month. Needed In every home, badly wanted, eagerly bought. 
Modern bathing facilities for all the people. Take the orders right and left. Quick 
sales, Immense profits. Look at these men. Kunkle. Ohio, received $240 first week; 
Mathlas, Florida, $120 In two days; Oorrigan. New York, $114 in CO hours; Newton, 
California, $60 In three days. You can do as well. TWO 
SALES A DAY MEANS $300 A MONTH. The work Is very 
easy, pleasant, permanent, fascinating. It means A business 
of your own. 
I grant credit, furnish sample, help you out, back you up— 
don't doubt, don't hesitate, don't hold back. You cannot 
lose. My other men are building homes, bank accounts, so 
can you. Act, then, quick. SEND NO MONEY, Just name 
on penny post card for free tub offer. Hustlel 
YOU! 
YESY0U 
CAN GET IT 
h. s. robinso n 
President 
19 0 VANCE ST., TOLEDO, O. 
DEMONSTRATING 
TUB FREE 
Canadian Address: Walkerville, Ont., Canada. 
MENTION TH E CRISI S 
FREE Shot Gun 162 TH E CRISIS 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMENT 
Points explained, viz.: Breath 
in Singing, Trying the Voice, the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto, Tenor Leggiero or High 
Tenor, the Baritone, the Bass, 
Parts of the Vocal Apparatus, the 
Mouth, the Tongue, Position When 
Practising. Position Whe n Singing, 
How to Practice, Good Bules for 
Singing. 
Comment from the world-renowned conductor of 
the Paulist Choir of Chicago, 111., whose choir has 
just received the first prize awarded at the Singing Contest held in Paris on Ma y 25 , 1912 : 
"Dear Mr. Tlnsley: 
"I take Rreat pleasure In commendlnc your very useful and 
succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placinrj and Voice-Development.' Tour own appreciation of the psychology of singing 
and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly 
reduced to a simple system. Cordially yours, 
•Father WILLIAM J. FINN, C. S. P.. 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N. T.: "A very practical little 
book Is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development.' by Pedro T. 
Tlnsley. It contains some very excellent material and vocal 
exercises, and should be in the hands of all vocal students." 
From "Music News," Chicago, 111.: "Accordingly bis 
'Practical Method of Singing' Is a most concise and practical 
little manual, containing many valuable vocal exercises. It 
cannot fall to be helpful to all ambitious vocal students." 
HELPE D HI M GREATL Y 
"Sinc e I practised your exercises of 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' my voice is more resonant 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a new voice." Prof. John T. Lay ton, 
Director Coleridge-Taylor Musical Society, 172 2 10th 
St., N. W. , Washington, D. C. 
PRIC E 51-00 
Address the publisher: PEDR O T. TINSLE Y 
644 8 Drexel Avenue CHICAGO , ILL. 
LEARN TO READ MUSIC AT SIGHT JN 
FOR $1.00 fe fv f\ 
ai&t ? r ; -y- ---i 
•* i % * v f T ~ 
Anyone in the "Rrnss Band" or "Stringed Orchestra" mav 
learn in a few hours to master the Instrument he loves with 
our "Sight Reader" and ' 'Sight Reader Positions." 
$1 (cash). Address 
WILLIAM D. SMITH 
1636 Clarion Street Philadelphia. Pa. 
Agents Are Making $10.00 Per Day 
and more selling our famous Negro picture, '' A 
Joyful Welcome Into Heaven,'' the finest painting 
ever produced with the Negro as a subject. Semireligious. Sells at sight. Send 15 cents in stamps 
or coin for 50-cent sample and agent's terms. 
TH E DOUGLA S SPECIALTIE S COMPAN Y 
354 8 Vernon Ave . Dept. K Chicago, 111. 
ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
17 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address: 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon 
champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity 
for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. 
Belongs in the library of every friend of social 
justice. Price 2 5 cents. Send orders to 
JAMES F. MORTON , JR. 
24 4 West 143 d Street - - - New York, N. Y . 
Facts of Reconstruction 
By MAJO R JOHN R. LYNC H 
In this book Majo r Lynch presents the 
readers and thinkers of the present generation with accurate, reliable and impartial 
information, based upon his knowledge and 
experience, about Reconstruction, the most 
important and eventful epoch in our country's 
history. 
Majo r Lynch, has been prominently before 
the public during the last forty years. He 
was a member of Congress in 1876- 7 and 
was an active participant in the decision of 
the closely contested election between Haye s 
and Tilden for the Presidency of the United 
States. Man y interesting points in that contest not heretofore published will be found 
in this book. 
As a member of Congress, member of the 
National Republican Committee, auditor for 
the Navy Department, a member of many 
National Republican Conventions, over one of 
which he presided as temporary chairman, 
Major Lynch was brought in contact with 
many of the most prominent and influential 
men of the country. The chapters giving an 
account of his interviews with Presidents 
Grant and Cleveland, and with Messrs. Blaine. 
Lamar and Gresham, are both interesting and 
instructive. The book ought to be in the 
library of every home. 
Price, net $1.50 . By mail, $1.65 . 
Address: 
MAJO R JOH N R. LYNC H 
432 1 ForestviUe Ave . Chicago, 111. 
A COLORED DOLLY FOR THE CHILD 
Buy a beautiful colorpd doll, with lifelike features, long hair, jointed limbs and sleeping 
eyes. The right plaything for your child. A big attraction at church fairs and bazaars. 
Endorsed by leading clergymen and educators. Send for catalog. Agents wanted. Novelty 
souvenirs and favors. 
E. M . S. NOVELT Y COMPANY , Dept. A. , JAMAICA , N . Y . 
Mention TH E CRISI S 
OF INTEREST TO VOCAL STUDENTS THE CRISIS 
Vol. 7—No . 4 FEBRUARY . 1914 Whol e No . 40 
MUSIC AND ART. 
AT the annual meeting OF St. George's 
Club, OF New York, Mr. Harry T. 
Burleigh, the distinguished baritone-composer OF New York, in recognition of his 
twenty years' service as baritone soloist of 
St. George's Episcopal Church, was presented with a Tiffany watch bearing the 
inscription: "The Brotherhood of Men to 
Harry T. Burleigh, as a token of esteem 
from his fellow members of St. George's 
Club, November 29, 1913." The presentation was made by the rector, the Rev. Karl 
Reiland. 
^ The program for the series of artists' 
recitals which the Washington Conservatory 
of Music (Mrs. Harriet Gibbs Marshall, director) undertakes annually in Washington, 
D. C., at the Howard Theatre, began on 
Dec-ember 13, when Mrs. Marjorie Groves 
Robinson, pianist, and Mr. William Speights, 
tenor, were heard in piano and song recital. 
Amon g their selections were numbers by 
Clarence Cameron White, Rosamond Johnson, Will Marion Cook and ColeridgeTaylor. Miss Beatrice Lewis was the accompanist. Mrs. Robinson and Mr. Speights are 
both graduates of the New England Conservatory of Music in Boston, and have 
lately joined the faculty of the Washington 
Conservatory. The concert series for 1914 
will include a concert by the Conservatory 
Folk Song Singers in January, a lecture 
recital by Mrs. Maud Cuney Hare, pianist, 
assisted by Mr. William H. Richardson, 
baritone, in February, and a comic opera to 
be presented by Mr. Speights in March. 
<J A series of five recitals on folk songs, 
folklore and folk dances in costume have 
been presented at the Brooklyn Institute of 
Arts and Sciences by Mrs. Alexina 
Carter-Barrell, an American singer of 
Boston, Mass. Negro and Creole folk songs 
were given on December 3. Dr. W . E. B. 
Du Bois was the lecturer; Mrs. Barrell, 
soprano; Mellville Charlton, organist; Walter 
Craig, violinist, and Henry L. Jeter, violoncellist, with Mrs. Dora Cole Norman, solo 
dancer. On December 10 an Indian and 
Mexican progTam was presented, with the 
addition of Miss Lucille Perry Hall as solo 
dancer. 
*I On December 14 Mr. Julian F. Adger, 
organist, gave an organ recital under the 
auspices of the Philadelphia Organists' 
Alliance, at Cherry Memorial Church, Philadelphia. Pa. The assisting artists were Miss 
Blanche Williams, soprano, and Miss Elizabeth Benson, pianist. 
*I On December 29 the Philadelphia Concert 
Orchestra gave the first of a series of concerts for the season 1913-1914, at Philadelphia. The soloist was Miss Lydia C. 
McClane, soprano, of Philadelphia. The 
orchestra, which is in its ninth season, is 
the first incorporated colored symphony 
orchestra in the United States. 
<I Mr. T. Theo Taylor, pianist, and Mr. 
Harrison Emanuel, violinist, of Chicago, 
111., were heard in a joint recital on November 20, at Springfield, 111. 
*B Cloyd Boykin, the artist of Boston, Mass., 
sailed on November 29 for London. Mr. 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 164 TH E CRISIS 
Boykin is to have the advantage of a year's 
study of the art of England, France and 
Italy. 
*I A new addition to American literature at 
the close of the year is Mr. William Stanley 
Braithwaite's "Anthology of Magazine 
Verse," dedicated to 
"The poets of America singing to-day, 
The soul of their country, 
Truth, Beauty, Brotherhood, 
Their names are torches." 
1 Mrs. Estelle Ancrum Forster, of Boston, 
gave a recital at Haynes Hall, Boston, on 
December 10. Mrs. Forster was assisted by 
Clarence Cameron White, violinist, Theodore Drury, tenor, and Mrs. Clarence 
Cameron White, accompanist. 
1 The Renaissance Players, a company of 
colored players, will give a series of plays 
in Washington and other cities during the 
present season. The purpose of the players 
is to bring the best side of the Negro before 
the public in contrast to the plays which 
caricature the race. The company is offering 
a prize of $25 for the best three-act drama. 
James Reese Europe has resigned as president of the Clef Club, and Daniel Kildare 
has been elected to fill the position. 
1 The Hampton Singers, a chorus of forty 
from Hampton Institute, were heard at 
Carnegie Hall, New York, on January 27, 
in Negro folk songs illustrating a motionpicture pageant of agricultural life in the 
South. The Hon. George McAneny, president of the board of aldermen, spoke in 
behalf of Hampton, the first industrial 
school for Negroes and Indians. 
<J Mr. Roland W . Hayes, tenor, and Miss 
Maria L. Baldwin, reader, appeared in recital 
at the home of Mrs. Robert R. Gardiner in 
Boston. Miss Baldwin read selections from 
Paul Laurence Dunbar and Mr. Hayes' 
songs were by Negro composers. The 
Musical Courier says: "Mr. Hayes, 
whose entire vocal training has been received 
during the last two years at the studio of 
Arthur J. Hubbard, revealed himself as the 
possessor not only of an uncommonly fine 
voice, but of instinctive musicianship and 
sincerity of purpose as well. In the voice 
itself were the two essentials of quality and 
body, while the results of his excellent training were seen in the perfect ease and freedom 
of his tone production, the remarkable clarity 
of his diction and the excellence of his 
legato singing. The program was sufficiently 
varied to show the range of his vocal and 
artistic accomplishments, which are nothing 
short o f remarkable considering the comparatively brief period he has been 
studying." 
<I The Saturday program at the Sherwood 
Music School, of Chicago, was given on 
November 29, by Mary Haines, who read 
poems by Dunbar. 
<I George W . Blount writes in the Southern 
Workman of Mr. Alexander Hughes, a 
colored citizen of Springfield. Mass., who 
was awarded the first prize for the best kept 
lawn and most beautiful flower garden two 
successive years. Mr. Hughes cultivates his 
own gardens and also the vacant or neglected 
lots of his neighbors before and after his 
regular work hours. He gives flowers to the 
hospitals and to strangers having no friends 
near. 
SOCIAL UPLIFT. 
Th DWAR D REED , a little 11-yearold colored boy, saved Marguerite 
Williams, a 2-year-old white child, from 
drowning in Kansas City, Mo . He pulled 
the unconsicous child from the creek into 
which she had slipped and resuscitated her 
by applying first aid to the drowning as he 
had learned to do in school. 
^ Colored people of Nashville, Tenn., contributed more than $600 to the campaign 
fund for the white Y. M. C. A. 
^ The colored employees at Wanamaker's, 
in Philadelphia, have organized a Robert C. 
Ogden Club in appreciation of Mr. Ogden's 
work among NegToes. 
^ The New York American, with the aid of 
the Women's Business League of Greater 
New York, had more than 100 dolls dressed 
and distributed among the poor colored 
children as Christmas gifts. 
•I The colored women of Birmingham, Ala., 
are carrying on a campaign for a Y. W . 
C. A., which has resulted so far in over S00 
paid-up members. 
<J Resolutions condemning the use of the 
small "n" in the word Negro were adopted 
at one session of the emancipation celebration in Syracuse, N. Y. 
<I James Selly and Clifton Parham, two 
colored boys employed at the Alclyde apartments in New York, rescued all of the in-ALONG TH E COLOR LINE 165 
mates from the burning building. They 
continued to run the elevator through Are 
and smoke in spite of the danger to 
themselves. 
<I A young colored man, G. A. Morgan, has 
invented a breathing helmet and smoke protector for the use of firemen in fighting 
flames. This helmet is in use in several large 
cities of Ohio, New York and Pennsylvania, and it is probable that New York City 
will adopt it. 
<J In a large mass meeting of Negroes in 
Atlanta, Ga., $5,375 was added to $11,500 
already raised for the Y. M. C. A. 
^ It is said that Mrs. L. Brackett Bishop, a 
white woman, the wife of a wealthy Chicago 
man, will adopt fifteen 1-year-old children 
from as many races in order to learn which 
will develop faster under the same 
conditions. 
Fulton County, Ga., has recently purchased 400 acres of land for a reformatory 
for colored boys and girls. 
*5 Judith C. Horton, a young colored woman, 
with five others, succeeded in getting funds 
to begin a public library in Guthrie, Okla. 
After the first payment upon the building 
was made and the library was proving to be 
a success and of great use to the community, 
the city took over the library and assumed 
the debt. This library was established in 
1908 and was the first public library in the 
Southwest. 
^ A tuberculosis hospital for Negroes has 
been established at Wilson, N. C. The 
Grand Lodge of Masons in that State contributed largely to it. 
<I The Missouri Grand Lodge of Colored 
Odd Fellows has purchased land for the erection o f a home for aged members of the 
order. 
1 The records of desertion from the army 
show that the colored Ninth and Tenth 
Cavalries and the white Fifth Infantry have 
had the smallest number. 
1 Sergeant W . H. Brice, first sergeant of 
the Twenty-fourth Infantry, has retired 
after twenty-six years of service. 
«J The Kentucky State Federation of Colored 
Women's Clubs has more than doubled its 
membership in the past year. The federation has also established a scholarship loan 
fnnd, for which $213 has been collected so 
far. 
<J The cross-country championship of 
Greater New York was won by Frank Jenkins, a colored student of the Jamaica 
(L. I.) high school. He came out well ahead 
at the end of the three and a quarter mile 
course. 
*i Jordan Cavener, a former slave, died 
recently, leaving an estate worth $75,000. 
li e bequeathed small sums of money to four 
white people who had befriended him. 
^ Thomas H. Stewart, a colored man, has 
been appointed to the chief messengership 
in the United States Patent Office. This 
position has always been held by a while 
man. 
<5 John Caldwell, a Negro, by prompt' action 
in arousing the inmates, saved thirty families 
and eighty guests from probable death by 
burning in Perry Hotel, Cleveland, O. 
*J Many of the colored people of Richmond, 
Va., are opposing an exposition to celebrate 
fifty years of freedom. They. want the 
governor to appropriate the $25,000 for a 
sanitarium for colored consumptives or for 
some other charitable institution. 
<J J. W. Cromwell, principal of the Alexander Crummell School, in Washington, 
D. C , has written a book, "The Negro in 
American History," which will soon be in 
circulation. The purpose of this book is to 
furnish the teacher with supplementary 
material with which to increase the colored 
student's knowledge of his race's part in the 
development of the country. 
<I Andrew Carnegie has donated a library 
for the colored people of Evansville, Ind. 
*]] The Christmas fund raised by the TimesDemocrat, of New Orleans, for indigent 
colored people amounted to $1,020. Through 
this fund and the efforts of the Mystic 
Order of Hobgoblins, of New Orleans, about 
12,000 poor little colored children were 
remembered by Santa Claus. 
^ When eight frightened Texas steers broke 
forth in the streets of New York some time 
ago, officer Holmes, one of Manhattan's new 
colored policemen, seized a big steer by the 
nostrils as it was trampling upon another 
policeman, shut off its wind and with a jiujitsu twist threw the animal and held him 
down until others could rope him. 
*I The Pullman porters are endeavoring to 
form themselves into a union so as to demand fairer wages and hours from the Pull-166 TH E CRISIS 
man Company. At present the hours are 
not only very irregular, but often exceedingly 
long and the wages paid are small. 
1 \ enezuela has erected a monument to 
Alexander Petion, the first president of the 
republic of Haiti. Petion's father was a 
wealthy colonist and his mother a mulatto. 
EDUCATION. 
" D I SHOP J. ALBER T JOHNSO N reports 
that the Fanny J. C'oppin Hall, at 
Wilberforce Institute, Evaton, Transvaal, 
South Africa, was completed in September, 
1913. at a cost of $8,000. It has been 
married during the holidays against the rules 
of the school, and when the president refused to hear a committee of boys the 
students went on strike. Dr. Meserve has 
been president of Shaw for twenty-five 
years. 
^ The late Adolphus Buseh, of St. Louis, 
Mo., bequeathed to the Provident Hospital, 
in Chicago, $5,000; to the Bartlett Agricultural and Industrial School, at Dalton, Mo., 
$2,000; to the Old Folks' Home, at St. 
Louis, $1,000; to the St. Louis Colored 
Orphan Home, $1,000; to the St. Francis 
Orphans' Home, Normandy, $1,000. 
FANN Y J. COPPI N HALL , A T WILBERFORC E INSTITUTE . SOUT H AFRICA . 
entirely paid for with money raised by the 
South African conferences. The women's 
missionary societies of South Africa are 
assisting in raising money with which to 
furnish the building. 
<3 The Negro students of Shaw University 
have sent a request to the board of trustees 
asking that a colored president be put in the 
place of President Meserve. A student 
•J The white Southern Baptist convention at 
its St. Louis meeting last May tendered its 
financial aid to the colored national Baptist 
convention in the establishment of a theological seminary. It has been decided that 
this aid will be a donation of $50,000, and 
the seminary will be established in one of 
the five cities of which Memphis and Louisville are the most prominent. ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 167 
<J Senator William P. Jackson has introduced an amendment to the Smith-Lever 
agricultural extension bill providing that the 
appropriations be distributed without partiality among the white and colored races. 
*J The first annual meeting of the Associations of Colleges for Negro Youth convened 
at Knoxville, Tenn., on November 7. The 
three main subjects for discussion at this 
meeting were: (1) Entrance requirements 
to the college. (2) The requirements for 
the college degree. (3) The reception of 
students dismissed from other colleges. 
Representatives from eight Negro colleges 
were present. 
THE CHURCH. 
' I ' H E Church League for Wor k Among 
•*• Colored People, in Milwaukee, Wis., 
met and decided to purchase a piece of 
ground to erect a parish house for colored 
people. 
9 The council o f the Congregational Church 
will contribute $30,000 annually for church 
work among colored people. 
ECONOMICS. 
' I ' H E report given out by the auditor of 
•*• public accounts of Virginia shows that 
Negroes in Virginia own property, real and 
personal, worth $34,743,656, and that 
Negroes in the city of Richmond pay taxes 
on property valued at $4,118,910. 
<J The report of the postal savings bank in 
New York City states that of the 30,138 depositors on June 30, 1913, 654, or 22 per 
cent., were Negroes, with deposits of $39,673. 
<J The colored people of Knoxville, Tenn., 
have purchased ground for a hospital which 
will accommodate forty-eight patients. 
Two colored lawyers in Little Rock, Ark., 
John Gaines and Scipio Jones, have applied 
for a charter to sell stock for the erection 
of a ' $50,000 hotel for Negroes in Little 
Rock. 
*$ The Le Roi Mercantile Company, of 
Spokane, Wash., has organized with a capital 
stock of $10,000 for the purpose of conducting a hotel and general merchandise 
department. 
«J Scott Bond and his son, two wealthy 
planters of Madison, Ark., have purchased 
a model gravel moving and loading machine 
costing $10,000. This is said to be only the 
second machine of its kind sold in the South. 
Samuel Keeton, of Bloomington, Ky., is 
well known in his State as a colored cattle 
king. Recently he carried about $10,000 
worth of cattle to the Mt. Sterling market. 
*J Richard T. Ware, a young colored man, 
of Washington, D. C , opened up a wellequipped shoe store six months ago which is 
already on a paying basis. 
*J A colored enterprise, the Acme Steam 
Laundry, in St. Louis, employs forty colored 
men and women. 
*I The Masons of Tennessee are planning to 
build a $50,000 temple. 
The Equitable Insurance Company was 
recently organized by colored men of Muskogee, Okla. 
<J The Windham Brothers, a contracting 
firm in Birmingham, Ala., employ 100 men 
the year around. B. L. Windham started as 
a carpenter twenty-seven years ago, and for 
seven months of the year 1913 the contracts 
of the firm were up to $265,000. 
*I On January 1 a colored bank was opened 
in Jacksonville, Fla., with Charles H. 
Anderson as president. 
*j| P. H. Smith, a contractor of Durham, 
N. C., has purchased a city block, upon which 
he will erect houses for rental. 
«J G. W . Mitchell, of Chicago, has launched 
the Mitchell Fountain Ink Eraser Company. 
Mr. Mitchell has invented a fluid which, 
used in a fountain pen, erases ink. It is 
said that a white firm offered Mr. Mitchell 
$25,000 for the patent. 
<I The deposits of the Solvent Savings Bank, 
in Memphis, Tenn., are estimated to be more 
than $140,000. 
•J The Institute Building and Land Company, a corporation composed of colored 
men in Institute, W . Va., has purchased a 
farm of 210 acres. The farm will be divided 
into building lots and put on the market in 
the spring. 
PERSONAL. 
A MONG the recipients of medals from the 
McClintic-Marshall Company for work 
on the locks of the Panama Canal is the name 
of George A. Barnes, a colored man. 
*J James A Wright, a divinity student at 
Andover Theological Seminary, has been 
elected vice-president of the HarvardAndover Divinity Club. He is the first 
colored member of the club. 168 TH E CRISIS 
*I Peter J. Smith, a colored Democrat, has 
been appointed as a deputy corporation inspector at Boston. He was an applicant for 
assistant register of the treasury. 
f§ Rev. E. C. Morris, president of the 
national Baptist convention, has been named 
as a member of the American committee for 
the celebration of the signing of the treaty 
of Ghent and the 100 years of peace between 
Great Britain and the United States. 
*I Among the guests at the recent wedding 
of President Wilson's daughter was the 
minister of Haiti. 
<I Rev. R. R. Wright, editor, and J. I. Lowe, 
business manager of the Christian Recorder, 
have been reinstated. 
«J W. E. B. Du Bois spoke to the students 
of Smith College at the regular vesper 
service on December 14. 
^ Julian H . Lewis, fellow in pathology in 
the University of Chicago, has been elected 
to membership in Sigma Xi , the national 
honorary scientific fraternity. 
<3 Major John C. Buckner, of Chicago, died 
on December 17. "While serving in the fortyfirst and forty-second general assemblies 
Major Buckner did much for the protection 
of the colored miners and their families who 
were being threatened by mobs. He also 
organized the Ninth Battalion of the National 
Guard, which was the beginning of the 
present Eighth Regiment of Illinois. 
Miss Carolyn M . Wood has been elected 
superintendent of the orphanage at Riverdale-on-the-Hudson, to succeed Frank Barber 
who resigned lately. 
1$ L. A . Jackson, of Englewood, N . J., a 
colored student of Harvard University, has 
been chosen as orator of the class. 
<I Thomas Downing, who was for fifty years 
a clerk in the foreign department of the 
Boston postoffice, is dead. 
MEETINGS . 
T H E National Benefit Association of the 
District of Columbia celebrated its 
fifteenth anniversary in November. The 
assets of the association are estimated at 
$234,500. 
The National League on Urban Conditions Among Negroes held its annual meeting 
in New York City on December 3. Prof. 
Kelly Miller, of Howard University, and 
Prof. George E. Haynes, of Fisk. were 
among the speakers. 
•I The Masonic Grand Lodge for the jurisdiction of Pennsylvania held its annual session in Philadelphia December 8. The North 
Carolina Masons met in Newbern at about 
the same time. 
The Tuskegee's annual Negro conference 
will convene February 22. 
The Missouri State Teachers' Association 
met in Jefferson City in December. 
•I The Sunflower State Agricultural Association held the annual meeting at the 
Topeka (Kan.) Industrial and Educational 
Institute in December. 
<I The third annual meeting of the Grand 
Chapter of Kapp a Alpha Nu, a national 
Greek-letter fraternity of Negro college men, 
was held in Indianapolis, Ind., December 
29-30. 
*8 The seventeenth annual session of the 
Negro American Academy met in Washington. D. C . on December 30. 
•! The Georgia conference of the A . M . E . 
Church held its fortieth annual session at 
Hawkinsville, Ga., November 25-30. 
*3 Negro State farmers' week will be held at 
the A . and M . College in Greensboro, N . C , 
February 9 to 14. 
*1 The third annual conference of employed and volunteer workers in colored 
Young Women's Christian Associations in 
cities will be held in Philadelphia, Pa., 
under the direction of the national board, 
from January 2S to February 2. 
<5 The Teachers' Association of Northern 
West Virginia held its annual session at 
Morgantown on November 27 and 28. 
<H The fifth annual convention of the Intercollegiate Socialist Society, attended by men 
and women from all over the country, was 
held in New York on December 29, 30 and 
31. Dr. W. E . B. Du Bois was one of the 
speakers on "Socialism and Suffrage." 
*I At the fifty-first anniversary of the 
emancipation proclamation, at Stamford, 
Conn., Postmaster Bohle, of that place, and 
Mr. A . G. Dill, of New York, were the 
speakers. 
*I The sixteenth session of the Arkansas 
Teachers' Association was held in Little 
Rock December 29-30. 
<S The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People held the annual 
meeting in New York on January 5. The 
general subject was segregation. ALONG TH E COLOR LINE 169 
FOREIGN. 
' I ' H E Hon.'Edwar d Rawle Drayton, a 
Barbadian, has been appointed to 
administer the government of the Windward 
Islands during the governor's absence. 
*I Five of the East Indian strikers in South 
Africa are reported killed by policemen. 
*B President Michael Oreste, of the Republic 
of Haiti, has ordered all Jamaicans to leave 
Haiti. 
^ At the distribution of prizes at Sorbonne, 
France, among colleges belonging to the 
university, two of the winners were Haitians. 
One, a mulatto, won the prize for Latin 
composition and the other, a black man, 
stood highest in Greek composition. 
A motion protesting against the compulsory accommodation of natives in the 
Transkeian Territories, South Africa, has 
been adopted. Originally hotelkeepers were 
prosecuted if they failed to accommodate 
natives. 
*3 A member of the Port Elizabeth (Africa) 
town council has succeeded in having all 
public seats in the municipality reserved for 
Europeans. The colored people are arranging a mass meeting to protest against this 
discrimination. 
^ The Kimberley branch of the African 
Political Organization appealed to the school 
board to pass a compulsory school law for 
the natives. The school board expressed 
sympathy with the request, but refused to 
provide accommodations for the native and 
colored children. 
The colonization movement in Liberia has 
been resumed after a lull of twenty years. 
A. C. Faulkner, a colored man, of Baltimore, 
who sailed for Liberia on December 20 with 
his wife and child, is the first of the new 
colonists. 
THE COURTS. 
WILLIA M YOUNG, a Negro, accused 
of assaulting a white girl in Way -
cross, Ga., has been acquitted. This is the 
first time that a Negro accused of rape in 
Georgia has been acquitted. 
<J Antonio Navarro, of San Domingo, is 
suing the Sisters of Ladycliff Academy, at 
Highland Falls, N. Y., for $5,000. He claims 
that his daughter was received in the school 
under a four years' contract and later 
rejected because the other students "drew the 
color line." 
*I The white Knights of Pylhias in Tennessee have dropped the case in the Uniled 
States Supreme Court against the colored 
Pythians. 
^ Charles Kie, a Pueblo Indian, sued for 
$5,000 damages for being restrained from 
voting and $5,000 for being committed to 
jail. The case was heard in the United 
Slates District Court at Sante Fe, N. M., 
and damages were not granted to the Indian. 
Kie may take the case to a higher court. 
*II Governor Mann, of Virginia, has issued 
a full pardon for George Nelson, a colored 
man senlenced to one year in the penitentiary for forging orders on a tobacco warehouse. The man is pardoned because he is 
innocent and was convicted on incomplete 
evidence. 
1$ Police Judge Osborn, of Columbus, 0., 
sentenced three white men to six months in 
the workhouse and fines of $200 and costs 
each for attacking a colored police officer, 
Henry Lane. The judge refused to comply 
with the jury's request for leniency in the 
case. 
THE GHETTO. 
A SHORT time ago, when the colored 
employees of the Pickering Lumber 
Company in Logansport, La., reported for 
work, they found placards posted on the 
premises of the company. These placards, 
which the white employees are suspected of 
putting up, read: "Niggers, don't let the 
sun go down on you here." It seems, however, that the placards were simply a cowardly bluff. 
*l The Boston Symphony Orchestra gives 
five concerts in Washington, D. C , each 
winter, and heretofore colored people have 
been able to procure some kind of seats. 
This year it is reported that they are barred 
from the concerts entirely. 
1 Assistant Postmaster Mischenux, of Florence, S. C , has been discharged. The only 
reason for this action seems to be the fact 
that Mr. Mischeaux is a Negro. The postmaster says that he is determined to have 
all colored clerks, even those protected by 
civil service, discharged, so that white girls 
can be emjjloyed in the office. 
<I A pamphlet recently issued by the school 
department of Philadelphia shows that most 
of the white graduates of the grammar 
schools work in factories or offices or enter 170 TH E CRISIS 
trades. On the other hand, by far the largest per cent, of colored graduates are compelled to enter domestic service because 
other occupations are not open to them. 
9 The segregation ordinance in Augusta, 
with many prominent colored citizens and 
a white paper openly opposing it, was defeated in the city council. 
*I At the recent session of the Woman's 
Home Missionary Society of the Methodist 
Church in Washington, D. C , Mrs. Hilda 
M. Nasmyth, of Philander Smith College, 
succeeded in getting 162 signatures to a 
resolution against the Florida school law. 
^ Joseph Harrold and Barnett Jimson, two 
colored men of Newport News, Va., refused 
to give up their seats in a trolley ear to 
white people. They were arrested and later 
acquitted. They will bring suit against the 
railway company for "false arrest and 
imprisonment." 
CI Protest was made to the council of East 
Orange against discrimination o f colored 
people at the Lyceum Theatre in that place. 
The mayor stated that he would write the 
manager of the theatre a strong letter 
against this policy. 
^ Mrs. Joseph T. Bowen, in her report to 
the Juvenile Protective Association in Chicago, called attention to the fact that colored children are not even allowed to bathe 
in the waters of Lake Michigan. 
•J George H. Jackson, who was appointed 
consul at Cognac, France, by President 
Taft, has been dismissed. Kenneth F. Patton, a white man, succeeds him. This position is perhaps the best in the consular 
service ever held by a colored man and was 
supposed to be protected by the civil service. 
*I Madisonville, Ky., has passed a segregation ordinance. 
1$ The North Carolina Teachers' Association 
has appointed a commission upon equal passenger accommodations on the railroad 
lines of that State. This commission will 
bring definite cases of improper service 
before the State commission and, if necessary, the interstate commission. 
*I Joseph Ricks, a colored man, who was 
elected borough auditor on the Republican 
ticket in Coatesville, Pa., was arrested for 
disorderly conduct. The general opinion 
seems to be that the arrest of Auditor Ricks 
was simply a case of prejudice. 
<I Dr. H. E. Young, of Baltimore, purchased 
a house on Myrtle Street at an auction sale. 
No one is occupying the house, but when 
it was learned that it had been purchased by 
a colored man a mob broke every window 
pane in the house. Colored people will move 
in and a test case will be made o f it by the 
National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People. 
CKIME. 
"dAVI D LEE, a Negro, 45 years old, was 
lynched in Jefferson, Tex., about midnight o f January 2. A dozen masked men 
took him from the jail in which he was 
imprisoned for shooting a constable. The 
constable has recovered, as the victim o f the 
mob inflicted only flesh wounds. 
1 Cleve Culbertson, a white man, was 
lynched in Williston, N. D. He was charged 
with the murder of three members of the 
Dillon family of Williston. 
1 At St. Charles, Mo., a policeman and one 
Negro were killed as the result of a race 
riot. It is claimed that the riot was caused 
by the attempt of two Negroes to escape 
arrest. 
*I The deputy sheriff and two Negroes are 
dead as the result of a race riot in Bassfield, Miss. No definite cause of the riot 
is given. 
Mary E. Mitchell, a colored woman, accused of killing a white boy under provocation, near Madison, N. C , was carried to 
the prison at Stoneville to prevent A 
lynching. 
^ Four white men in Greely, la., have been 
arrested, charged with murder, for participating in the recent lynching of a colored 
man in that place. 
<I John S. Gaines, a colored policeman of 
Austin, Tex., was fatally shot in the back 
while reporting over the telephone to the 
station. The murderer was a white deputy, 
George Booth. So far no reason for the 
crime has been given, but it is thought that 
Gaines had gained the enmity of several 
members of the force because of his fight 
against houses of prostitution which they 
had been paid to keep quiet about. 
*I W . J. Fuller, a white lawyer of Montgomery, Ala., rushed into the courtroom last 
May and killed a colored man being held for 
trial. He has been acquitted on the plea o f 
insanity. AN INTERVIEW 
WITH THE 
PRESIDENT. 
On Thursday, November 6, 
five colored men and one 
colored woman, led by Mr. 
W . M. Trotter, had an interview with the President and presented a 
petition against segregation with 20,000 signatures. No record of this event has appeared in THE CRISIS and the Boston 
Guardian is disturbed over the omission. 
The explanation is simple. The monthly 
edition of THE CRISIS is now so large that 
it has to go to press early. All matter for 
the December CRISIS, for instance, was in 
the hands of the printer November 3. This 
meant that this interview could not be mentioned for something like six weeks. At that 
time it could scarcely be called news. There 
was not the slightest intention on the part 
of THE CRISIS to belittle or ignore this important event, but monthly newspapers have 
verv distinct limitations. 
ANOTHER 
CRINGING 
COWARD. 
A colored man who rejoices in 
the name of Horace Donia Colerance was elected to the city council of Winchester, Ky., recently. 
His fellow white members objected to him; 
therefore, he resigned and gives this lucid 
and brave explanation of his course: 
"Members of the new council got up a 
petition declaring that they would not sit in 
the council with a Negro, signed when a 
friend of mine saw it by six councilmen, and 
I afterward heard that the seventh man 
signed it. Now as far as I was concerned 
all of them asking for my resignation could 
not affect my standing as a councilman. 
They could themselves resign, but the 
thought came to me : Will it be the best thing 
for my people in my ward for me to sit 
two years in humiliation and being snubbed 
and sat upon? 
"They would do no improvements in the 
Fourth Ward, a vote from me or a suggestion would fall on deaf ears. Is it not selfishness that I sit two years (if I am not waylaid and shot down) and my people suffering? I laid the matter before my wife and 
boy (two of the best friends I have on 
earth). My wife readily desired me to get 
out of it all; my son thought best to stay. 
I talked with Dr. J. H. Holmes and he 
finally thought that I could do no good. Dr. 
M. S. Brown, a friend of mine for many 
years and a member of the present council, 
came first to my store, and we had a long 
talk over the matter and he took the matter 
under advisement, returning to my residence 
Friday morning, and we agreed that for 
peace and harmony he advised me to 
resign." 
So the colored gentleman resigned and 
named a white Democrat in his place, whom 
he describes as the "Honorable James N. 
Hiles." No wonder our race is still in 
slavery. 
It is always pleasant to have our 
POLITICS. gouther n whit e f r; end s fan out 
because then we get little glimpses of the 
truth. In South Carolina the Columbia 
State does not like Mr. Blease and Mr. Tillman, and has been saying things. The New 
York Evening Post says editorially: 
"In explaining South Carolina's indifference to woman suffrage, the Columbia State 
makes a confession regarding the misuse of 
manhood suffrage in that commonwealth 
which would justify any unfranchised portion o f the population in agitating for the 
ballot. The State has about 330,000 men of 
voting age. But 'the central and principal 
policy of our politics is the exclusion of 
165,000 of these possible voters from the 
polls because they are Negroes.' Worse remains behind, however, in the use that the 
white voters themselves make of the franOpinion 172 TH E CRISIS 
chise. 'Everybody knows,' the State declares, 'that in recent years we have failed 
to conduct a white man's primary, free from 
fraud and corruption. * * * We lack 
either the intelligence or the courage to prosecute bribe takers and bribe givers. Our 
corrupt-practice laws are honored in the 
breach. We have so far neglected to 
arrange a party enrollment that is even a 
reasonable check on illegal voting and repeating.' The discouraging element in the 
situation is that the primaries were once 
conducted honestly; their debauching is a 
recent development. If there be 'treason' 
in the State's frankness, it is the kind of 
treason that it behooves honest voters to 
make the most of." 
In this same line there is a funny extract 
from the Florence (S. C.) Times. Florence, 
by the way, has a majority of colored people in its population. 
"The people of Florence have for a number of years been trying to get the postoffice here in the control of white men, and 
it is the very irony of fate that it is the 
unthinking white people, men of business 
standing whose word is worth something in 
the community, that has blocked the efforts 
of the people in this direction. The softness 
of the man who cannot refuse to sign any 
paper that is presented to him is the whole 
story of cause and effect. It kept a Negro 
postmaster in Florence long after even the 
cities of the North had cast him over, and 
even the Republican party had repudiated 
him. It now happens that the assistant postmaster is the one to be changed, and the 
petition of a number of the business men 
of the city 'to retain him in some position 
in the service' is apt to break up the whole 
thing. We know, and the men who signed 
the petition know, that Florence wants a 
change in that postoffice and wants it bad, 
but they could not resist the request to sign 
a petition to keep the assistant postmaster 
there, and excused it on the ground that 
they would not ask for him to keep the responsible position that he has, but merely 
asked that he be retained in the service. That 
is weakness dodging weakness, and men who 
act so foolishly do not deserve to have anything that they want, for they neither have 
backbone nor judgment to appreciate what 
they get. They may excuse themselves all 
they want, for half if not nine-tenths of the 
people believe that an excuse is like charity, 
covering everything in sight. The world 
does not want excuses and the damage being 
done to the wishes of the community all the 
excuses in the world do not undo. There is 
but one thing to do now and that is to get 
your name off the petition that we understand blocks the way of the postmaster in 
trying to get a force of competent white 
people in the office.'" 
We note with interest that some Northern 
white papers are beginning again to insist 
upon the farce of this sort of Democratic 
government. The Boston Daily Advertiser, 
in a leading editorial, says: 
"In the name of ten millions of Americans, whose rights are now refused them, 
and who often suffer from the grossest injustice on that account, we appeal to Woodrow Wilson, as President of the United 
States. President Wilson has made it plain 
that he regards with concern the welfare of 
a few thousands of Americans in Mexico, 
who are the victims of unconstitutional 
government in Mexico. Wil l he not also 
lend a pitying ear to the cry for help which 
comes from some ten millions of Americans 
who suffer from admittedly unconstitutional 
government in the United States? 
"Although the unconstitutional methods 
of depriving the Negroes of the South of 
their right to vote has been an open and 
neglected sore in American politics for many 
years, we trust to President Wilson's own 
assurances as to his beliefs and policies in 
assuming that he at last will overthrow this 
evil and heal up this pestilential evil. 
"Al l Americans, unquestionably, felt a 
line glow and fervor when they read 
the recent message of President Wilson to 
Congress, in connection with the refusal of 
the American government to recognize the 
illegal and unconstitutional government of 
the dictator Huerta, in Mexico. * * * 
"Is the government of the United States 
to-day 'constitutional'? Indeed it is not. It 
is maintained only in defiance of the Constitution. The vote i n the Electoral College 
was cast for President Wilson (so far as 
regards the electoral strength from the 
Southern States) in flat, open, flagrant, impudent defiance of the Constitution. Every 
vote cast in the House of Representatives 
during a quorum, no matter for or against 
what measure, is admittedly and flagrantly 
cast in defiance of the explicit commands 
of the Constitution of the United States." OPINION 173 
SEGREGATION . 
The Rev. Charles F . Aked 
publishes a strong word for 
the Negro in the San Franciscco Examiner. 
He says among others things: 
"The crime against the Negro continues. 
North, as well as South, East equally with 
the West, hangs, shoots and occasionally 
roasts its Negroes by order of Judge Lynch. 
State after State disfranchises its Negroes; 
the 'Jim Crow' car is still running; the Wilson administration discriminates against the 
Negro clerk or employee at Washington— 
and nobody seems to mind. 
"Florida shows the lengths to which the 
crime against the Negro may carry a sovereign State. Last June a law was enacted 
making it a penal offense for a white person 
to teach Negroes in Negro schools. Florida 
has no mixed schools. The brutal animus 
of the legislation is clear. 
"Washington answers back to Florida. 
In the government departments discrimination and segregation, wherever possible, are 
being practised. President Woodrow 
Wilson's administration is a Southern administration, with Southern prejudices and 
Southern injustice to the Negro. His 'New 
Freedom,' which we were so innocent as to 
take for the sincere expression of a great 
man's convictions, turns out to be not inconsistent with the old bondage to ignoble 
fear." 
The Boston Record says: 
"Negroes segregated and crowded out in 
the Federal departments. Negroes excluded 
from the White House welfare-work meeting. Negroes barred from subscription to 
Boston Symphony Orchestra concerts at 
Washington. Just what is the idea? Here 
is involved no question of 'social equality,' 
but of ordinary human justice to men and 
women seeking first to work honorably and 
efficiently; second, to do their share in helping others to live better lives; third, to enjoy 
those uplifting and inspiring influences 
which are the common rights of mankind. 
It is not an American program unfolding 
at the Capital." 
"Colored people," says Oswald Garrison 
Villard, in the North American Review, 
"rightly declare — as must every fairminded man free from prejudice—that this 
spells caste. They believe that it is intended to drive them out of the public service by rendering it intolerable for Negroes 
with self-respect; they assert that one of the 
Assistant Secretaries of the Treasury has 
already held up the promotion of two colored 
clerks because of their color. Segregation 
is, beyond doubt, an entering wedge, and 
here is the chief significance of it all. Let 
a precedent he established, and who shall say 
what the outcome will be, to what lengths 
despotic officials will take their way by 
means of discrimination, intimidation, by 
above-hoard or underhand methods? Who 
shall prophesy to what extent this caste idea 
may not be developed in the decades to 
come? If Negroes can thus be set apart 
contrary to the spirit of the civil-service law 
and of the Constitution itself, why not others 
—Jews, for instance? This phase of it 
ought to appeal to every supporter of the 
Woodrow Wilson administration. Every 
administration that comes into power in 
Washington, whether it be good or bad, must 
expect to encounter an enormous amount of 
criticism. The more virile the government 
the more determined it is to put through reforms on behalf of the whole people and to 
strike at intrenched privilege, the more certain it is to be criticised and to have its 
motives questioned and assailed. This has 
been particularly true of the Wilson 
administration. 
"How shortsighted, as well as unjust, it 
was, then, for it to have raised this issue of 
segregation at this time, or for that matter 
at any time! Did it not have troubles 
enough with Mexico, with the Philippines, 
with the currency problem—with a hundredodd things? At the outset of his career as 
President Mr. Wilson has, from a politician's point of view, most wrongly and 
needlessly antagonized one-ninth of the 
population of this country and its white 
sympathizers. He has alienated thousands 
of colored voters in pivotal States, when it 
would have been so easy to let the situation 
rest precisely as it was under Mr. Taft. 
Indeed, it may come to pass that Mr. Wilson 
will go down to history as the man who set 
in motion terrible forces for evil without 
adequate conception or prevision of the dangers he was inviting." 
There is, however, a rather indefinite report that segregation in Washington departments has either been lessened or at any 
rate is not growing. The Springfield 
Republican declares: 
"The Washington correspondent of the 
Boston Advertiser, who has been paying 174 TH E CRISIS 
close attention to the charges of discrimination between the white and colored employees 
in the departments at Washington, now reports that the causes for complaint are being 
removed. The nub of his summing up 
follows: 
'Negro segregation in the departments of 
the Federal government has not only been 
effectually checked and therefore stopped, 
but it is rapidly being disintegrated— 
wiped off the slate, in other words. Somebody has seen a big light, and as the start 
of Negro segregation was very quiet, so its 
demise is being conducted in a similarly 
noiseless way. * * * Segregation has largely 
been a movement in the under strata of the 
departments. The little fellows have tried 
to put into force an idea that they had. It 
spread like smallpox contagion when it was 
found that the heads were not saying anything in opposition. But the opposition did 
come though from without, and has made 
itself felt by impressing the authorities high 
up who were so incredulous.' 
"In other words, when this matter was 
called to the attention of President Wilson 
he proceeded to deal with it without summoning a brass band and is getting the 
results desired." 
On the other hand, the Afro-American 
Ledger, one of the best of colored papers, 
has this striking comment: 
"If we are to be a nation within a 
nation, then the sooner we understand it 
and get about it the sooner we will be in a 
position to take a substantial interest in all 
the things that are going on around us. 
It is plain that if we want a share in a community Christmas tree we must have a 
community Christmas tree all of our own. 
W e must have our own stores and not depend on the stores of other people. In 
fact we must have a little world of our own 
revolving inside o f the other and larger 
world. The Negro must learn to provide 
for all his own needs, be what they may. 
The Negro must provide for everything, 
from the birth of child to the death of the 
great-grandfather. Boots, shoes, clothing, 
houses, lands, food, hospitals, schools, 
churches, orphan asylums, old folks' homes 
and what not. He must learn to invest his 
savings in bonds and mortgages of public 
utilities; he must learn that he must be 
represented along money lines in steamboats, street cars, railroads and everything 
else which takes public money to run. Thus 
he will be able in the course o f time to 
have some say as to where he shall sit as 
well as the other fellow, for he will be 
part owner. 
"These are the things which are to be the 
outcome o f the present segregation in all 
public affairs. When we shall have demonstrated our ability to be independent, then 
and not until then will we become an 
integral part of the community like all 
other races and nationalities. An d we 
better begin now. " 
In New Yor k City Negroes 
REA L ESTATE . „ , , „ , 
were for years bottled up in 
the slums and tenderloin. About ten years 
ago a shrewd colored real-estate dealer, 
Philip A. Payton, found a way out by 
convincing white real-estate dealers that 
colored tenants pay. The result was a 
quick and enormous transplantation of the 
Negro population to one of the healthiest 
parts of New York—in Harlem. Since 
then repeated attempts have been made to 
drive out this colored population. A correspondent in the New Yor k World says 
of the real-estate situation: 
"Another important factor is the Negro 
problem. It cannot be denied that the 
Negro is entitled to pitch his tent wherever 
he sees fit. Experience, however, has shown 
that a colored invasion is followed by 
calamitous depreciation. A s yet we are 
not ripe for assimilation, and this disturbance has played havoc with West Harlem 
to an almost incalculable extent. The average 
Negro is, however, law abiding and proves 
a good-paying tenant. Prejudice on account 
of color should be overcome, with a resultant 
benefit to both owner and investor." 
Meantime, however, Shaw & Company, 
white real-estate agents at 1 West 125th 
Street, are sending out circulars proposing 
an incorporated real-estate company to get 
rid of colored people. The statement says: 
"In the last few years the colored population in the upper section of Harlem has 
spread to such an extent that its effect on 
the real-estate values in the entire Harlem 
section has been very marked, causing 
shrinkage in values running into very large 
figures. 
"The question will arise in considering 
this proposition as to the section into which 
the colored population could be transferred. OPINION 175 
This is a matter for open discussion, there 
being several sections to which they could 
be removed that would afford adequate 
housing facilities equal if not better than 
those which they now enjoy, as well as the 
transit facilities which must be considered. 
"It is the opinion of the people interested 
in the section through holding mortgages 
that the scheme is a good one, and they have 
expressed their willingness to give the move 
their co-operation. There is not a bank or 
other institution holding mortgages in the 
section that could not be counted upon for 
support. 
"At the present time it is almost an 
impossibility to obtain a mortgage loan in 
the section. 
"With the mortgage market in such condition that the owners could not procure 
mortgages on colored property in the section, it would be absolutely impossible for 
any one to hold out against this movement. 
It would rather be to everyone's advantage 
to join the movement and thereby obtain 
the assistance o f the corporation." 
Will the colored people and their friends 
permit the success of this monstrous attempt 
to push back the colored population into 
the slums? 
ROBBERY . 
A letter from Oklahoma to the 
Professional World, a colored 
paper of Columbia, Mo., says: 
"In no State in the Union have Negroes 
been robbed, actually robbed with impunity 
and openly, as in this State, and to-day 
white men are worth millions who have built 
up their fortunes by thievery. Practically all 
the rich oil fields in this State were originally 
the property of Negroes. When the restrictions preventing the sale of freedmen's lands 
were removed by Congress in 1908, it was the 
signal for wholesale robbery of these freedmen's lands, and the white guardians of 
Negro minors sold their guardian wards' for 
a mere pittance and in turn shared in the fortunes made from oil found on the lands sold. 
Sarah Rector, the little Negro girl just out 
from Muskogee, whose income from her 
oil lands amounts to more than $1,000 a 
day, lives in a little log shack and wears 
the cheapest kind of clothes, and is given 
but a meagre education by her white guardian, who doles out for her support but a 
few dollars each month. To-day her income, 
with but perhaps a third of her land developed, amounts to $1,030 per day from 
oil products alone. This is increased by 
the money being loaned out at the legal 
rate of interest, making her income nearly 
$400,000 per annum. The white guardian 
receives 2 per cent, fee for handling her 
property, and the little Negro girl, although 
rich as Croesus, lives in a log shanty, has 
but the commonest fare and illy made 
clothes. If she were a white child her 
guardian would see that she lived in a manner befitting her income, and was receiving 
the best education. Her riches only serve 
to enrich whites—only serve to enable whites 
to live in luxury while she lives in poverty, 
or next door to poverty. 
"Only this week a decision was handed 
down in the courts of this State in the case 
of Adam Doyle, an old Negro 90 years of 
age, who is insane and whose lands, worth 
many millions for the oil on them, were disposed of, which practically and clearly 
robbed him. His present guardian brought 
suit to recover his valuable lands on the 
ground that he was insane, which he is, and 
not competent to make a deed or contract. 
Rich white oil companies are now in possession of his lands, worth many millions, 
having secured them from him for a mere 
song, because he was too unbalanced to 
know what he was doing when he signed 
them away. The decision given in the case 
was that 'he is a man of unsound mind, but 
capable of some understanding.' This queer 
decision legalizes the robbery of this old 
Negro, and gives to the soulless white individuals and corporations which secured his 
lands under deeds and contracts which he 
as an insane man signed. 
"Oklahoma has many bright Negro men 
and women, some brilliant and strong attorneys, but they cannot become guardians 
of the Negro minors who possess rich oil, 
coal and farming lands, because no bond 
they could get would be accepted by the 
courts, and because it is so arranged that 
they cannot secure proper bond." 
EDUCATION 
Florida's new law is still 
being commented on by the 
papers. The Milwaukee Free Press says: 
"It is just becoming generally known 
that the Florida legislature, at its recent 
session, clandestinely enacted a law whose 
object is to drive the white teachers out of 176 TH E CRISIS 
the colored mission schools and thus to 
cripple their efficiency. The principal section of the law reads: 
" 'From and after the passage of this act 
it shall be unlawful in this State for white 
teachers to teach Negroes in Negro schools, 
and for Negro teachers to teach in white 
schools.' 
"The punishment for violation is a fine 
not to exceed $500, or imprisonment of not 
more than six months. 
"Of course the second prohibition is 
wholly supererogatory and intended merely 
to give the law a show of consistency; for 
there are no Negro teachers in the white 
schools. 
"Compared with this law as an example 
of blind and fiendish race hatred, the segregation ordinance of Baltimore is mild 
indeed. That ordinance, at least, does not 
push the vicious segregation theory to a 
point where it raises a barrier to the Negro's 
education, the one hope of solution for the 
race problem. 
"Indeed, the Florida statute is the best 
evidence that there still exists a large body 
of Southern men who prefer to keep the 
black race in ignorance and thus measurably 
in its old-time bondage." 
The Boston Advertiser declares that: 
"The feeling that the South is in the 
saddle seems to have spread rapidly through 
the Southern States. One of the indications 
of this is the recent action of the State of 
Florida in making a law by which it has 
been declared illegal for white teachers to 
teach Negroes in Negro schools and for 
Negro teachers to teach in white schools. 
The latter part of this law is probably quite 
unnecessary, even from a Southern point of 
view, and the first part is a provision which 
is likely to work a great deal of harm in the 
South. Even in the days before the war it 
was the custom for white ladies to teach 
Negro children. On many an estate in the 
South the mistress of the great house and 
her daughters had school for the colored 
children. The situation during slavery was 
therefore, in a certain respect, better than 
the situation which the State of Florida now 
proposes to create. A great many colored 
people have become qualified as teachers in 
the last few years, but to cut off the colored 
people from any instruction from the whites 
is simply terrible." 
Mr. Charles Carroll Sims thus argues 
against the compulsory education law proposed in South Carolina, in the Charleston 
News-Courier: 
"If the compulsory education law should 
prevail, then, under present educational 
conditions the Negroes would come under the 
same provisions as the whites, with the 
result of exceedingly high education, but an 
aggravation of the labor problem and an 
end of agricultural pursuits. If it is true 
that the Negro is being educated in larger 
numbers than the whites under the present 
law, it is hard to conceive how the compulsory education would relieve the situation. If it be admitted that both races would 
be equally educated, a condition would arise 
in South Carolina of two races, absolutely 
different in kind, and utterly incapable of 
assimilation, more or less equally educated, 
struggling for supremacy. It would aggravate the servant problem, and increase it in 
all of its perplexities and worry, and cause 
a continual warfare between the races which 
God intended, and Jefferson announced, 
could only live together as master and 
servant." 
TH E DEMAN D 
FOR MISCEGENATIO N 
For the benefit of 
those people who are 
deceived by the cries 
of Southern demagogues we subjoin a few 
facts. The first is sent us in a letter: 
"On Tuesday morning, December 9, Mr. 
James H . Bell, a prosperous colored farmer, 
of Cedars, Miss., a little town about twenty 
miles from Vicksburg, was found shot and 
died shortly afterward. Mr. Bell owned a 
plantation of 4,200 acres of improved land, 
with necessary stock and fixtures. This property had been given him by his white father, 
who still lives in the neighborhood. It is the 
current belief that poor white relatives of 
Mr. Bell were implicated in the killing, this 
impression being heightened by the fact that 
Mr. Bell's younger brother was murdered 
only a few days before Mr. Bell himself. 
The plan seems to be to exterminate the 
family. The county authorities have, of 
course, found no trace of the murderers of 
their men." 
Another is from the Muskogee Phoenix, 
a white Oklahoma paper: 
"Late last night two prominent Muskogee 
business men were found by the police in 
the home of Maude Tate and Essa Thorne, OPINION 177 
two Negro women. The house is on what is 
known as Frisco Alley, south and parallel to 
Elgin Avenue, between South 2d and 3d 
Streets. The women were arrested and will 
be tried in police court this morning at 
9 o'clock. The men pleaded to escape arrest 
and to prevent their names becoming public, and were released by the police, as they 
were men who have good reputations and 
gave promises to attend to their own affairs 
and to keep to the straight and narrow path 
in the future. The women, however, are 
well known to the police, who have had past 
dealings with them." 
Another colored paper says: 
"Down in Georgia, not many days ago, a 
colored man was sentenced to hang, and 
actually given life imprisonment because 
he was caught with a white woman whose 
reputation was no better than those of 
Maud Tate and Essie Thorne. The poor 
black was literally railroaded to the penitentiary 'as an example to learn Niggers to 
stay in their place.' 
"It is such unequal administration of 
justice as exhibited in these cases that makes 
for bad Negroes and causes race strife, 
murders and lynchings. The affair of Maude 
Tate and Essie Thorne is not an isolated 
occurrence, but is one of countless instances 
of the same kind happening nightly in this 
city. 
"Last week a leading jeweler at Oklahoma 
City was sued for divorce by his wife, who 
named a colored woman as co-respondent." 
HARVARD'S 
CLASS ORATOR. 
The election of a colored 
man as orator of his class 
at Harvard for the third 
time within a generation has brought some 
comment. The Florida Times-Union does 
this quick step among the arguments: 
"Perhaps we have now reached the second 
stage in the development of public opinion 
as to racial distinctions—once it was taken 
for granted that a Negro had no political or 
social fitness because of his color, and now 
we may be ready in some sections to admit 
that he must have merit because of his color. 
Surely we. have taken the second step if we 
may believe the following editorial assumption from the New York World: 
" 'Class honors at Harvard are reputed 
to go by favor, but the selection of a Negro 
for the coveted place of classday orator by 
the vote of his classmates indicates that 
merit also counts, and that, too, without 
discrimination of race. This is the second 
time within recent memory that Harvard 
has ignored the color line in the award of 
classday prizes. Besides A. L. Jackson, of 
Englewood, on whom the present distinction 
is conferred, Roscoe Conkling Bruce, a 
Negro student from Mississipi, was chosen 
orator by his class eleven years ago.' 
"Wh y should our contemporary assume 
that merit has won because a Negro has 
been chosen? Wh y should it be assumed 
that merit had been disregarded if a white 
candidate had been elected? Perhaps it will 
be urged that nothing but real merit could 
have overcome the prejudice against the 
Negro—in that case we have the admission 
of a prejudice in the attempt to deny it 
"But is it matter of congratulation that 
a Negro whose great-grandfather was a 
savage has developed greater merit than 
any competitor among some hundreds of 
several races who might be credited with 
longer training if heredity count for anything? Would it be a matter of congratulation if Negroes could show candidates 
better fitted to be presidents or judges than 
any competitors of the white races? Would 
not the fact argue that the white races of this 
country had degenerated as much as that 
the Negro had improved? 
"But if we assume that some Negroes have 
eclipsed white rivals in worthy fields, can 
we longer hold that slavery was a crime? 
Is there a native Negro in his own land 
who has risen so high? Is there a Negro 
in any other country who has done so well? 
Then is it not fair to believe with some 
leaders of the race that slavery in the 
Southern States was the best school for the 
Negro? Might not New England now urge 
that the slave trade be resumed for the 
benefit of the Negro race as she once insisted on its preservation as her most profitable line of business?" 
ENGLISH 
OPINION. 
Two well-known London weeklies 
have noted our problems. F. J. 
Gould, who has been traveling in 
the States, writes in the Ethical World: 
"Baltimore is a 'Southern' city in temperament, and bears spiritual marks of the old 
slavery period—that is to say, it more or 
less willingly maintains social barriers between the white and the African. 178 TH E CRISIS 
"The African. * * * But I shall never forget the uneasiness of my sensations when, 
having been set down in the official program 
to meet an assembly of 'colored' teachers, I 
observed that some of them were all but 
white like myself. Personally I was glad to 
be among these fellow teachers; but what op ­
pressed me was the thought that there really 
was no absolute line of demarcation at all. 
The races were visibly mingled, and yet the 
barriers were still stern and difficult. Negro 
and European children attend different 
schools, the teachers are trained in separate 
colleges and the 'colored' schools are of 
inferior equipment. Not loudly, but often 
with determination, the European elements 
express a wish that Negro education may be 
kept at a low level in order that European 
households may be supplied with willing, if 
illiterate, cooks and grooms. 
"This is not really a desperate situation. 
One has to remember that the Africans were 
slaves till 1863 or 1865. Fifty or sixty years 
have not elapsed in vain. The very fact that 
my own tour has included some colored 
schools is a small but notable indication of 
progress. Indeed, for the Negro and 
mulatto people, and for the whites who are 
tinged by the fateful hue, the one hope is 
the civic school. The stars in their courses 
cannot resist the teacher, and ideas will 
finally overthrow old walls of prejudice and 
distrust. Reluctantly, perhaps, but inevitably, Baltimore must solve the riddle of the 
races, as must the whole vast South of the 
United States. It is not for me here to discuss so complex a subject as the economic 
aspects and the political aspects of this 
question. I have looked into the eyes of 
young colored folks, told them my stories, 
heard their spontaneous replies to my questions, and felt the pathos of their restrictions. One may estimate that the colored 
child is two years behind the march of the 
white child in intellectual achievement. W e 
need not ask how much of the distinction is 
due to heredity until (how remote the day!) 
all social and educational limitations are 
removed. 
"But they will be removed. 
"P. J. GOULD. 
"Louisville, Ky., U. S. A., November 18, 
1913." 
Sidney and Beatrice Webb's New Statesman says in a book review: 
"No actual comparison of colored progress with white progress during the last 
fifty years is possible, for the starting point 
and the original momentum are so obviously 
disparate. The advance of the Negro must 
therefore be judged not comparatively, but 
positively; and, so judged, it calls fo r congratulation. Wherever he has been treated 
without prejudice and with a genuine desire 
to make the most of his capacities, he has 
responded; wherever he has failed in his 
duties as a citizen it is largely because he 
has been given to understand, by trickery 
or by bullying, that his co-operation is not 
wanted and that his very existence is an 
impertinence. The facts obligingly yield 
the exact moral that democratic theory requires : that if you treat a fellow creature 
simply as a fellow creature, spiritually and 
essentially the equal of everybody else, you 
get the best out of him—and he out of you ; 
whereas if you treat him as an inferior, it 
degrades both him and yourself, This is 
the answer to lynching in America as it is 
to sweating in Dublin. 
"Even if race distinctions of capacity are 
permanent, that is no argument against 
equality; equality does not mean that in 
every business of a thousand men there 
shall be a fixed number of Negroes according to their proportion of the whole population, but simply that if any Negroes are 
fitted to be there, they shall not be excluded 
on the ground that they are Negroes. There 
is a ludicrousness in this insistence on a 
point so familiar to every thinking being; 
but the misunderstanding at which it is 
aimed crops up every day, in the exclusion 
of women from certain professions as well 
as in the doctrine of race separation. The 
race problem, however, all artificial misunderstandings swept aside, remains a problem. There is difference of opinion between 
high authorities, and, in the result, a profound ignorance. W e do not know how 
race tells, what characteristics it irrevocably 
involves, or what characteristics intermixture 
on any grand scale might produce. The 
solution cannot work itself out without 
searchings of heart; it is bound to cause 
individual tragedies by the way ; and no man 
can foretell the course of it. But at least 
it can be kept clear of base irrelevaneies. 
Quite apart from the question o f whether a 
white man should look upon the colored 
woman as a wife, there is no question, but 
a certainty, that he should look upon her as 
a sister." THE PHILADELPHIA NEGRO DENTIST 
B y J. MA X BARBE R 
THE Philadelphia Negr o 
dentist has already become 
a power in the community, 
a factor for good among 
his people. It was some 
twenty-five years ago that 
the late Dr. William A. 
Jackson completed a course in dentistry at 
the famous old Philadelphia Dental College. 
He was the janitor of the school before and 
during the entire time he studied. The 
doctor lived to build up a splendid practice, and before he died he aided, by counsel 
and otherwise, several young men who came 
into the field. 
Here, as all over the country, there were 
many colored people who did not, at first, 
patronize the colored dentist. This is the 
experience of all men o f color in the professions. Nor was this unnatural. The race 
had been taught that a white skin was a 
passport to virtue and honor and an insurance against blunders and inefficiency. 
And, too, the black professional man had 
had no experience. In striking contrast to 
the doubters, however, there were those whose 
race loyalty outweighed every other consideration. They took chances on their own, 
preferring one of their own race with a little 
less skill to a white man. The Negro professional man quickly dispelled doubt by his 
accomplishments. There certainly is now no 
reason why he should not be patronized by 
the race. 
The Negro dentist here has become a 
factor of social uplift. There are twenty 
in Philadelphia, and they are meeting 
and handling an average of seventy-five 
patients a day. They take in, as fees, an 
average of $30,000 a year. Their outfits 
represent an outlay of between $18,000 and 
$20,000. The dentists themselves are investing in drugs and materials more than 
$10,000 a year. 
Think how all o f this must help the race! 
First, twenty high-class men are coming in 
contact with 450 patients a week, representing every stratum o f society. The 450 
are receiving advice in oral hygiene; 
are having their pains relieved; their 
appearances improved; their digestions safeguarded and their opportunities for a livelihood enhanced. The future generations will 
have a better chance in the race of life 
because of all of these facts. 
Second, the $30,000 taken in as fees go to 
make of these twenty men substantial factors 
in the community, because they are considered men of affairs. They receive that 
consideration from dealers and citizens 
which men of affairs are entitled to. This 
money enables them to support decent homes 
and families and to educate their children. 
The money they spend for outfits and 
materials is an asset in gaining the courtesy 
of the white race. 
Is the Philadelphia Negro dentist a success? This is a question which cannot be 
answered altogether in terms of dollars and 
cents. Success must be measured by the 
good one is doing for his fellow man. Using 
this as a standard, I should certainly pronounce the Negro dentist here a success. 
He is certainly saving lives, relieving pain, 
promoting oral cleanliness, making ugly 
faces beautiful and establishing a point of 
contact with the whites that helps the race. 
The colored dentists here are all ethical practitioners; with two or three exceptions, they 
are all clean men physically and morally, 
bearing themselves as gentlemen and leaders. 
Many of them are skilful operators. It is 
safe to say that those who have been in 
the profession more than four years are 
making an average of $1,500 a year. That 
is more than the average teacher, preacher, 
lawyer or government servant makes. 
There are no Bentleys here. Dr. Charles 
E. Bentley, of Chicago, must make at least 
$10,000 a year. He is at the very top of 
the profession in his city and enjoys a large 
practice among the wealthy citizens of the 
Windy City. But we have men here who 
make $5,000 a year, as, for instance, Dr. 
R. R. Royster. Dr. Royster was the first 
colored man to pass the Pennsylvania State 
board. He worked his way through school 
as a Pullman porter and a waiter, graduating in 1S99 from the Pennsylvania Dental 
College. Like most of our fellow men, he 
bought his outfit on credit. His skill as an 
operator soon attracted to him a very lucrative practice. To-day his office is crowded 
during work hours. Many of his patients 180 TH E CRISIS 
E. E. EOYSTEE , D. D. S. 
are Hebrews. They are so well pleased with 
him that no influence could induce them to 
change their dentist. 
Dr. Solomon Cox has been practising 
longer than Dr. Royster. He began to practice dentistry before examinations were 
required by the State board. His practice 
is, perhaps, even larger than that of Dr. 
Royster. South Philadelphia can boast no 
more skilful or careful dental surgeon. 
It was only a month ago that Dr W . T. 
Robinson passed away. Sixteen years ago 
he graduated from the dental school of the 
University of Pennsylvania as the second 
best man in the class. If providence had not 
put upon him the badge of a black skin he 
would have been honored as the first man in 
scholarship in the class. He practised in 
West Philadelphia since 1S95, where he was 
widely known as a pioneer dentist among 
his people. 
Dr. William Myers Slowe is a graduate 
from Howard University. His success here, 
where he has practised for the last ten years, 
is a splendid argument for the dental school 
at Howard. Dr. Slowe is, perhaps, the most 
honored of the colored dentists in the city. 
He is the president of our local dental 
society, a member of the Philadelphia 
Academy of Medicine and Allied Sciences, 
a member of the National Medical Association and dentist for the Home for Age d 
Colored People. He is a civic force in 
South Philadelphia. 
Dr. V. Pinnock Bailey, o f Germantown, 
started practice two years ago in a whirlwind. The dental dealers estimate his practice at $3,000 a year. It is undoubtedly true 
that Dr. Bailey has a larger practice than any 
of the younger practitioners, and it is also a 
fact that he has the most costly outfit of any 
colored dentist in the city. Dr. Bailey is 
an operator of dispatch and skill, has a 
splendid poise and great business acumen. 
When a colored man can, by his own 
efforts, go through a Northern professional 
school without having had the opportunity 
for at least the foundations for a classical 
education, he deserves great credit. When, 
after graduation, he can, by industry and 
application, achieve success he deserves even 
more credit. Amon g such men I would 
mention particularly Dr. A . T. Overby and 
Dr. James T. Howard. Dr. Overby came up 
from the farm, through the brickyard and 
Pullman car to the operator's chair. Dr. 
Howard came by way of the brickyard, the 
barber's chair and the waiter's apron to the 
operator's chair. Both of these men are 
self made; neither had more than a preparaW . M . SLOWE . D. D. S. TH E EPISCOPAL CHURCH 181 
tory education, but both of them have become 
educated gentlemen through hard work and 
wide reading at home. Both are successful 
dentists. 
T HAV E enjoyed reading TH E CRISIS, with 
•*• the exception of the Christmas 
number. 
Your editorial on the Episcopal Church 
was far fetched. Whoever reported to you 
that the colored people were not well treated 
at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine the 
night you mentioned was certainly wrong. 
I had several friends with me that night, and 
the efforts of the ushers toward all colored 
people was to seat them front, and in every 
way to make them comfortable. 
Then, too, that was the night when the 
combined choir of the colored parishes of 
Xew York City sang, and not at the deliberation of the colored episcopate. This was 
done at a regular session of the convention 
separately by the house of bishops, and that 
of the clerical and lay delegates. 
I have no briefs for Bishops Gailor and 
Nelson; they can take care of themselves. 
My only desire in this is "to render to 
Caesar the things that are Caesar's." 
Yours, 
(Rev.) A. G. C'OiiBS, 
Nashville, Tenn. 
M 
Much as I regretted the arrangement of 
the Cathedral service criticised in the December number of TH E CRISIS, I still more 
regret that it should represent to you the 
A very good percentage of the men in the 
dental profession here are college graduates. 
A majority of the men are Southern born, 
but Pennsylvania is well represented. 
attitude and meaning of the Episcopal 
Church. 
The Cathedral service was resented by 
many church people, but it is fair to say 
that it was a meeting not of the general 
convention, but of the church institute and 
for the purpose of raising funds chiefly. It 
was not foreseen that the colored congregations of New York would attend in such 
numbers. Most certainly the colored clergy 
should have been asked to take part as well 
as the colored choirs. For the other speakers 
it has been considered a good thing that the 
Southern bishops should by their public 
endorsement commit themselves to the high 
educational standards and democratic spirit 
of the church institute. 
Later, at a full meeting of the general 
convention, a joint session of both houses, 
Bishop Ferguson, of Liberia, and Archdeacon Russell spoke and both were voted 
additional time, although the white speakers, 
Bishop Brent and others, were cut short. 
I so much value your work and TH E 
CRISIS that it would be a great disappointment did I think you would not come to 
recognize the contribution colored men and 
women are making to the life of the 
Episcopal Church as well as elsewhere in 
our country. 
Sincerely yours, 
HENRIETTA GARDINER, 
Lawrenceville, Va . 
THE EPISCOPAL CHURCH 
CERTAINT Y 
B y LESLI E PINCKNE Y HIL L 
WPIAT have I fathomed of life, 
What of its medley of strife, 
Sorrow and solace profound? 
What can we creatures of dust 
Stand upon, swear by and trust, 
What my unshakeable ground? 
This: that though evil be strong, 
Goodness prevaileth ere long 
However betrayed or beset; 
That lie his own spirit cloth smother, 
Wh o willeth the hurt of another; 
And this: that God liveth yet. (.Reproductions of this picture for sale by TH E CRISIS ) 
HI S MAJESTY , TH E LAT E MENELI K II. , KIN G OF TH E KING S OF ETHIOPIA , EMPERO R OF ABYSSINIA , 1844-1913 . A MERCHANT. 
S
I X years ago Charles Thompson, a 
colore d man of Sault Ste. Marie, 
Mich., opened a little one-chair bootblacking stand on the corner of an alley, 
shining shoes and buying odd souvenirs from 
the Indians as they passed by. After a 
while he had purchased enough to place in 
a little old showcase, which he displayed 
in the window of a dilapidated frame building alongside of his shoe-shining stand. 
Daily increasing his purchases and sales, he 
at last gave up his shoe-shining stand, purchased a larger showcase and entered the 
frame building with an idea of doing 
business in souvenirs. His indefatigable 
effort and eager desire for better quarters 
to display his goods inspired the owner of 
the building to put up an $8,000 brick building, in which Mr. Thompson now has about 
a $5,000 stock of goods consisting o f 
souvenirs, embroidery, notions and a rare 
line of agate goods. 
The needlework is done by Mrs. Thompson, 
who is an adept in sewing. 
CHARLES THOMPSON'S ART STOKE, SAULT SAINTE MARIE, MICH. 
MEN OF THE m0NTh MEN OF TH E MONT H 185 
A YOUNG STUDENT. 
JOSEP H MALCOL M FAREIRA , of 
Germantown, leads his class in the 
boys' high school of Philadelphia. There 
are seventy white boys and one other colored 
boy in the class. Most o f the white boys in 
the class come from Philadelphia and many 
are the sons of the best white people in the 
city. 
Fareira's leadership of these boys is pronounced and undisputed. In his language 
and mathematic tests he frequently made 
ME . J. M. FAREIRA. 
100 per cent, and has always been exempt 
from examinations because of his perfect 
recitations. That he is popular as well as 
brilliant is attested by the fact that he was 
almost unanimously elected as president of 
the class, which is thought to be one of the 
most brilliant that the school has ever graduated. His suggestion for a memorial to 
leave the school was accepted and he himself drew the design. It is to be a starshaped mat upon which will be mounted the 
pictures o f the members of the class. 
So far as is known this young student, 
who is 17 years old, has no white blood in 
his veins, but is o f a distinct Negro type, 
in color and features. His brilliancy cannot, therefore, be attributed to white blood, 
as is often done in the case of brainy 
Negroes. The name of Joseph Fareira has 
already been placed upon the list of "distinguished members" of the class, and he is 
a strong candidate for one of the high-school 
scholarship s at the University of 
Pennsylvania. 
gg 
MENELIK. 
' | ' H E Emperor of Abyssinia, who was 
stricken by paralysis several years 
ago and several times reported dead, died 
TH E EMPEROR OF ABYSSINIA. 
December 18. He was born in 1844, and 
was the son of the Prince of Shoa, the 
southern of the four great provinces which 
make up the empire. He claimed an unbroken descent of nearly 3,000 years from 
Maqueda, Queen of Sheba. When the 
Emperor Theodore committed suicide in 
1867 Menelik became King of Shoa, and 
in 1889 was proclaimed Emperor of 
Abyssinia. In 1893 he inflicted the crushing defeat of Adoa upon the Italians, leaving 7,000 of them dead on the field. His 
great Queen Taitou led one of the charges 
against the foe. Since then Abyssinia has 
been unmolested by Europeans. Menelik is 
succeeded by his grandson, Lidj Jeassu, a 
boy of 16. 50,000. 
IN February, 1911, we 
asked for 10,000 subscribers and purchasers. 
We had them inside of 
two months. In April, 
1911, we asked for 
25,000 subscribers. We had them before 
January, 1913. We asked for complete 
financial independence and stated that 
this meant 50,000 subscribers and purchasers by January 1, 1915. We have 
32,500 to-day. As a subscriber to TH E 
CRISIS or a reader of its pages will you 
not send us one new subscriber this year 
and let us walk into the class of the 
larger magazines next Christmas? 
WORK FOR BLACK FOLK IN 1914. 
AmERICA N citizens of 
Negro descent and their 
friends have much to do 
in 1914, if they are to 
stem the rising tide of 
racial proscription. 
First—They must meet the new 
attack on property rights of colored 
people which, under the name of "segregation" and under the excuse of such 
equitable adjustment of social relations 
as to avoid "friction, " is really a widespread attempt to prevent colored 
people from making good investments 
or living in decent homes. Its latest 
appearance is directed toward preventing Negroes from buying agricultural 
land, and against this last and most 
dangerous propaganda what honest 
American can withhold his influence 
and help? 
Second—The attack on property is 
the natural child of the refusal of the 
right to work to Negroes. The year 
1914 should see a determined attempt 
to break down the rules and customs 
which bar black men from labor unions 
and discriminate against them in other 
ways in their attempt to earn a living. 
The worst examples of this are in 
the contract labor laws of the South 
which virtually legalize peonage in 
agriculture. All of the advance labor 
legislation in the South specifically 
excepts "agriculture and housework" ! 
Third—We might wait for all-healing 
time and reason in these economic 
difficulties if education was all right. 
But education for Negroes is awry, 
and our work for 1914 is to begin to 
right it. Under the guise of introducing 
"industrial" training the colored city 
public school has, first, been differentiated from the white system; secondly, 
shortened in length so as to end at the 
sixth and seventh grades, while the white 
schools have usually ten and twelve 
grades; and, finally, it is now openly 
proposed to so change the character of 
grade work that even the lower-grade 
work will not be concentrated on reading, writing and ciphering, but will 
teach Negroes to work, which, as Supervisor Guy, of Charleston, thinks, is more 
important than their learning to read. 
Of course the majority of Negroes in 
the country districts have no decent 
school facilities at all and here, surely, 
is work for 1914. 
Fourth—The civil rights of Negroes 
need defense in 1914. The annoying and 
EDITORIAL EDITORIA L 187 
illegal race discrimination in the civil 
service, in hotels, restaurants, theatres, 
churches and Young Men's Christian 
Associations must be squarely and 
frankly investigated and systematically 
opposed. 
Fifth—The robbery of the Negroes' 
political rights is the cause, and was intended to be the cause, of the invasion 
of the Negroes' civil, educational and 
economic rights. Disfranchisement for 
race or sex must go, and the work of 
1914 is flatly and fearlessly to restore 
democratic government in the South and 
overthrow the oligarchy which rests on 
the worst rotten borough system known 
to the modern world in civilized States. 
Sixth—Finally, in 1914, the Negro 
must demand his social rights: His 
right to be treated as a gentleman when 
he acts like one, to marry any sane, 
grown person who wants to marry him, 
and to meet and eat with his friends 
without being accused of undue assumption or unworthy ambition. 
This is the black man's program for 
1914, and the more difficult it looks the 
more need for following it courageously 
and unswervingly. It is not a radical 
p r o g r a m—it is conservative and 
reasonable. 
P. S.—The above statement was 
solicited by the Survey and accepted; 
then it was returned because the writer 
refused to omit number six! 
A LETTER . 
J NOTICE in this past issue 
a number of people who 
wrote you and some felt 
that you were rather inclined to be inflammatory 
in your denunciation of 
wrong. Now I think just the opposite. 
I think we have crushed truth and submitted to indignities so long that 
people in America think we do not know 
when we are mistreated or insulted; in 
fact, I have heard people say we are 
really too ignorant to know when we are 
imposed upon. Truth itself is harsh on 
the man or woman who must stand by 
conviction, and truth must dare the 
harsh thing in order to awaken conscience and sentiment. For my part, I 
desire you, with all my heart, to continue to do as you have been doing, and 
if I had the means I would see to it that 
THE CRISIS went to thousands of people 
who need to read it in order to have 
their eyes opened. We are slumbering 
over and upon the tired, subdued wrongs 
and crushed lives of our people, and 
know not of their writhings and sorrows, all because we have kept still when 
we should have spoken out, and with me, 
free speech tempered, of course, with 
the best reason and coolest logic, is the 
only thing that will stir the citizens of 
America to do their duty. 
While I was East I was.in attendance 
upon the meeting of the Woman's Home 
Missionary Society of our church, the 
Methodist Episcopal, and I was successful in getting our ladies to register a 
protest against the recent law enacted in 
Florida. I felt that it was but right that 
the American people should know, as a 
great body of women representing one 
of the greatest protestant forces in 
America, that we registered our protest 
against such iniquities, and I send you 
under separate cover a copy of the same 
that you may know the stand we took, 
and I shall be very glad to hear from 
you, some time, to know your impression 
of it, and if it will do our cause any 
good I shall be glad for you to use it or 
any part of it or comment on it as you 
see fit in THE CRISIS. 
I am glad for the open letter you sent 
President Wilson. It was what we 
needed and I surely have not read anything better as an appeal in behalf of 
justice and right in a long time. 
I hope you will be strong and very 
courageous, for our cause is right and 
it must prevail. 188 TH E CRISIS 
THE SOUTH AND THE SADDLE. 
{"Should I become President of the United States, 
they (the colored people) may count on me for absolute 
fair dealing and for everything by which I could assist 
in advancing the interests of their race in the United 
States." ] 
THESE were Mr. Wilson's 
words October 16, 1912. 
Wh y has the President 
failed to keep them ? 
It is not because he 
did not mean them. He 
did mean what he said. But Mr. Wilson 
is seeking to keep his party intact for 
carrying through certain legislation. 
That party in Congress consists to-day 
of 290 Representatives and 51 Senators, 
against an opposition of 127 Representatives and 45 Senators. Moreover, the 
President's party of 341 includes 115 
Senators and Representatives from former slave States. 
If these 115 members withdrew their 
support Mr. Wilson's party would be a 
minority of 226 votes against 287. For 
his policies, therefore, Mr. Wilson must 
have the solid South, and the solid South 
has but one political tenet: ' ' Down 
with Niggers !' ' 
But how is it that the solid South is 
numerically so strong in Congress ? 
Because it represent s not simply 
16,000,000 white Southerners , but 
8,000,000 disfranchised blacks. Thus the 
disfranchisement of blacks gives the 
Southern whites a club to beat them 
with. 
Not only that, but it gives the 
Southern whites an abnormal advantage 
over the Northern voters. This is easy 
to prove: 
In ten Southern States it took, in 
1912, 1,110,034 votes to elect 94 Congressmen. In the rest of the United States 
it took 13,926,508 votes to elect 323 
Congressmen. In other words, 43,116 
ignorant and low-down Northerners and 
Westerners are necessary to elect a 
representative to Congress, but only 
11,808 aristocratic and wise white 
Southerners are needed to seat a Negro 
hater in our highest legislature. No 
wonder the South is in the saddle when 
it wields four times the political power 
of the North! 
HETCH-HETCHY. 
\ HA T is the remedy for the 
unfair political preponderance of the South? 
Reduction of representation. This the Republicans have undertaken 
for representation in the national convention. We are glad of it. The only 
persons who benefited from full representation were the heelers of the lillywhite " movement in most Southern 
States, thanks to Mr. Taft. The next 
step will be to reduce the representation of the whole South, in order to 
release the West and the North from its 
intolerable political dictatorship. 
We wonder if in anticipation of 
Western disaffection the Hetch-Hetchy 
bill was signed? 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD. 
|R. VILLAR D has been the 
chairman of the executive board of the National 
Associatio n for the 
Advancement of Colored 
People from the day of 
its founding until January 1, 1914. He 
took it when it was nothing but an idea 
and left it a nation-wide movement, with 
twenty-four branches and 3,000 members, out of debt, aggressive and full of 
faith. Mr. Villard now feels that some 
of his burden should be shared by others 
and therefore becomes treasurer and 
chairman of the finance committee, while 
Dr. Joel E. Spingarn succeeds him as 
chairman of the board of directors. 
Every colored man in America owes a 
debt to Mr. Villard. Others have 
shouted louder at the hustings and debated and theorized, but not a single 
worker for the new abolition has 
shouldered so much actual responsibility 
or done so much downright hard vrork 
or raised so much cash to pay our 
bills. The task has been hard—harder EDITORIA L 189 
than many realize—and the cost for an 
overburdened man of affairs has been 
heavy. But the result will in the end 
pay for the effort. The Negro race owes 
a debt of deep gratitude to the grandson 
of William Lloyd Garrison. 
WE MOVE. 
>IIE National Association 
for the Advancement of 
Colored People and T H E 
CRISIS will move into 
larger and more convenient quarters February 1. TH E CRISIS was founded in one 
room of the Evening Post Building, 20 
Vesey Street; it overflowed into two 
and three rooms, and finally moved 
with the association to larger quarters 
in the Evening Post Annex, 26 Vesey 
Street, in March, 1912. Here we have 
become so congested that we must move 
again. After February 1 the association will occupy a suite of four offices 
on the eleventh floor of the Educational 
Building, 70 Fifth Avenue, at the corner of 13th Street, and near Union 
Square. TH E CRISIS will occupy a suite 
of six offices on the fifth floor of the 
same building. In the building are 
Ginn & Company, the well-known publishers, and the People's Institute. 
W e shall welcome our friends and 
readers at all times. 
" I WAS SICK!" 
JACCOMPANIE D a 
friend on a visit to Harlem Hospital this last 
Sunday. This friend is 
serving on a committee 
of the social-s e r v i c e 
bureau of some Jewish organization and 
her duty was to visit the sick in various 
hospitals and offer a word of comfort 
to the friendless, etc. I was particularly 
struck by the fact that very few of the 
colored patients in that hospital had 
friends—and we went during visiting 
hours when most of the patients had 
visitors. 
"Could not such a movement be 
started through the medium of TH E 
CRISIS or other agency for the colored 
people—if such a movement is not 
already on foot? 
"Ver y truly yours, 
(Signed) "GERTRUD E CHRYSTAL. " 
What on earth are the colored 
churches of New York doing 1 
THE NEGRO AND THE LAND. 
1
ISFRANCHISE the Negro, give him an education and full rights of 
work and property . 
This will settle the 
Negro problem." Such 
was the argument put forward in 1890 
when Mississippi began the nullification 
of the United States Constitution. 
What has been the result? The 
Negro problem is not settled despite the 
fact that nine-tenths of the colored men, 
21 years of age and over, have lost their 
votes in the Gulf States. Education has 
been restricted, cheapened and lowered 
in efficiency, and most Negro children 
of school age are out of school. Low 
wages and caste restrictions hamper the 
Negro worker and show little abatement. 
And the right to hold property? 
Even this is being openly attacked. In 
Southern and border cities a half dozen 
ordinances are making it difficult or 
impossible for Negroes to purchase city 
homes. 
But there is the rural South, the 
haven of refuge for all true black men, 
if they read the Gospel according to 
our best friends correctly. And yet 
listen to this, by Clarence Poe, of North 
Carolina, editor of the widely read 
Progressive Farmer: 
" I have received hundreds and 
hundreds of letters, representing fifteen 
States, endorsing the plan of race segregation I advocated on this page, 
August 30. * * * 
"Th e law I advocated August 30, it 
will be remembered, was just this: 
'Whenever the greater part of the land 190 TH E CRISIS 
acreage in any given district that may 
be laid off is owned by one race, a 
majority of the voters in such a district may say, if they wish, that in 
future no land shall be sold to a person 
of a different race; provided such 
action is approved or allowed (as being 
justified by considerations of the peace, 
protection and social life of the community) by a reviewing judge or board 
of county commissioners.' 
"Such a board, as I have said, could 
be used by any white community to keep 
itself white, but the Negro would almost 
never be able to use it to make a community wholly Negro. If you are in 
favor of such a plan and want to know 
more about it, send me a postal card 
or letter at once. " 
"What is the reason of all this? This 
is the reason in North Carolina: 
Colored Farmers 
1900 1910 
Farms owned 17,520 21,443 
Land in farms owned 965,452 1,197,496 
Per cent, of improved 
land 40.9 42.8 
Value of property owned. 8,828,581 27,448,410 
Value of land 5,351,290 17,063,588 
Increase of value of all farm property, 
1900-1910, 130 per cent.; of land and buildings, 134 per cent. 
This is the reason in the United 
States: 
MIGRATION. 
H E Oklahoma movement 
for migration to Africa 
is a poorly conceived 
idea and we warn our 
reader s against it. 
Migration to-day is ' a 
serious matter and should be planned 
and financed on a large scale. It is 
foolish for individuals with small sums 
of money and no knowledge of the 
country to go to Africa. Africa needs 
capital, not labor; it needs technical 
knowledge and executive ability and not 
small farmers. 
Ordinary inexperienced farmers and 
laborers migrating from America to 
Africa would succumb to the trying 
climate in very short time. 
Let the migration idea stop at present. 
Fight out the battle in Oklahoma and 
protect the masses against the charlatan 
who is stealing their money. 
There is no steamship in New York 
building for the African trade and 
owned by Negroes, and the alleged 
African chief traveling in Oklahoma is 
nothing but a common cheat who belongs in jail. 
Value of farm property farmed by colored 1900 
farmers $546,723,508 
Value of farm property owned by colored 
farmers '. 179,796,639 
Value land of owners 102,022,601 
Value buildings of owners 28,662,167 
Value implements of owners 8,352,975 
Value live stock of owners 40,758,896 
Increase 
Increase for 
1910 Per Cent, whites 
1,279,234,245 134 99.6 
440,922,439 
277,391,441 
69,354,013 
15,852,814 
78,324,171 
145.2 
171.9 
142 
89.8 
92.2 
93.2 
109.2 
74.1 
69 
59.1 
Here we are then: Advance toward 
property and independent farm ownership and a movement among our "best 
friends" to stop it. 
We confess to some bewilderment in 
this development, and we are waiting 
for enlightenment from those wise 
statesmen who have been volubly leading us out of the wilderness in these last 
ten years. 
RESISTANCE. 
HE Hindus in Natal and 
the Chinese in Panama 
are resisting white oppression. It is a good 
sign, not simply for 
colored folk, but for 
white folk. Bad as oppression is for the 
oppressed, it is worse for the oppressor. 
For the sake of both it should cease. f THE ANNUAL MEETING f 
<y> OF THE Y 
national association for the advancement of colored p
JOEL E. SPINGARN , CHAIRMA N OF TH E BOAR D OF DIRECTORS . 192 TH E CRISIS 
ANNUAL MEETING. 
' I ' H E annual meeting of the National 
Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People, held in the Charities Auditorium, New York, on January 5 , was well 
attended and was a distinct success. Amon g 
those present were Mrs. Henry Villard, Miss 
Lillian D. Wald, President Henry C . King, 
of Oberlin, Mrs. Max Morgenthau, Jr., Dr. 
Charles E. Bentley, Mrs. Florence Kelley, 
Mr. Butler R. Wilson, Mr. Archibald H. 
Grimke, Dr. P. N. Cardoza, Mr. Ray 
Stannard Baker, Mrs. Robert M. La 
Pollette and many others. 
At the business session in the afternoon 
reports of officers and committees were read. 
The report of the chairman of the board 
showed an increase in the income and membership of the association of over 10 0 per 
cent., and a most encouraging record of 
accomplishments. TH E CRISIS, with its circulation of 32,000 , reaches 150,00 0 readers. 
This report will be printed in full. 
REPORTS OF BRANCHES. 
" MoST interesting were the reports of 
-
1
- •*• branches, which lack of space prevents our giving in detail here. They will 
be printed in full in the annual report of 
the association. Dr. Cardoza, in a few 
telling words, described the splendid work 
of the Baltimore branch, dwelling upon the 
work of legal redress. Twice the branch, 
co-operating with national headquarters, has 
won its ease against the segregation ordinance, and now it looks as if this might be 
carried up to the Supreme Court of the 
United States. The branch has invited the 
association to hold its conference in Baltimore in the spring, and is now laying the 
groundwork for this. 
Mr. Butler R. Wilson, the able secretary 
of the Boston branch, gave a most interesting account of its organization and various 
activities. They have handled several cases 
of discrimination most successfully and their 
work of legal redress is rapidly developing 
in importance. During the year, in addition 
to the support of their own special activities, the Boston branch sent to national 
headquarters almost $2,000 . 
Dr. Charles E. Bentley, from Chicago, 
gave a graphic description of the fight the 
branch waged last year against the flood of 
hostile legislation which followed the Jack 
Johnson episode. No less than three antiintermarriage bills, one "Jim Crow" bill and 
a full-crew bill, which would have deprived 
colored porters in Illinois of their positions, 
were smothered in committee through the 
activities of the branch. Many new members have been added during the year and 
the branch has most ambitious plans for 
developing its work in the future. 
No one at the meeting so eloquently expressed the real spirit of the association's 
work as Mr. Archibald H. Grimke, under 
whose brilliant leadership the Washington 
branch has become a powerful, cohesive 
body and a great source of strength to our 
organization. Mr. Grimke had the complete 
attention of his audience, which was profoundly touched by his appeal for the 
necessity of unity of effort and the layingaside of all personal .differences. He said 
in part: 
"W e in Washington have had to work 
definitely to arouse the colored people themselves to their danger, to make them feel it 
through and through, and at the same time 
to make them willing to make sacrifices for 
the cause. Of course, those who know anything about Washington know that it is 
rather a difficult proposition to tackle. 
Washington is broken up into all sorts of 
factions. 
"Segregation was the thing that did the 
work for us. The people became aroused 
and began to look around for the instrument that could help them. W e took great 
pains to point out that there was only one 
instrument in fact (and I mean no disparagement to other organizations), but 
there is only one organization in this country 
that can do this work, and that is the 
National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People. There is no use to divide 
ourselves among a lot of little things, small 
organizations, some of them really organizations on paper only and, like the Haitian 
arm}', composed entirely of colonels and 
generals. Now, we have the machinery; we 
have the organization; and I called the 
attention of our Washington people to the 
fact that it is of the utmost importance 
that we assist such an organization in its 
work. 
"One reason why I am interested in this 
effort, why I am willing to devote the remainder of my life to it, is that we are 
preparing a machine that will be useful TH E ANNUA L MEETING 193 
fifty years after we are dead. Mr. Villard 
is doing it, Mr. Spingarn is doing it, Miss 
Nerney is doing it, Mr. Russell is doing it. 
They are all preparing a great machine. 
W e in Washington must help; also the 
people in Boston. W e must help to prepare 
the machine that can be used when the great 
leader comes upon the platform. He may 
not come for a generation, but let us prepare the machine, so that when he does come 
he will not have to use his powers to invent 
one. An d it is my belief that that leader 
is going to be a colored man. W e have not 
the colored man now, for he must be a 
colored man with a great brain and a great 
heart who can take in all the little differences 
among us and can reconcile them. 
W e must shake this country by agitation. 
W e have that firmly fixed in our minds in 
Washington. What we must do is not only to 
talk, for talk is really cheap. All of us are 
willing to say what we will do, what we will 
sacrifice, but we want the proof of what you 
will do. I said to the Washington people: 
" 'Have you any wrongs? Are you willing 
to let white people do more for you than 
you are willing to do for yourselves? Are 
you going to let the people in New York 
do your work for you and you not make any 
sacrifices? Yo u must show these people 
that you are willing to make sacrifices— 
sacrifices of speech, sacrifices of action, sacrifices of money. You must give.' 
"They have done this. It is a perfectly 
wonderful piece of revival in Washington. 
I never believed that the thing could be done, 
but it has been done in Washington. School 
teachers whom you would not believe cared 
for anything but pleasure, society women, 
young men, have given themselves up, and I 
can scarcely speak of it without being 
touched almost to tears. It has been a tremendous revelation. 
"If we could only get the colored people 
to understand that they must make sacrifices 
just as the white people make sacrifices, 
and as the anti-slavery people did. Let us 
never hear of drawing the color line in this 
association. What we care for is not whether 
a man or a woman is white or colored, but is 
that man or that woman the best person to do 
a certain piece of work. Without any regard 
to color, the right person must be put to 
work and you and I must back him up if 
we mean to get effective action. To put up 
somebody against somebody else simply 
because he is colored would be a fatal mistake and would make this association an 
ineffective association. 
"What are these white people here for ? 
W e are brothers and sisters, and as brothers 
and sisters we must use each other to the 
best advantage. This association is the one 
organization dedicated to our freedom and 
we must do all in our power to make it 
stronger and stronger. 
"This is the spirit we have carried into 
the Washington branch. From Washington 
we have sent to headquarters since October 
27 something like $2,500, raised by the 
colored people for this work. W e have 
made no effort to reach the white people. 
Our effort was to reach 100,000 colored 
people. The work that has gone on is wonderful. A regular bureau of speakers has 
been organized. They have gone from 
church to church, from society to society, 
from secret lodge to secret lodge, sometimes 
speaking two or three times in a day and 
at night, until at last they have reached 
everyone and everyone was willing to give 
something. 
"This committee was organized after the 
great meeting of the 27th of October. W e 
were not able to raise much money that 
night. A committee of 250 and more was 
organized, and each person was pledged to 
give either out of his own pocket or to raise 
in some way $25. They have done this 
and some have raised a great deal more. W e 
have gotten our collections from the 
churches, from the lodges and from individuals. W e have gotten Washington ready to 
give and Washington has given. 
"It was suggested that we have a paid 
secretary in Washington, but I discouraged 
this. I said that with headquarters in New 
York we cannot afford to spend any money 
in Washington, but send every cent to New 
York. W e sent every cent that we raised 
except our expenses—even the membership 
fees, of which we had a right to keep onehalf—and we expect to send within a few 
days $500 more, hoping at last to reach the 
$3,000 mark. It is not so much the giving 
of which we are proud, but it is the disposition of the colored people. They are 
finally becoming aroused. 
"If I could have a word to say to our 
other branches, I would say to them that 
all moneys ought to be sent to headquarters. 
In some way we must make this association self-sustaining, and if the colored 
people themselves could do it, it would be an 194 TH E CRISIS 
immense advantage to us. This is our chance. 
W e will never have another. If this association dies we will never have another body 
of white people who will come together as 
these white men and women have come together and espouse our cause—and I am 
speaking, as it were, over the possible grave 
of the liberty of the colored people in this 
country. Do not trifle with your opportunity. Yo u are in a great crisis. The 
spirit which we need, the spirit which we 
must have, is that we must not only be 
willing to do, but we must be willing to 
give. 
"The colored people seem to love more 
dearly their money than their lives. W e 
must teach them to give; teach them to dare; 
teach them their strength. When we have 
done that, and have buried all our little 
differences, when we forget that we are white 
and that we are colored in this organization, 
when we are simply men and women, 
brothers and sisters in the most glorious 
cause in this country, then we have done 
what the old anti-slavery people did: W e 
have set a torch, we have lighted it, we have 
applied it to the republic, and all the 
wickedness, all the wrong, will be finally 
burnt out of it, if it takes fifty or seventyfive years." 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS. 
r TT
 H E following directors, whose terms 
expire in 1917, were elected: Miss 
Jane Addams, Chicago; Mr. Elbridge L. 
Adams, New York ; Dr. C. E. Bentley, 
Chicago; Rev. Hutchins C. Bishop, New 
York ; Rev. W . H. Brooks, New York ; Dr. 
W . E. B. Du Bois, New York ; Mrs. Florence 
Kelley, New York ; Miss Mary White 
Ovington, Brooklyn; Mr. Charles Edward 
Russell, New York ; Mr. John G. Underhill, 
New York. 
OFFICERS. 
At the board meeting, held immediately 
after the business session, the following 
officers were elected: National president, 
Mr. Moorfield Storey, Boston; vice-presidents, Rev. John Haynes Holmes, New York ; 
Mr. John E. Milholland, New York ; Mr. 
Archibald H. Grimke, Washington; Rev. 
Garnett R. Waller, Baltimore; Miss Mary 
White Ovington, Brooklyn; chairman of the 
board of directors, Dr. Joel E. Spingarn; 
director of publicity and research, Dr. 
W . E. B. Du Bois; treasurer, Mr. Oswald 
Garrison Villard; attorney, Mr. Chapin 
Brinsmade; secretary, Miss May Childs 
Nerney. 
PUBLIC SESSION. 
The speakers at the public session in 
the evening, which was devoted to the 
subject of segregation, were Mrs. Robert 
M. La Follette, Dr. W . E. B. Du Bois and 
Mr. Charles Edward Russell. Mr. Villard 
presided. Mr. Russell's address, delivered 
with his customary eloquence, was warmly 
applauded. His picture of the discomforts 
and indignities which colored people suffer 
in "Jim Crow" ears was one never to be 
forgotten. His comment on the rumor that 
the government has reversed its policy o f 
segregation, " I think I know a political side 
step when I see it," drew smiles from his 
audience who listened with profound attention when he went on to show the significant relation of the ballot to the present 
condition of the colored people and the power 
they could even now wield in the pivotal 
States if they would present a united front. 
Mrs. La Follette was enthusiastically 
greeted. She spoke with deep feeling and 
conviction on the condition o f the colored 
people in the District of Columbia, telling 
of her long residence among them there. 
She condemned segregation in the most 
unqualified terms, saying that segregation in 
street cars, in government departments and 
in other public places would be a national 
disgrace. "Riding in street cars is not a 
social privilege. If you ride in your own 
conveyance you can invite whom you please 
to ride with you. On a public car all lines 
of distinction and caste must be disregarded. 
The United States Government stands back 
of the civil service. Whatever is done there 
has the stamp of government approval. 
There are over 11,000 colored employees 
working for the United States Government, 
more than half of them in Washington. 
They have competed with white people for 
their positions and are justly proud of the 
success they have achieved. This spirit, 
according to every ethical principle, should 
be encouraged by the United States, and it 
is a shame that a government should put 
its stamp of approval upon such unjust 
measures against a struggling people. " 
Resolutions of protest were wired from the 
meeting to the President and to the Secretary 
of the Treasury. TH E HOODO O 195 
OUR STANDARD FOR 1914. 
' I ' H E board of directors and officers wish 
to express for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People their heartfelt gratitude and appreciation to the committee of fifty and 
more, which has been 
working under the 
auspices o f the District of Columbia 
branch. Throug h 
their efforts we have 
been able to clear a 
debt of over $1,000, 
and now have a 
balance in bank. This 
is entirely the work 
of the colored people. 
Sinc e October 27 
they have sent almost 
$2,50 0 t o th e 
National Association, 
and the District of 
Columbia .branch has 
the honor of being 
the first branch to 
subscribe $100 for 
the salary of the 
attorney. A comparison of this year's 
membership with last 
year's for the period 
covering from October to January shows 
an increase o f nearly 700 per cent. These 
figures indicate that the branch is surely 
reaching the people. 
What this means in work those who have 
not lived in Washington cannot understand. 
Personal differences* have been laid aside. 
Great sacrifices of time and money have 
been made. People who had already worked 
almost to the limit of their physical endurance have added the 
strain of night hours, 
speaking, organizing, 
campaigning ceaselessly, and with what 
glorious results. To 
have aroused this 
spirit in the city of 
Washingto n is 
nothing short of a 
miracle, for almost 
every man employed 
by the government or 
by the schools risks 
his position when he 
stands on our militant platform. 
Even more than 
the substantial fruits 
of their work do we 
appreciate this wonderful spirit which 
has animated it and 
which is an inspiration not only to us 
in New York, but 
als o t o al l ou r 
branches. They have 
set a high standard. May we all live up to 
it. W e regard their work as by far the 
greatest achievement of the past year. 
What we need now is similar effort in all 
great centers of Negro population. 
MES . EOBEE T M . L A FOLLETTE . 
TH E HOODO O 
MARTH A GRUENIN G 
'HE N I dropped into Bobby's 
room that evening for a 
quiet chat I was annoyed 
to find James Herrick 
there. I had never quite 
approved Bobby's enthusiastic friendship for him, 
though I suppose the boy's pride in his 
intimacy with an author and a man ten years 
his senior is natural enough. If my nephew 
had shown any sign of realizing my annoyance, had contrived to hint that he, too, 
deplored Herrick's presence on this occasion, 
I might have minded less, but his delight in 
it was only too apparent. 
"Oh, come in," he greeted me radiantly. 
"Jimmy's here, spinning yarns. I hated to 
have you miss it." 
Bobby and I have a very solid esteem for 
one another, but Herrick is the romantic 
creature who has captured his imagination. 
I found the latter seated in the big armchair before the fire, with three or four of 
Bob's young friends, Dane and Carrington, 196 TH E CRISIS 
and some I didn't know, grouped around kim. 
There was something irritatingly schoolboyish and hero worshiping in their attitude. 
Bobby's somewhat perfunctory introductions were soon over and he turned his 
shining face back to his friend. 
"Go on, Jimmy," he urged, "your 
impossible one—you promised." 
And then the slight stir made by my 
entrance subsided and Herrick's soft 
Southern voice and the occasional snapping 
of a log were the only sounds in the room. 
"It's about a man I knew—a friend of 
mine," Herrick said slowly, "and the reason 
I call it impossible, and that some of you 
will find it hard to believe, is that all his life 
he seemed to suffer from a kind of hoodoo— 
bad luck—whatever you like to call it. It's 
the kind of thing one scoffs at if it's offered 
as an excuse for failure, but I knew him 
and know that it was true. 
"I knew him for fifteen years—eager, 
busy, striving years that were full of work 
and hope and dreams and just as full of disappointment and failure and crushing humiliation. There's nothing so strange in that, 
perhaps—the queer thing about it was that 
he had all the qualities that make for success. 
When I knew him he was young and strong, 
he had talent and perseverance; just the 
sort of fellow you'd say would succeed. Yet 
he never did and never could for no reason 
but that fatal curse which hung over him, of 
which he was aware, but which even he never 
fully understood. Perhaps none of us knew 
the strength of that curse until too late. 
There are some people born within a 
shadow, it seems, and those who stand outside of it can stretch out their arms to 
them, hut can't ever lift it or reach beyond 
it, except sometimes like this, when it is too 
late." 
Herrick seemed lost in thought for a 
moment and little Dane shuddered with 
ecstatic sympathy. The other boys sat very 
still, their rapt young faces toward him. 
There is a kind of spell about Herrick, 
especially that voice of his. 
"He was ten or twelve years younger than 
I," Herrick went on, "and his name was 
Edgar Lewis. I knew him first as a merry 
little chap of 5 or 6. He had the usual 
poor but honest parents, and the more 
honest they were the poorer they remained; 
or maybe 'twas the other way round. They 
were our nearest neighbors, living about 
a mile down the road. I don't really know 
much about the elder Lewises, for Edgar 
was an orphan when I first began to notice 
him, but I always suspected that he'd 
inherited his hoodoo. I do know that next 
to Edgar his father, Tom Lewis, was about 
as unlucky a man as I ever knew. 
"He was a farmer, but he didn't have the 
shiftlessness that is so common in our part 
of the world, and though he wasn't a 
Yankee, he was thrifty. The harder he 
worked, however, the worse luck he seemed 
to have, and though he was inoffensive 
enough, he had enemies—and bitter ones. 
So his crops were burned and his mule 
poisoned and, finally, one night (you've 
heard of feuds in Kentucky—well, we have 
them in Alabama, too)—one night a gang 
of feudists, let us call them, descended on 
his shack. They called him to the door and 
shot him down in cold blood and then—I 
hate to tell you this—they went in and had 
their way with his wife and daughter. There 
were about a dozen of them, but no one 
ever saw their faces, though the poor halfcrazed daughter, who managed to escape 
after they killed her mother, swore that she 
knew their voices. But, of course, no one 
paid any attention to what she said and, 
fortunately, she died soon after. 
"This happened when Edgar was 6, and 
I suppose that his escape was the first 
example of his hideous luck. His mother 
had hidden him under a quilt in the woodbox and told him to lie still and not cry, no 
matter what happened, till she or his sister 
called him. So he lay there trembling all 
over, but not daring to cry, although he 
heard her screaming and struggling. He 
listened very carefully to see whether she 
wouldn't call 'Edgar' or 'sonny,' but she 
didn't. For hours he lay under the stuffy 
quilt, and at last he did cry, but very quietly, 
the tears just rolling down his nose and 
cheeks and onto his neck and making him so 
wet and uncomfortable that he couldn't stay 
there any longer. He thought his mother 
must have forgotten to call him, anyway, so 
he crawled out of the woodbox into the 
blazing daylight—and you can imagine what 
he saw. 
"How much he knew, how much he understood, how much of it became clear in after 
years and mingled with his recollections I 
do not know. I only know that he ran 
screaming and sobbing until he came to our 
house. I remember his bursting into the 
dining room where I sat with my mother, and TH E HOODO O 197 
how we tried to soothe him and disentangle 
his story from the incoherent sobbing torrent of his words and our sudden sickening 
realization of what it meant. 
"O f course the county should have cared 
for. Edgar, but the county had its hands 
and all its institutions full. There were 
plenty of earlier victims of feuds and other 
untoward happenings and, besides, there are 
plenty of chances for a boy to take care of 
himself in a community like ours. At first 
he stayed with us a bit, the servants caring 
for him, but soon they tired of it and so, 
at 7, Edgar was thrown on his own 
resources. He worked sometimes in the 
fields and sometimes ran errands or did odd 
jobs in the houses of the wealthier people 
in our town, but chiefly he worked outdoors. 
He ate the food that was given him, cold 
cornbread and the like—this was wages, you 
understand—and slept wherever he could 
find a place to sleep. 
"But his hoodoo never slept. It was 
strange the way the boy, who was the 
friendliest soul in the world, made enemies. 
He was the shyest, gentlest, most willing 
creature imaginable, though he had in him 
some of the proudest blood of the South; 
soft spoken and diffident and yet with a 
kind of eager hopefulness of which his 
experience never robbed him, and it was 
strange the way people were always mistaking it for insolence and punishing him. The 
farmers he worked for said they'd 'take it 
out of him,' and I suppose they did. It 
was strange, too, that his history left people 
untouched. Of course feuds engender bitter 
feelings, and yet it does seem odd that in all 
these years I never heard a word of pity 
for him, except from my mother, perhaps, 
or our old cook, Mandy. 
"I can't help wondering sometimes at the 
frenzy of cruelty the very sight of him used 
to evoke in people—and decent, harmless 
enough people, too, at least at other times. 
How deeply all this unfriendliness wounded 
Edgar I didn't know until long afterward. 
I went away to college and abroad and 
came back to find him grown into his early 
teens, a rather awkward boy, still shy and 
secretly friendly and easily, so very easily, 
touched by a little kindness. There was 
nothing merry about him now, but at the 
back of his dark, soft eyes there was still 
that same wistful hopefulness. If he still 
had hope he had to a certain extent lost confidence, however. When you spoke to him 
he seemed to expect an insult or even a 
blow and if you passed him on the street 
he shrank aside witli timid haste. In those 
days ho had already pondered much, but 
always secretly, over the fate that kept him 
from the things that were easily within the 
reach of others and especially on the meaning of that night of terror and the red 
dawn, which were almost his earliest 
recollections. 
"He had gone to school three or four 
months a year and learned to read and write 
very slowly and painstakingly, chiefly, I 
suppose, because this was the only way in 
which his teacher could read and write. 
Here for the first time in his life he found 
some sort of companionship and happiness. 
Indeed it almost seemed as though his 
hoodoo had forgotten him, for in the little 
rural school he found that he liked to draw 
pictures with chalk on the blackboard and 
with pencil on paper, and the discovery 
elated him. He used to fill his pockets with 
chalk and walk along trying to make pictures on every rock and fence and telegraph 
pole he saw—that is, until his hoodoo awoke 
and some one came to drive him away. He 
had always been a dreamy boy and this had 
frequently gotten him into trouble with 
those for whom he worked, but now he was 
in trouble all the time, for his life was all 
dreams and any work except picture making 
he looked on as a brief and necessary evil. 
"Somehow or other it had filtered to his 
knowledge that in the outside world people 
went to school longer and that picture 
making was one of the things they learned, 
and one day he disappeared and was never 
seen in town again. Afterward we heard 
that he had tramped, barefoot, for two days 
and nights through woods and swamps until 
he turned up, half starved and utterly 
exhausted, at the door of file great industrial 
institute of a neighboring State. He had 
come, he said, because he wanted to learn. 
He was disappointed at not being allowed to 
learn more about pictures, but he was taught 
lo read and write and figure better than 
ever before. He learned something of 
geography and history, too, and was given 
a real room with a*bed in it, and his first 
whole suit of clothes. In return for all 
this he did a good deal of work of various 
kinds, and in the course of two or three 
years learned a trade—masonry or plastering, I forget which. He used to wish that 
they would let him draw, but somehow none 198 TH E CRISIS 
seemed to care whether he drew or not. He 
had heard of a boy in our town who had 
gone to a Northern city and then abroad to 
study picture making and this puzzled him, 
but he decided that he had come to the wrong 
kind of school and must find the right one. 
So when the institute turned him out with 
a certificate and a trade, the big Northern 
city was his goal and there it was I found 
him again. 
"Edgar's hoodoo was a faithful kind. I 
don't believe it ever really let up on him. 
When you believed it had, it had a way of 
cropping up and fooling you, but the 
nearest it ever came to it was during those 
first weeks Edgar spent in the city. He 
found work at his trade and it brought him 
returns that seemed to him almost miraculous, and he found pictures, the first he 
had ever seen, and people who didn't seem 
to hate him. This was perhaps the greatest 
wonder of all to him. 
"At first he spent his evenings in the 
museum, but when I ran across him he was 
going to art school. When he was really 
hungry he worked at his trade during the 
day, but when he was only moderately hungry 
he preferred to spend all his time painting. 
This sometimes brought the wrath of foremen down upon his head, but his head was 
much too full of painting to mind. Fo r the 
first time in his life he was actually handling 
colors and the jo y of it almost intoxicated 
him. 
"In this way things went on for some 
months and I believe Edgar was blissfully 
happy. Then one day a philanthropist 
offered a prize—a European scholarship— 
for the best picture painted by a student in 
one of the city's schools. I was seeing a 
good deal of Edgar in those days, and when 
he showed me the announcement the same 
thought leaped up in both our minds, only in 
mine it took the shape, 'Could Edgar? ' 
while in his eyes I read 'I can,' and looking 
at him I suddenly experienced the old 
heathen instinct, the superstitious desire to 
placate the Gods because mortals are too bold 
or too successful. If only Edgar weren't 
so confident, I thought, and my mind reverted apprehensively t o the hoodoo, but 
Edgar seemed to have forgotten it. 
"There isn't much more to tell. Fo r six 
months Edgar lived and worked and dreamed 
only for the prize. It kept him from seeing 
things in his life which even I could see; 
the old distrust and dislike coming out in 
people who had seemed friendly or indifferent, the resentment and jealousy of some 
of his fellow students—all those hideous 
human qualities which this sweet-souled 
creature seemed destined to bring out in 
others and their more hideous results. But 
Edgar, who had always seen and buried 
what he saw in the silent depths o f his heart, 
for once saw nothing; or rather he saw just 
one thing—the picture he was painting as it 
would be when finished. It was a scene from 
home, a field he had worked in as a boy, 
with a distant prospect of misty hills and 
one or two toiling figures in the foreground. 
"Then one morning I read in the paper 
that the prize had been awarded. The 
scholarship, it said, had been won by Edgar 
Lewis for bis picture 'Winter in Alabama.' 
The award, the account went on to say, was 
strictly for merit. The contestants had submitted no names, merely numbers, and their 
work had been passed on by three o f the 
nation's greatest painters. A s I read, a great 
sense of relief surged over me. Perhaps, 
after all, the hoodoo was dead. I could 
hardly wait to see Edgar. I ran to his room, 
but could not find him. I waited a long time 
and finally left a note asking him to hurry 
to my lodging. 
"I waited all day and in spite of myself 
something like fear began to stir in my 
heart. That old superstition which I despised 
even while it haunted me was like a ghost 
that wouldn't be laid. Then, very late, Edgar 
came. 
"At first he couldn't speak, but long before 
he could his face had told me all I needed 
to know. After a long while, between convulsive gasps that shook all his strong young 
body, he tried to tell me of his meeting with 
the prize trustees. Ho w it had been like 
'down home;' how, somehow, the hoodoo had 
sprung up again. How he had won—he was 
sure he had won, he was dreadfully afraid 
of my making a mistake on that point, for 
it was his number and his picture, but when 
they had seen him they'd said it was a mistake, and they were sorry—perhaps another 
time. * * * They were polite to him, he 
managed to say between gasps, but they'd 
said—they'd said—and then he broke down 
and clung to me, shaking. 
" I don't think I ever felt the bitterness of 
life as I felt it that night. Fo r the first time 
I had personally come up against what I've 
called the shadow in which some of us are 
doomed to live and the tragic helplessness TH E BURDEN 199 
o f those who stand by, whether they try to 
lift it or not. I wanted so to help him, to 
give him some comfort, but there are thing's 
for which there is no help. 
"He left me at last, although I begged 
him to spend the night, and went, reeling a 
little, down the street. It was the last time 
I ever saw him. What happened after that 
I only guess; but his hoodoo was not napping 
now and as far as I know it was this: That 
in an alley near his home, as he was 
stumbling blindly toward it, he ran heavily 
into a woman—a girl—who was frightened 
and screamed. Edgar never knew what 
happened to him, I suppose, and if he had 
he couldn't have explained. The hoodoo 
wouldn't have let him. 
''I found him next morning in the morgue 
with the mark of virtuous citizens' boot 
heels on his face." 
Herrick's gentle voice ceased suddenly. 
There was a silence and then a long sigh as 
I he boys eased the tension of their 
positions. 
"But—but—whyf" Dane stammered suddenly. "What was the hoodoo1
? Didn't you 
ever find out? " 
"But it is impossible," Bobby objected. 
"How could that happen to someone you 
knew? You said he was a friend of yours." 
"Things like that can't happen without 
some reason—not in America," added 
another boy. 
By all the canons of his art, Herrick's 
supreme moment had arrived. Were we not 
waiting breathlessly, obviously mystified? 
But he hardly seemed conscious of his 
triumph, and in the fitful firelight his face 
looked suddenly old and tired. After a 
moment's silence he turned to the last 
speaker: 
"Oh, there was a reason—Edgar was a 
Negro—in America," he said quietly. 
TH E BURDE N 
COLORED MEN AND WOMEN LYNCHED 
WITHOUT TRIAL. 
1885 7S 
1886 71 
1887. 
1888. 
1889. 
1890. 
1891. 
1892. 
1893. 
1894. 
1895. 
1S96. 
1897. 
1898. 
1899. 
80 
' 95 
95 
90 
121 
155 
154 
134 
112 
80 
122 
102 
84 
1900 107 
1901 107 
1902 86 
1903 86 
1904 83 
1905 61 
1906 64 
1907 60 
1908 93 
1909 73 
1910 65 
1911 63 
1912 63 
1913 79 
Total 2,662 
REPORTED is JANUARY, 5. 
Salem. Ala.—Carson; no offense named. 
Paris, Tex.—Henry Mouzon; murder. 
Drew, Miss.—Man; party to a murder. 
Wagone r County, Okla.—Man; rape. 
Fulbright, Tex.—Richard Stanley; rape. 
REPORTED IN FEBRUARY, 7. 
Houston, Miss.—Andrew Williams; murder. 
"David Rucker; same crime, "by mistake." 
Drew, Miss.—Willis Webb ; murder. 
Marshall, Tex.—Anderson ; murder. 
Elysian Fields, Tex.—Two men; horse 
stealing. 
"Barney, Ga.—George McDonald ; disorderly 
conduct. 
REPORTED IN MARCH , 7 (S? ) 
Cordelia, Ga.—Two men ; murder. 
"Lyrtis, La.—Preacher; debt of $10. 
'Manning, S. C.—Boy; assault on a white 
man. 
"Andalusia, Ala.—James Green: shooting a 
white woman. 
Union City, Tenn.—John Gregson; murder. 
"West Point, Miss.—Henry Brown; attempted murder. 
*Clay City, Ky.—Man; murder (?) . 
REPORTED IN APRIL, 8. 
Mondak, Mont.—J. C. Collins; murder. 
"Issaquena, Miss.—Man; murder. 
"Albany, Ga.—Man; no apparent reason. 
"Kosciusko, Miss.—Man; assault upon white 
woman. 
Marshall, Tex.—Man; assault upon a white 
woman. 
"Hickory, Miss.—Man; assault upon white 
man. 200 TH E CRISIS 
*Pensacola, Fla.—Man; assault upon white 
man. 
"Springfield, Miss.—Man; assault upon white 
man. 
REPORTED IN MAT , 2. 
'Appling , Ga.—J. H. Moore ; firing a pistol 
and creating a disturbance. 
•Hogansville, Ga.—Samuel 0 w e n s b y ; 
murder. 
REPORTED IN JUNE, 7. 
*Harlem, Ga.—Man; drunkenness. 
Newton, Tex.—Richard Galloway, attacking 
a party of white men. 
Anadarko, Okla.—Dennis Simmon s ; 
murder. 
Hot Springs, Ark.—William Norman ; rape 
and murder. 
Beaumont, Tex.—Man; murderous assault. 
Americus, Ga.—William Redding, shooting 
an officer. 
Lambert, Miss.—William Robin s o n ; 
murder. 
REPORTED IN JULY , 9. 
Yellow River, Fla.—Roscoe Smith; killing 
a sheriff. 
Bonifay, Fla.—Man; rape. 
*Reuben, Miss.—Man ; murder. 
•Milton, Fla.—Unknown ; rape. 
Blountsville, Fla.— Tempers; assisting a 
criminal to escape. 
Dunbar, Ga.—John Shake; wounding a 
white man. 
*Germantown, Ivy.—Two men; no apparent 
reason. 
'Haines City, Fla.—Samuel While, attempted rape. 
REPORTED IN AUGUST. 10 . 
Laurens, S. C.—Richard Puckett, attempted rape. 
Ardmore, Okla.—Franklin and Ralston; 
murder in disputes. 
•Lexington, Mo.—George Winkfield; murder 
and rape. 
Kilgore, Ala.—Unknown; no apparent 
reason. 
Morgan, Ga.—Robert Lovett; murder. 
•Birmingham, Ala.—Wilson Gardner, halfwitted ; frightening women and children. 
Charlotte, N. C.—Joseph McNeely; shooting an officer. 
Greenville, Ga.—Virgil Swanson; murder. 
Jennings, La.—James Comeaux; attacking 
an Italian merchant. 
REPORTED I N SEPTEMBER, 10 . 
Little Rock, Ark.—Lee Simms; rape. 
Tamma, 111.—Two unknown men; murderous assault. 
Franklin, Tex.—William Davis; murder. 
Louisville, Miss.—Henry Crosby; asking a 
woman if her husband was at home. 
Litchfield, Ky.—Joseph Richardson ; rape. 
Harriston, Miss.—Walter and W i 11 i a m 
Jones; murder. 
"Akron, 0.—Man; as a "last warning" to 
leave the neighborhood. 
*Bartow, Fla.—Man; assaulting a white 
woman. 
REPORTED IN OCTOBER, 3. 
Hinchcliff, Miss.—Walter Brownloe; attempted rape (proved innocent). 
Monroe, La.—Warren Eaton; insulting a 
white woman. 
Cairo, 111.—Man; dispute with a merchant. 
REPORTED IN NOVEMBER, 6. 
Wewoka, Okla.—John Cudjo; murder. 
Dyersburg, Tenn.—John Talley; attempted 
rape. 
s
llazlehurst, Miss.—Wilson Evans; attacking a white girl. 
*Ocala, Fla.—Man found hanging from a 
tree; no facts known. 
•Madison, La.—Man; assaulting a white 
girl. 
'Walton, Ga.—General Boyd ; attempted 
rape. 
REPORTED I X DECEMBER, 4. 
Blanchard, La.—E a r n e s t and Fran k 
Williams; murder. 
"Haleburg, Ala.—Unknown; attempted 
rape. 
'Tunica, Miss.—Albert Coopwood ; murder. 
•Campville, Fla.—Henry White ; found in a 
white person's house. 
Total, 79 ; possibly 80 . 
For alleged attacks or attempted attacks 
on women, 19 , or 24 per cent. 
*Lynchings not reported hy the Chicago Tribune, 
which is supposed to publish an accurate summary. HROUG H the patronage of 
Mrs. E. H. Harriman a 
study of heredity in the 
skin color in persons of 
white and Negro blood has 
been made by Charles B. 
Davenport, the well-known 
authority on eugenics. The pamphlet of 
106 pages with plates has been published 
by the Carnegie Institution of Washington. 
The studies are based principally on 
measurements in Bermuda and Jamaica and 
acknowledgment is made "o f the courtesy 
with which our field worker was everywhere 
received" by the courteous race! 
The results of the study go far to sweep 
away two ancient lies: one that white folk 
may have a black child on account of a black 
ancestor several generations away and 
another that mulattoes are infertile. The 
study says: 
"This brings us to a matter of great social 
moment to hundreds of our citizens, namely, 
the possibility of a reversion in the offspring of a white-skinned descendant of a 
Negro to the brown skin color. There is 
even a current opinion that such an extracted 
white, married to a pure-bred white, may 
have a 'black' child. This tradition has been 
used to create dramatic situations in novels 
and in newspaper 'stories'; and the dread 
of this tradition hangs over many a marriage that might otherwise be quite happy. 
In our studies no clear case of this sort has 
been found, and our fundamental hypothesis leads us not to expect it." 
And again: "At Jamaica I asked several 
highly intelligent colored and white natives 
if they knew of cases of 'reversion' to black 
skin color. All replies agreed in holding the 
idea mythical. It was thought to have arisen 
from the fact that two very light-colored 
persons might be the parents of a mediumcolored child." 
As to the fecundity of mulattoes, the 
report says: 
"This matter has been considered recently 
by Eisher, who finds that the number and 
vigor of the hybrids of the Boers and 
Hottentots has not suffered any decline. 
There is no support in our data for the 
notion of lack of fecundity of Negro-white 
crosses, nor of their deficient viability." 
The pamphlet is tolerably free from 
insulting terms and insinuations if we except 
some nasty allusions from Louisiana on page 
106. One conclusion is, however, characteristic of American science: 
"Recognizing the inadequacy of the average black African Negro to play a part in 
our highly developed society, a natural 
stigma has become attached to black skin 
color. Our social distinctions are based on 
that skin color; we have separate railway 
cars and schools for 'blacks' and 'whites.' 
Meanwhile, in consequence of hybridization 
and segregation of characters, we have blackskinned persons with straight hair, narrow 
noses and, as is well known, with many or 
all the inhibitions and educability of the 
Caucasians. And, also (and this is of great 
and increasing moment), we have whiteskinned persons not only with Negroid features, but with that lack of inhibitors, that 
absence of educability, that characterizes the 
typical west coast African. From a social 
point of view one may suggest that it had 
been better for society had it been possible 
to find some simple criterion of mental inferiority that is as conspicuous as skin color. 
Then we could have separate cars and schools 
for the feeble minded without regard to skin 
color." 
As a matter of fact there is not the 
slightest scientific warrant for the suggestion that the typical west coast African is 
incapable of education, and this Mr. Davenport knows or ought to know. 
Mr. W. P. Dabney, of Cincinnati, collected some data on this subject while fighting the bill against race intermarriage before 
the Ohio legislature. His pamphlet of fourteen pages, called "The Wolf and the Lamb," 
is not scientific, but has some interesting 
comment and pictures. 
Two other pamphlets by Dr. Louis P. 
Moore, of Howard, and the Hon. Archibald 
H. Grimke lie before us. 
Moore's pamphlet might be used as supplementary reading in schools as a review 
of Negro progress. Grimke's pamphlet, 
A Little Pile of Books and. Pamphlets 202 TH E CRISIS 
"The Ballotless Victim of One-party 
Governments," is an excellent argument to 
show the inevitable results of disfranchisement. When anyone argues that political 
rights are not necessary to race advance, 
send him these eighteen pages of reason. 
The pamphlet forms occasional paper No. 16 
o f the publications of the American Negro 
Academy. 
M 
The volume of the American Academy of 
Political and Social Science, entitled "The 
Negroes' Progress in Fifty Years," is on 
the whole a creditable publication. Its 
twenty-four contributors include eleven 
colored men, six Northern white men and 
seven Southern white men. The little monographs are grouped in four parts; one 
dealing with general statistics, one with 
business and labor, one with social conditions and the last with educational and 
cultural conditions. The statistical part presents well-known figures. Kelly Miller 
writes of professional and skilled occupations and R. P. Wright of unskilled labor. 
Dr. Wright's paper is especially interesting, and emphasizes the fact that during 
the last fifty years 
1. The race, then largely unskilled, has 
developed more than a million semi-skilled 
and skilled workers, business and professional men and women. 
2. The standard of the unskilled worker 
has been raised. 
3. The unskilled worker has adapted himself to a system of wages as against the 
system of slavery. 
4. The average of intelligence of unskilled labor has been gTeatly increased. 
5. Unskilled labor has become more 
reliable. 
6. Negro labor has survived the competition of the immigrant. 
7. The unskilled Negro laborer has 
migrated largely to the large cities. 
S. Unskilled labor has to a large extent 
been the foundation on which Negro businesses, the Negro church and the Negro 
secret society have grown up. 
T. C. Walker's paper deals with the Stale 
of Virginia and his own county, where 
Negroes have made such phenomenal advance in land holding. 
James B. Clarke brings us the unusual 
point of view of the foreign-born colored 
man and concludes with this sentence: 
"When the center of American interests is 
transferred from considerations of race to 
the recognition of those surer standards of 
birth, education and ideals, by which alone 
citizeuship is to be adjudged, racial prejudice against the Negro and Negroid will 
become as insignificant in Anglo-Saxon 
America as it is rare in Latin-America. 
Toward this end the Negro and the immigrant should strive by removing the barriers 
of color and of mutual fear or distrust which 
separate them, in order to make possible the 
realization o f the new and really United 
States of North America, without which there 
can be no union of all America." 
Thomas J. Edwards presents a ridiculously favorable view of the Southern tenant 
system. Professor Brough presents a rather 
rhetorical case of "the Southern sous of 
proud Anglo-Saxon sires" for a rational 
study of the race problem. 
Christensen has a sympathetic study of 
Sea Island Negroes which shows decrease in 
crime and increase in church support, education and property holding. 
Work shows that while Negro commitments 
for crime are much higher than white commitments, that the Negro rate is nevertheless 
lower by considerable than that of foreignborn Americans, such as Mexicans, Italians 
and Austrians. Peonage and unfairness in 
the courts are cited as part causes of NegTO 
commitments. 
Mr. Ray Stannard Baker, because he has 
"confidence not only in the sense of the white 
man in the South, but in the innate capability 
of the Negro," is quite willing to let present 
suffrage conditions drift. 
Dr. Haynes discusses segregation in cities. 
Dr. S. B. Jones shows that the Negro death 
rate is declining with that of the general 
population, and Mr. Lichtenstein, the editor 
of the paper, says that "the rapid reduction 
of Negro illiteracy from something above 
95 per cent, to 30.4 per cent, in fifty years 
of freedom, and constituting the largest element in the diminution of illiteracy for the 
United States as a whole, is a phenomenal 
race achievement." 
The most indefensible thing in the whole 
volume is the twenty-two pages given to a 
young Southern white man, Odum, in which 
he tries to lay a foundation for separate 
Negro schools in Philadelphia. As a piece 
of scientific writing the paper is little less 
than silly. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 203 
TH E CRISI S I S TH E OFFICIA L ORGA N O F 
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPL E 
Th e Crisis was started under the NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N 
three years ago after it had called Dr. Du Bois from Atlanta University as Director of Publicity and Research. The NATIONA L 
ASSOCIATIO N still publishes Th e Crisis. Th e Crisis is its mouthpiece. Through it the ASSOCIATIO N speaks each month to 
150,000 readers. From them it now seeks a reply. 
You like Th e Crisis. Why not join the ASSOCIATIO N which 
it represents? 
The NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N has 3,000 paying members, 
80 per cent, of whom are colored. It wants 300,000. The NATIONA L 
ASSOCIATIO N represents YOU . It fights YOU R battles. 
Ar e YO U a member? If not, fill out and return this membership blank. 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE. 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in Class 
paying $ a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name 
Address •• 
Class 1. Donors, paying $100 to $500 per Class 3. Contributing Members, paying 
year. $2 to $10 per year. 
Class 2. Sustaining Members, paying Class 4. Associate Members, paying $1 
$25 per year. per year. 
The subscription to TH E CRISIS is $1 extra, foreign (including Canada) $1.25 
extra, except to members paying $2, foreign $2.25. or more, who signify their wish 
that $1, foreign $1.25, of their dues be considered a CRISIS subscription. 
All members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the 
Annual Meeting of the Association. 
PLEAS E MAK E CHECK S PAYABL E TO NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N TO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF 
COLORE D PEOPLE, 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . 
Mention TH E CKISI S 204 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
SCHOOL OF BEAUTY CULTURE AND HAIR DRESSING 
Kelsey's Hair Dressing, Hair Grower, Scalp Tonic and Face Lotion have no equal. Price, 60c each. 
Guaranteed under Food and Drug Act, June 30, 1906. 
T r "• > ~T~ C^t ~M—"\ 7"l/~>( Manicuring, Shampooing, Hair Dressing, Marcel 
kelsey's LN S ' Facial and Body Massage, Hair Making, Chiropody, 
I I I 1 etc., scientifically taught. Unlimited practice in parlor 
—* -•—J—d -MV- "k—' day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
_ . . „ , ,..,. „ Diplomas. Special Summer Course, $7.50 up. Send for 
Telephone Morningside 8162 booklet. Mme. A. Carter Kelsey, Gen'l Instr.; Dr. Samuel 
14 3
 , ™ _.
13^!* st
- A. Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen'l Manager. 
NEAV YOKE 
MUTUAL TEACHERS' 
AGENCY 
Recommends teachers for schools; secures 
employment for teachers. Blanks and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 
Only 
$65.00 
No. 24 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A Value Unequaled. Sold on $1.00 
Profit Margin FrQ m 
Factory to User 
Write for prices 
and other styles. 
Send for catalogue. 
C. R. PATTERSON 
& SONS. 
Greenfield, Ohio 
Largest Negro Carriage concern in the United States, 
WANTED—ON E MA N OR WOMA N I N EVER Y 
locality to start a Candy Kitchen. Best paying 
small business on earth. Few dollars starts you. 
Get away from wage slavery. Writ e for particulars. Native Herbarium Co., Ambler, Pa. 
$10 Business Course Only $1 
Harvey L. Pittman, famous manufacturing chemist 
and mail-order expert, is now manager of the United 
Service Company and offers their new course, containing seventeen guaranteed formulas for making 
perfumes, toilet and household preparations, with 
complete instructions for making, for local or mailorder sales, for only $1 . This business pays big 
money the year round. Send to-day for list and 
valuable free information. . Address: 
TH E UNITE D SERVIC E COMPAN Y 
618 Fifth Avenue. East - - - Duluth. Minn. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
You can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU . Others are making $2 0 to 
$DO0 a week. Wh y can't you? By our method 
you can start with $5 and up. W e offer you thirty 
live, money-making mail order plans. You can 
make 9 5 cents profit on every dollar order. W e 
furnish circulars, printed matter and place your 
advertising at lowest rates. Send 10 cents* for 
complete outfit. Do it to-day—Now! 
MAI L DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
51 7 Dearborn Street Chicago, I1L 
WANTE D 
500 Negro families (farmers preferred) 
to settle on FREE Government Lands in 
Chaves County, New Mexico. Blackdom is 
a Negro colony. Fertile soil, ideal climate. 
No "Jim Crow" Laws. For information 
write 
JAS. HAROL D COLEMA N 
Blackdom ---- - New Mexico 
$25.00 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
' 'History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "Histor y of the Negro Tiace." 
40 0 pages, 5 0 illustrations. Price $1.2 5 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSO N 
15 4 Nassau Street New York 
REGALI A 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L EEGALI A CO. 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E. Cor. 8th and Plum Sts. 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
COLORED MEN 
WANTE D TO PREPARE AS 
SLEEPING-CAR AN D TRAIN 
PORTERS. 
No experience necessary. Positions pay $6 5 to $10 0 a month. 
Steady work. New Yor k roads. 
Passes and uniforms furnished when 
necessary. Writ e now. 
I., Dept. 19, Indianapolis, Ind. 
JAMAIC A TH E BEST HOM E SITE 
Unequalled values at this time of year. New 6 and 8-room cottages, well built, all improvements, title guaranteed. $10 0 down and $2 0 to $2 5 monthly. Immediate possession. Also 
small farms. 
Jamaica is the biggest and most progressive town on Long Island; it lias the second best 
health record of any town in New York State; and it is less than twenty minutes from New 
Yor k City. Writ e for particulars. 
QUEEN S REALT Y COMPANY , Bo x 196 , 32 DEWE Y AVENUE , JAMAICA , L. I. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 205 
MILE S M. WEBB 
Chicago's Exper t Photographe r 
I specialize in every phase of artistic picture 
making. Send me your photos for enlargements. 
Prices reasonable. Satisfaction guaranteed. 'Phone 
668 8 Douglass. 
WEB B STUDI O 
351 9 State Street Chicago, 111. 
The Loyal Knights and 
Ladies of Malachites 
is incorporated under the 
laws of the District of Columbia. Its objectistocombine the Negroes of the 
world for their mutual advancement along industrial and commerciallines-. 
It also stands for the full 
enjoyment by the Negro of 
*»___ j his civil and political rights, 
rn £K" e Thi s movement is internabovernor tional in its scope; we have 
lodges not onl y in the United States but in 
Jamaica, B. "W. I.; Colon, Bocas delToro, Panama (Canal Zone ) and Costa Rica. It is a dark 
day for the Negr o and he must come together. 
Race movements have failed because our people were told that by contributing thereto the 
race only would be benefited, but no tangible 
individaal benefits were offered. By our plan 
the membe r pays 35c . per month in the Association and receives $4.00 per week sick benefits and $100 at death. W e not only look 
after the race but each individual membe r as 
well. Abigconvention is soon to be held here. 
W e want a lodge in every village, hamlet and 
town and a delegate to be sent to this convention. Organizers wanted everywhere. For 
full particulars, write 
KNIGHTS OF MALACHITES 
1111 You St. N. W. Washington, D. C. A 
AGENT S WANTED—Bi g seller. $3 to $ 5 per 
day. Costs you from 10 to 2 0 cents; sells for 
3 5 cents and up. Sample free for the asking. 
G. A. ALBUR Y & CO., P. 0 . Box 414 , Bristol, Pa. 
Beautiful Colored Doll Free 
This Negro doll has light 
brown color, long black 
hair, jointed limbs, sleeping eyes. For selling our 
artistic Negro post cards 
and other beautiful cards. 
Large assortment; very 
cheap. Agents and dealers are making big 
money handling them. 
Terms free. Sample of 
all post cards sent postpaid for 15 cents. 
J. GRIFFIT H 
AR T COMPAN Y 
36-38 Beekman St. 
Ne w Yor k 
James Web b 
Was Jesus a Negro 
with Woolly Hair? 
Webb's books and pictures prove 
it and show it by the Bible. A 
picture, 12x18 , of Jesus with 
woolly hair, and His Holy Angels 
at His second coming, and a book 
with Biblical references, extending 
from Genesis to Revelations, proving the fact. All for $1.5 0 and 
postage prepaid. The book alone 
is worth its price. 
The following are comments upon the same: 
' 'I beg to say, after hearing Elder Web b on 
the subject, that the blood of the Negro coursed 
through the veins of Jesus and Solomon. I am 
frank to say that I have seldom, if ever, enjoyed 
such an intellectual treat. The position he 
assumed as the subject of his lecture touching the 
Hametic blood and race is difficult and requires a 
practical knowledge of Biblical and historical lore. 
But I am pleased to say that he not only shows 
himself an expert, but the master of the situation, 
and I commend him to the ministry and churches 
of our race of every denomination." 
Truly, 
(Signed) Bishop H. M. TURNER . 
"The evidence submitted by Elder Webb tending to prove 
that the Saviour of mankind was a black man seems to be 
sufficient to put those who oppose the proposition upon their 
proof. Now that the chain of evidence presented by Mr. 
Webb appears so complete. It Is strange that none of the 
delvera In the Biblical records have not advanced the sensational proposition before. Not only was Christ a Negro, 
but It seems that Solomon, who has been held up through 
all the ages as the personification of wisdom, had Ethiopian 
blood In his veins, also."—Seattle "Daily Times." 
Price $1.5 0 for picture and book. Send money 
order or express order to James M. Webb , 351 9 
State Street, Chicago, 111., in the care of the Web b 
Studio. 
WANTED—Colore d carriage smiths, 
woodworkers, trimmer s and painters. Sober, experienced men only. 
Address: TH E CRISIS , 70 Fifth 
Avenue , Ne w Yor k City. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 206 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
Residence 254 6 Michigan Office Phone 
Bell Phone E-216 1 Home 58 Main 
C. H. CALLOWA Y 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
11 7 W . 6th Street Kansas City, Mo . 
HARR Y E. DAVI S 
Attorney-at-Law Notary Public 
160 7 Williamson Building - - - Cleveland, O. 
Office L . D. Telephone 329 7 Market 
Residence L. D. Telephone 5277-M Marke t 
GEORGE A. DOUGLAS 
Counselor-at-Law 
Rooms 613-614 , Metropolitan Building 
11 3 Marke t St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRIS 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
102a Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis ------- - Minn. 
BROW N S. SMITH 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610 , Sykes Block 
Minneapolis Minn. 
GEORGE W. MITCHELL 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia - Pa. 
Tel. 202 6 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
34 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W . F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHEN 
Attorney s-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street - - - Baltimore, Md . 
Phones: Office, Bell 4059 ; New 420-M 
Residence, New 733-A 
THOS. E. GREENE, JR. 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
Maloney Block - Youngstown, Ohio 
William H. Austin Edmund O. Austin 
Law Offices of 
AUSTIN & AUSTIN 
St. Paul Building, 22 0 Broadway, New Yor k 
Suite 7—H . I, J, K 
Telephones: 7400 , 5365 , 536 6 Cortlandt 
B. F. BOOT H 
Attorney-at-Law 
5 7 N. Second Street 
Memphis Tenn. 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephone 527 7 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUD E E. CURTIS 
Surgeon Dentist 
188 W . 135th Street - - ' -' - Ne w Yor k City 
Telephone Connection 
R. W . FEARING 
Electrician 
Contracting, Repairing, Motors, Electric and 
Gas Fixtures 
Electrician recent Emancipation Exposition in 
New Yor k 
85 Marion Street Brooklyn, N. Y . 
Telephone Columbus 393 5 Open All Night 
RODNE Y DAD E & BROS. 
Undertakers and Emb aimers 
Notary Public 
Funeral Parlor and Chapel Free 
Licensed Lad y Embalme r Prompt Service 
26 6 West 53d Street - - - - New Yor k City 
Between Broadway and 8th Avenue 
MME. FANNIE BELLE DE KNIGH T 
Dramatic and Dialect Reader. Engagements solicited. Students given special training in the 
Delsarte Method. Instruction also given in Dialect, 
English Grammar and Rhetoric. 
Terms Reasonable. 
Telephone Morningside 904 5 
Studio: 23 1 W . 134th St. New Yor k City 
TAND Y & FOSTE R 
Architects 
1931 Broadway New York 
Telephone 5368 Columbus 
H. HENR Y HARRI S 
Architect 
Corner 8th and Princess Streets 
Wilmington ----- - N. C. 
WILLIA M L. BELL 
Architect 
138J/2 Auburn Avenue - - Atlanta, Ga. 
JUNIO R . MECHANICA L DRAFTSMA N desires 
position. Persistent, resourceful and efficient. 
Reference. Address DRAFT , care of TH E CRISIS . 
J. E. ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August 
Box 25 , Wilberforc e University 
Wilberforce, 0\ 
FO R S A L E—Colore d restauran t 
doin g a first-class business o f fro m 
$3 0 to $5 0 pe r day . Excell e nt location , 
no t excelle d in city . Addres s : 
G . W . REE D 
266 West 53d Street New York Citv 
Mention THE CKISIS The Art of Printing 
A S EXEMPLIFIE D I N OU R WOR K EMBODIES TH E FOLLOWIN G POINTS O F MERIT : 
| (a) Neat 
1. Stationery •< {b) Attractive 
( (c) Quality 
f (a) Polite 
2. Form J. (b) Business 
( (c) Social 
{ (a) Artistic 
3. Workmanship -I (b) Correct 
( (c) Prompt 
We Print TH E CRISIS 
ROBERT N. WOOD, Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T Telephone: Lenox 6667 NE W YOR K 
Homes in Long Island! 
Few people realize the wonderful possibilities of Lon g Island 
property, the rapid growth of that section of the city and its wonderful 
future. 
W E AR E SELLING GOOD HOMES IN CORONA, with all 
improvements, only five cents carfare to New York. Corona is in the 
very center of Greater New York, and in a few months will be reached 
by the rapid transit lines of Manhattan, giving to the people of that 
section of the city a five-cent carfare to any section of Manhattan. 
The only place within thirty minutes of Times Square, Grand 
Central Station or the Pennsylvania Station, where the man of small 
means can get a modern home with all improvements at a moderate 
cost. W e would be glad to have you visit Corona at our expense. 
Corona is one of the highest elevations in New York City, has an 
excellent car service, good schools, excellent water supply and the best 
place in all New York for children. For full particulars as to price 
and terms address 
L. S. REED & COMPANY 
142 Hunter Avenue Long Island City 
Some choice investment lots for $50 on reasonable terms 
Mention TH E CKISIS . A Life of 
NORRI S WRIGH T GUNE Y 
By 
MAU D GUNE Y HAR E 
(His daughter) 
Would you like to read about a red-blooded man who was 
one of the great leaders of Negro Americans? Would you like 
to inspire your children with the life of this "Tribune of the 
Black People"? 
8vo; 250 pages. Postpaid, $1.50. Best terms to agents. 
THE CRISIS PUBLISHING COMPAN Y 
70 FIFTH AVENU E NE W YOR K CITY 
HAZE L 
The Story of a Little Colored Girl 
By MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Author of "Half a Man" 
Price $1.00 net. Postage prepaid, $1.08. For 
sale through our agents and at TH E CRISI S 
office, as well as at leading book stores. 
CRISIS PUBLISHIN G COMPAN Y 
70 FIFTH AVENU E NEW YOR K CITY 
Mention TH E CMISI S 