RICHMOND, VIRGINIA, NUMBER 
The CRISIS 
Vol. 13 No. 3 JANUARY, 1917 Whole No. 75 
^-Photograph by George W. Brown 
ONE DOLLAR A YEAR i TEN. CENTS A COPY National Pre-ident 
MOORFIEL D STOREY , Boston 
Chairman of the Board of Directors 
DR. J. E. SPINGARN , New York 
Director of Publications and Research 
DR. \Y. E. B. D U BOIS , New Y'ork 
Vice-Presidents 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , New Y'ork 
REV . JOHN* HAYNE S HOLMES . New Y'ork 
JOH N E. MILHOLLAND . New Y'ork 
ARCHIBAL D H. GRIMK6 . Washington 
MAR Y WHIT E OVIXGTON . Brooklyn 
REV . G. R. WALLER , Springfield, Mass. 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
Treasurer 
Chicago 
JAN E ADDAM S 
DR. C. E. BENTLE Y 
DIRECTOR S 
Boston 
JOSEP H PRINC E LOU D 
BUTLE R R. WILSO N 
Baltimor e 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
DR. F. N. CARDOZ O 
Brooklyn 
DR. V. MORTO N JONE S 
DR. O. M. WALLE R 
New Haven 
GEORG E W. CRAWFOR D 
Philadelphia 
DR. WILLIA M A. SINCLAI R 
Washington 
PROF. GEO. WILLIA M COO K 
RO Y NAS H 
Secretary 
Ne w Yor k 
REV . HUTCHIN S C. BISHO P 
MRS . FLORENC E KELLE Y 
PAU L KEXNADA Y 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
ARTHU R B. SPINGAR N 
CHARLE S H. STUDI N 
DR. JOH N G. UNDERHIL L 
LILLIA N D. WAL D 
WILLIA M ENGLIS H WALLIN G 
The present exodus of Negro labor from the South offers the 
chance of a generation for bettering the status of colored people 
throughout America. 
To take advantage of the situation requires two additional financial burdens for 1917: a national organizer to take charge of the 
field work; and a trained newspaper writer who will tackle the very 
difficult task of getting the facts of the Negro's problems into the 
daily press. 
We need $5000. Can we put you down for five? 
Date 1917 . 
j MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
The Crisis is sent without further charge to members paving two dollars or more. 
OSWAL D GARRISON YILLARD , Treasurer, 
70 Fifth Avenue , Ne w York . 
SIR : 
I desire to become a membe r o f the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People an d t o receive The Crisis. 
In payment o f my due s fo r one year, I enclos e dollars. 
Name 
Street 
. . . . City and State 
Mention TH E Caisis TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF 
COLORED PEOPLE. AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY. CONDUCTED BY W. E. 
BURGHARDT DU BOIS; AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, BUSINESS MANAGER 
Contents Copyrighted, 1916, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for January, 1917 
PICTURE S 
COVER. The Mechanics' Savings Bank of Richmond, Virginia. Photograph by George E. Brown. 
MEN OF RICHMOND 128 
COLORED RICHMOND 130-131 
ARTICLE S 
CENSORSHIP. By the late Inez Milholland 116 
MAMMY. A Story. By Adeline F. Ries 117 
EBON MAID AND GIRL OF MINE. A Poem. By Lucian B. Watkins. . . 118 
THE LATE WILLIAM A. HUNTON 119 
COLORED RICHMOND 124 
MEN OF RICHMOND , 127 
THE FINAL STRAIN. A Poem. By G. Douglas Johnson 132 
DEPARTMENT S 
EDITORIAL Il l 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED 
PEOPLE 120 
THE OUTER POCKET 122 
THE LOOKING GLASS 133 
THE HORIZON 140 
HAPPY NEW YEAR to you—readers and subscribers and loyal friends of THE CRISIS 
magazine. The success of THE CRISIS during these six years of its existence is due 
in large part to the continued support and hearty co-operation which you have given us. 
Eor the year 1917? Well, we want to make it the best year yet. In spirit and tone of the 
magazine we shall keep to the usual high standard. In news notes, articles and pictures we shall 
endeavor to be instructive anrl helpful. In service wc shall be always on the alert to do our best. 
And on to the 50,000! 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks* 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the P*st Office at New York, N. Y. 108 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
jiiiiiuiiiuiiiuiiiimiuiiiiiiimiiiimimniimiiiinimiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
The NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOO L 
TL'TTBUlBnilSj 
"/ cordially commend the school's interest and needs to 
all who believe in the Negro race and in our obligation to 
help promote its intellectual, moral and religious uplift." 
REV. DR. CHARLES H . PAEKHURST, New York City. 
IT IS MORE THAN A MERE SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNITY OF SERVICE AND UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, 
Y. M. C. A. and Y. W. C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced coworkers and actual every-day practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE 
DEPARTMENT. 
A HIGH STANDARD COLLEGE DEPARTMENT has now been established. 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
School Term Opened Oct. 4, 1916 
For catalog and detailed information, address: 
PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPARD 
NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL DURHAM, N. C. 
fTinnmninimimimimiiminnimnimiminNimimiiniiiiiiuiiNijraimiiiimiiiiiimiiiim 
TH E 
AGRICULTURA L AN D 
TECHNICA L COLLEGE 
(Formerly A. & M. College) 
Fall Term began September 1, 1916. 
Board, lodging and tuition $8.00 per 
month. 
Maintained by the Governments of 
the United States and of North Carolina. 
Short courses. 
Courses leading to the degrees of 
Bachelor of Science in Agriculture 
and Bachelor of Science in Mechanics. 
Writ e today for catalog. 
Address: 
PRESIDENT DUDLEY 
A. & T. College 
Greensboro, N. C. 
The Cheyney Training School 
for Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNSYLVANIA 
Unde r the managemen t o f the So ­
ciety o f Friends. Beautifully lo ­
cated, healthful, well appointed. 
This schoo l offers to youn g colore d 
me n and wome n wh o hav e a reasonable secondar y schoo l prepara ­
tion, and wh o earnestly desir e to 
becom e teachers, course s in aca ­
demi c work , domesti c science , do ­
mestic art, manua l crafts and 
agriculture. Tuitio n is free . Board , 
lodging, heat, light and laundry 
privileges are offered fo r nine 
month s fo r $100 . Th e entranc e 
fee is $7. Fall term opene d Sep ­
tembe r 16, 1916. 
Fo r full information, writ e to 
LESLIE PINCKNEY HILL, Principal. 
Mention TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 109 
Atlant a Universit y 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-seven years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWARD T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, CA. 
Knoxvill e Colleg e 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location . 
Th e Best Mora l and Spiritual Environ ­
ment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmo ­
sphere. Note d fo r Honest and Thoroug h 
Work . 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High School, 
Grammar School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Ter m Bega n Septembe r 21,1916 
For information address 
President R. W . M c GRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
ST . MARY' S SCHOO L 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of .the Sisters of St. Mary. 
Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
609 N. 43d St W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
Th e Colore d Teache r 
A Practical Educational Journal 
containing 
A Department of Methods and Practical Helps for 
Teachers; a Department of Rural Education; and a 
Department of Current Educational News, conducted 
by the best trained teachers; besides Editorials, etc. 
$1.00 per year, 10 cents per copy. Agents wanted. 
Address 
The Colored Teacher, Bo x 22, Wilberforce , Ohio. 
teachers ^ ^ v C a £
enc y furnishes the 
• Hi/*V>M*J-*1*J connecting medium in a business way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia. Illinois, Indiana, Kansas. Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, New York, North Carolina. Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania. Rhode Island, 
South Carolina, Tenressee, Texas, Virginia and West 
Virginia. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1403 New York Avenue Washington, D. C. 
Books ? 
See the Selected List on 
the Back Cove r 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA, G A 
College, Academy, Divinity- School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, ALL live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
WILE Y UNIVERSIT Y 
MARSHALL , TEXA S 
Recognized as a college of the First Qass 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
STRONGEST MUSIC DEPARTMENT IN THE WEST 
M. W. DOG AN. President 
FISK UNIVERSIT Y 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
IN Negro music. Special study IN Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
*High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE, President 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educationa l 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training, Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began Sept. 28th, 1916. 
For further information address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN, President 
BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Board. 
Mention TH I CVTRTR 110 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Stenography Typewriting Book-keeping 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
1. Short Courses in Typewriting 
2. Shorthand made as easy as A. B. C. 
3. Brief Courses in Practical Book-keeping 
W e typewrite Letters, Postal Cards, Wills; fill in 
Deeds and multigraph Circular Letters cheap. 
EDWARD T. DUNCAN, PRESIDENT 
1227 SO. 17TH STREET , PHILADELPHIA , PA. 
SHORTHAN D ^'i e standard system easily mas-
*ri"l » I nnlll / \ERED by our method. You write 
business letters the sixth lesson. Complete course of 20 lessons. 
Pay '.OI each proup when you are ready for them. Send ?3.00 
TODAY for enrollment and first lessons. Get started NOW. 
Sample lesson—fifty cents. 
PITMANIC INSTITUTE 
4277 Cote Brilliants, St. Louis, Mo. 
MME . BRIDGES ' SCHOO L OF 
French Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring and Millinery. 
BRIDGES SYSTEM. 
Special Courses in Designing, Copying, Draping, 
Making, Trimming, Finishing, Cutting and Fitting. 
Special reduction in tuition given to students entering in groups of three or more or to one student 
taking two or more consecutive courses. 
Individual Instruction. A Bridges Diploma means 
something to you. 
448 E. 35th St. Chicago. 111. 
LEARN THE S. T. TAYLOR SYSTEM 
of Garment Cutting, Fitting, Designing, Draping, Embroidery, Hand Decoration of Garments, Dressmaking and Ladies' Tailoring. 
Terms reasonable. Write for Catalog. 
S. T. TAYLOR SCHOOL AND PATTERN PARLORS 
Mrs. Maybe l B. Evans, PRIN. 
34 N. Garfield Avenue Columbus, O. 
TEACHER S 
—Science, Music, Mathematics. Wanted Teachers 
Rural Schools—Virginia—$30.00. Brick masonry, 
industrial school, $40.00—expenses. 
Standar d Teachers' Agenc y 
Established 1897 
1011 New York Avenue Washington, D. C . 
Let the 
- 4 iii 1 -
Coupon Plan 
Increase. ' 
Your Profits 
Mail Order Dealers 
Sell valuable instruction 
systems by cut price coupon under Money Back 
Guarantee. Big MARGIN . 
Small Selling Expense. 
Complete Plan, Sample 
Coupons and B A R G AI IF 
Bulletin sent on request. 
Mail Dealer's Coupon System 
521 Bo. Dearborn Street, Chicago 
SITUATION WANTED 
by 
Graduate of Oberlin Business College 
Competent in the following branches: 
Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, Penmanship. 
Has had actual experience and can furnish the best 
of references. 
Address: L. C. H, , care The CRISIS, 70 Fifth Ave., 
Ne w York. 
ROLAN D W . HAYES , Teno r 
Recitals Concerts , Oratorio Opera 
"A n unusually good voice. The natural 
quality is beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr . Hayes sings freely and with good 
taste."—Philip Hale, in the BOSTON HERALD. 
" A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre. 
—CHATTANOOGA TIMES. 
Address: 3 WARWICK ST.." BOSTON. MASS. 
F
ROFICIENCY in the treatment 
of the hair and the skin is the 
result only of conscientious, 
scientific study. A thorough 
knowledge of the hair and the skin in 
the minutest detail xs an absolute requirement for one who desires to do 
effective work in this important profession. It is tliis knowledge which is 
offered by Mrs. M. Watson Rudd at her 
modern and well-equipped 
Rose School of 
Beauty Culture 
Conducted by a Negro woman for 
the purpose of training Negro women
1 
whose object is to build up a business 
among a white clientele and who are 
striving for advancement in this profession, this school enables the student 
to obtain a high degree of efficiency at 
a very reasonable cost. 
. The course of instruction is scientifically planned so as to give correct 
principles of work by which the student 
may achieve success and successfully 
meet the demands of those whom she 
desires to serve; and a personal interest is taken by the teacher in each 
student who enters. 
Each student must be prepared to devote three months in close application 
to study and practice. Class lessons 
are conducted daily and students are 
required to have certain text books and 
note books for their work. When satisfactory theoretical development has 
been attained through work in the class 
room, the student is given practical 
work under the direction of the teacher 
and. is thereby able to secure that experience which is so necessary for her 
self-reliance and stability in work. 
This is the opportunity for the young 
Negro woman of culture and refinement 
who desires to enter upon a dignified, 
lucrative profession and who wishes to 
bring to that profession the best in 
ambition and intelligence. 
Address: 
Mrs. M. Watson Rudd 
Room 507 47 West j?d Street 
New York City 
Mention TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS 
VOL. 13—NO. 3 JANUARY, 1917 Whole NO. 75 
Editoria l 
THE WORLD LAST MONTH 
IL L last month we were asking what happened in the 
last election and why. This 
| fact stands out as true: The 
Solid South with its denial of Democratic government made a real verdict on Mr. Wilson and the rest of the 
country impossible.—The slave trade 
in Belgium comes strangely near to 
us and makes us remember that oppression and injustice know no color 
line.—Congress is so evenly divided 
that no legislation for or against the 
Negro is probable. This turns our 
attention to the Supreme Court where 
late in January the segregation cases 
will come up again.—Football has 
brought the black man to the fore. 
On two of the most important small 
college teams, colored boys have not 
only played, but they have played brilliantly against the greatest teams of 
the land, with only Princeton to insult them. How natural.—The sweeping of Prohibition over the country 
is, undoubtedly, getting at a great 
evil in the wrong way; but there is 
no doubt of the great evil and there 
is no doubt that the wrong way will 
help the colored laborer more than 
no way at all.—In the Great War, 
light is dawning for Poland, not simply German light (in which case we 
should doubt it), but out of the contending jealousies of all Europe the 
Polish people will, probably, come 
to their own and another suppressed race will have a chance for 
self development after a high noon 
of despair.—What will President Wilson do for the colored man? What 
will he do against him? We understand that when replying to the congratulations of certain Pullman porters, his voice shook. It needed shaking.—All hail to Mexico for standing 
to her guns of argument. 
SCHOOLS 
HAT is to become of the secondary and higher Negro 
schools that are not smiled 
upon by the ring of rich 
philanthropists represented by the 
General Education Board and like 
agencies? These excluded schools are 
undoubtedly in many cases poorly 
equipped and indifferently managed. 
At the same time they are doing and 
have done the real work of the education of the Negro race. Their accomplishment both in volume and in 
real efficient result has been ten times 
that of Hampton and Tuskegee Institutes for the simple reason that 
they outnumber these schools 10 0 to 
1 and deal with by far the greater 
number of the children of ten millions. 
Instead then of being sneered at 
and discouraged, they ought to be encouraged, and it is little less than a 
shame that the United States government With the aid of Thomas Jesse 
Jones is (as we are assured) about 
to issue a definitive report recommending all sorts of things tending 
to extinguish these struggling institutions. 
We are glad, however, that the National Training School, of Durham, 
North Carolina, despite this handi-112 THE CRISIS 
cap, has paid her debt and has just 
held a conference of far-reaching importance on the subject of Negro education. Representatives of Negroes, 
South and North, and of white men, 
North and South, were on the program and all the visitors were firmly impressed with the wide influence 
of this school as a center of good work 
and with the indefatigable work of 
her president. 
In the same way Atlanta University, long frowned upon because she 
persistently stood for the bigger 
things, is trying to raise on her fiftieth anniversary, a fund of $500,000. 
No school in the South has done a 
work -for Negro uplift that can for a 
moment be compared with that of 
Atlanta University. 
Fisk University, which has fortunately reached the edge of the approval 
of Organized Philanthropy, asks for 
a conservatory of music in memory of 
the Fisk Jubilee Singers. The response to this appeal should be immediate and generous and should come 
from black people and white. 
We must rally to the defense of our 
schools. We must repudiate this unbearable assumption of the right to 
kill institutions unless they conform 
to one narrow standard. 
LYNCHING 
FKJMJHII WO stories of lynchings have 
come to our attention which 
I ^ deserve editorial mention. 
ligMffl One comes from Thomasville, 
Georgia, and is as follows: 
"It seems that a young colored man, 
twenty-one years of age, was engaged in conversation with a colored woman. This woman was the 
sweetheart of a white man who shot 
and killed the colored man. A local 
colored undertaker before removing 
the body ordered an investigation 
which brought into the courts the defendant. The courts rendered a verdict of self-defense. Enraged at the 
activity of the undertaker, a band 
of 'Regulators' made a night attack 
upon his establishment, cutting the 
wires, etc. Failing to find him, they 
attacked the home of the slain man's 
mother, brutally thrashing her and 
also a brother who was ill. The undertaker, acting upon a 'bit of news' 
in a local white paper to the effect 
that such had been done to some 
'niggers,' who had insulted 'white 
gentlemen' and adding that the same 
fate awaited another interested 'nigger,' immediately left town. All of 
the colored persons concerned were 
law-abiding and prosperous citizens 
of Thomasville, Georgia." 
The other is the real story of the 
lynching of a woman in Georgia 
which has just come to light: 
"Sam Conley, a densely illiterate 
boy of seventeen years, lived with his 
sixty-year-old mother and wife on the 
plantation of one Gengia Melvin, 
white, three miles from Leary, Calhoun County, Georgia, said county being in the southwestern part of the 
state. Last fall this boy got into 
trouble about a colored girl, Mr. Melvin paying his seventy-five dollar fine. 
The boy, his mother, and wife contracted to cultivate on shares a fortyacre farm of Mr. Melvin's, thirty 
acres in cotton and the balance in 
corn and potatoes. Mr. Melvin was 
to divide the crop, first taking out the 
seventy-five dollars due him. 
"Sam Conley, his mother, and wife 
lived in a two-room house on the 
premises cultivated, about a quarter 
of a mile from Mr. Melvin's house. 
Along about the middle of September 
(the boy could not even name the 
month in which the offense was committed) he had ginned six bales of 
cotton which were turned over to Mr. 
Melvin and he had about two more in 
the field. On the Sunday before the 
homicide on Monday, Mr. Melvin 
told him to come the next day to work 
for him by the month, for ten dollars 
per month. The boy told him that EDITORIAL 113 
he, Mr. Melvin, would have to see his 
mother. 
"The next day, Monday, Sam Conley's mother went to Mr. Melvin's lot 
to help his cook, a colored woman, 
Fannie Glover, milk his seven cows. 
Sam Conley passed by the lot on his 
way to the cotton field and was 
stopped by Mr. Melvin, who began 
to curse at him for not coming to 
work for him that morning, picking 
up a large oak stick and while in the 
attitude of striking him the latter's 
mother begged him not to strike her 
boy, saying that he had neither said 
nor done anything to him; that she 
was not well and that she and her 
daughter-in-law could not gather the 
crop without her son. Thereupon, 
Mr. Melvin left the boy and advanced 
upon his mother, striking her first 
back of the neck, causing blood to 
flow freely, then on her wrist, then 
kicked her three times in her abdomen 
and after she had fallen to the ground, 
he struck her again with the stick, 
breaking the stick. Looking about 
he got another oak stick and was 
about to strike her again, Sam Conley 
and Mr. Melvin's cook all the while 
begging him not to strike her anymore, because she was already ill. 
"When Mr. Melvin was in the attitude of striking the prostrate woman 
again her son looked around and picking up a peat (an instrument used in 
weighing cotton), struck him with it 
(Conley does not remember what part 
of his body he struck), knocking him 
down. Then picking up his mother, 
he carried her to their home, a quarter of a mile away. He left home, 
hiding in the woods until near night, 
and reached a small place, Pretoria, 
Dougherty County, fifteen miles from 
Leary. He was arrested at Pretoria 
at night, and taken to Albany where 
he remained in jail until the next afternoon when he was taken by automobile to Americus from which place 
he was brought to Macon jail on the 
midnight train. While on the way 
from Albany to Americus the sheriff 
informed him of the lynching of his 
mother, assuring him that he, the 
sheriff, was taking him where he 
would be safe. 
"By correspondence .with people 
living in that section we learn that 
the boy's mother and wife were arrested that same day and placed in 
the little guardhouse at Leary, from 
which his mother was taken that 
night, carried a little distance from 
the town and her body riddled with 
bullets, her eyes being punched out. 
Her body was placed on the public 
highway, where it remained several 
hours. Colored people living in that 
neighborhood were, upon pain of being killed, compelled to inter her remains. 
"The boy did not know that he had 
killed the man until told so by the 
sheriff. He says he did not intend 
to kill him, but merely intended to 
keep him from hitting his mother 
again, who he thought was already 
dead. 
"The white man was about fifty 
years old, having several grown children, none of whom lived with him. 
He was separated from his wife because he practically lived with his 
Negro cook, Fannie Glover, whose 
house was in his yard." 
A LETTER AND AN ANSWER 
Springfield, 111., Nov. 2, 1916. 
Y DEAR MR. SPINGARN: 
Last August when I was 
away and my mail was beiii ing dammed up here in 
Springfield, your invitation to the 
Amenia Conference arrived. Since 
then I have let everything go for a 
new book. Pardon me. My mail gets 
heavier every day and I can not yet 
afford a stenographer. 
I send my belated thanks, being at 
last able to get into my mail again. 
Be sure I was with you in spirit. 
My "Congo," and "Booker T. Wash-114 THE CRISIS 
ington Triology," have both been denounced by the colored people for reasons that I can not fathom. As far 
as I can see, they have not taken the 
trouble to read them through. The 
third section of "The Congo" is certainly as hopeful as any human being 
dare to be in regard to any race, and 
the "John Brown" is certainly not an 
unsympathetic poem; and "King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba" is a 
prophecy of a colored Utopia. Yet 
T H E CRISIS took the trouble to skin 
me not long ago. This in face of the 
fact that they had published with 
great approval my story of "The 
Golden-Faced People" in T H E CRISIS 
of November, 1914. That is the 
index to all subsequent work. 
I presume some of the men in your 
movement who have an intelligent 
angle on my intentions are responsible for my invitation to the Amenia 
Conference. When two or three of 
them get together sometime, I wish 
they would re-read "The Congo" (see 
volume of that name), the "Booker 
Washington Triology," in Poetry, A 
Magazine of Verse (543 Cass Street, 
Chicago), June, 1916, and also T H E 
CRISIS article aforesaid. I would like 
to draw your attention also to pages 
forty-seven and forty-eight in the 
"Art of the Moving Picture," where 
I have discussed the Reverend 
Thomas Dixon. 
And after you have read this letter, 
I would appreciate it if you will send 
a copy to the editor of T H E CRISIS, 
to be printed, if he cares to do so. 
Personally, Mr. DuBois has been most 
courteous, but I can not understand 
his editorial attitude. Add a word to 
this letter if you care to do so. 
Very sincerely, 
NICHOLAS VACHEL LINDSAY. 
difference between a poet's pageantry 
and a people's despair. 
No colored man doubts your good 
intentions, but many of them doubt 
your understanding of their hopes. 
You look about you and see a black 
world full of a strange beauty different from that of the white world; 
they look about them and see other 
men with exactly the same feelings 
and desires who refuse to recognize 
the resemblance. You look forward 
to a colored Utopia separate and different from the hope of the white 
man; they have only one overwhelming desire, and that is to share in a 
common civilization in which all distinctions of race are blurred (or forgotten) by common aspiration and 
common labors. 
Your poetry is wonderfully beautiful, and the poems on black men and 
women are no less beautiful than the 
rest. How can we fail to be grateful 
for all this beauty? But somehow we 
feel (and I say "we " because in this 
I share the feelings of the colored 
race), somehow we feel that you do 
not write about colored humanity as 
you write about white humanity. We 
remember your poem on "John Altgeld" (to mention only one), and 
realize that your heart goes out to— 
"The widow bereft of her crust, and 
the boy without youth, 
The mocked and the scorned and the 
wounded, the lame and the poor " 
but somehow we feel that for you, 
black men and women are not like 
others who have been mocked and 
scorned and wounded, but beings a 
little different from other sufferers 
who do not share the same ancestry 
and the same color of skin. 
Faithfully yours, 
J. E. SPINGARN. 
Amenia, N. Y., Nov. 6, 1916. 
My dear Mr. Lindsay: 
I wish you had been able to attend 
the Amenia Conference, and perhaps 
then vou would have understood the 
NE by one our friends of the 
early abolition group pass. 
The death of Francis Jackson 
Garrison, the son of William 
Lloyd Garrison, is announced. EDITORIAL 115 
MIGRATION AND HELP 
HE CRISIS wishes to repeat 
its insistence that the working men from the South who 
can be assured of reasonably 
good employment in the North should 
without hesitation come to the North 
as a means of self-defense and as the 
most effective protest against Southern lynching, lawlessness, and general 
deviltry. 
On the other hand, T H E CRISIS recognizes what a peculiar responsibilty 
rests upon the North in this new migration. It knows, however, of one 
instance where this responsibility is 
being splendidly recognized. In New 
Haven, Connecticut, The New York, 
New Haven and Hartford Railroad 
imported a large number of Negro 
workers. They were collected without discrimination and they represented all kinds and conditions of 
men, but more especially the worst. 
They were housed in old box cars and 
generally neglected. 
Here was the nucleus for a new 
Negro problem for New Haven. What 
did colored New Haven do ? The Reverend Edward Goin, a leading colored minister, went to the authorities 
of the railroad and pointed out their 
duty. He succeeded in getting a decent box car fitted up for them as a 
social center. He got colored Yale 
students to work with him and began 
a campaign of social uplift which 
must in the long run solve the 
problem. 
In addition to this, George W. 
Crawford, a colored lawyer, began negotiations with a great manufacturing firm looking toward carefulry selected migration of colored workers 
who could enter positions where promotion was possible. 
Thus, two sides of the problem were 
attacked. Let the good work go on 
both North and South. 
11 
FRAUD 
E are now and then compelled to bring to the notice of the public, efforts to 
defraud the colored people. 
Some' of these efforts are mentioned 
because of our personal interest. For 
instance, there is traveling in Virginia and North Carolina, a certain 
man named Thomas Hopkins, claiming to be of High Point, North Carolina, and of Watertown, New York, 
who is fraudulently taking subscriptions for T H E CRISIS. Any information leading to knowledge of his present whereabouts and operations will 
be received in our office with great 
joy. 
Also, the National Publication Company, of Montgomery, Alabama, is 
advertising an encyclopedia of the colored race and is announcing the editor of this magazine as one of its 
associate editors. This is a falsehood 
and the public is herewith so warned. 
TWO FRIENDS 
HAVE lost two friends, curious in their unlikeness, yet 
singularly alike. The one, Inez 
Milholland, viewed the worldscene with a certain clean-cut clearness. Her passion was Truth and 
where its pitiless logic led, she walked 
with seeing feet, splendidly unafraid. 
The other friend, William Alpheus 
Hunton, lifted his groping hands to 
God and Good, and set his fine face 
and prophet eyes toward yonder 
cloudy headlands where setting suns 
mistily disclose unproven wonders. 
I think these two knew nothing of 
each other. Between them rose the 
wall of race and sex and all of Culture's queer convention. Yet, in the 
world's deep meaning, they were one 
and hand-in-hand walked down its 
puzzling crag-strewn paths with 
hearts ablaze. They are dead. They 
have earned their entrance to the 
Court of Peace and today they dream 
their mighty Dreams. Amen. 116 THE CRISIS 
CENSORSHI P 
B Y THE LATE INEZ MILHOLLAND 
WHEN there is a question of good and 
bad involved, I am most distinctly 
opposed to suppressing the bad as a means 
of establishing the good. I would let them 
flourish side by side, certain that the really 
good would, in the end, prevail and outlive 
the bad, and certain likewise that, given 
freedom of reflection, all people would 
eventually repudiate the bad in favor of the 
good. Why ? Because that would be in 
accord with the fundamental instinct of 
self-preservation since what is good for the 
individual organism is good for the race, 
and the good of the race is the sum total of 
all morality that we know anything about. 
Let evil flourish unsuppressed by all 
means. If it is really evil it will kill itself 
by the very poison it distils. The best that 
we can do is to put up a danger sign for 
those who are inclined in its direction, 
warning them of its harmful properties. 
If we hide the thing away people are apt 
to come upon it unaware of its power for 
injury and it may kill. 
To suppress evil is to drive it underground, not to exterminate it. Incidentally, 
underground is about the only place where 
it can take root and flourish. "But," protest those who are for suppressing the 
"Birth of a Nation," "do you mean to say 
that you would permit a falsification and 
perjury of this kind to continue?" Yes, I 
would—that and much more noxious things 
than that, and I would permit anything that 
anyone chose to produce. "But, Heavens! 
on what theory?" This: (1) That it is difficult, if not impossible, to counteract the 
effect of a secretly acquired evil, whether it 
be a disease, an idea, or a poison; whereas 
the evil that is known is more easy to combat. (2) That nothing so reinforces an 
evil thing (or a good thing either for that 
matter) like any attempt to suppress it. 
(3 ) That it is a supreme right of every individual to judge for himself and not to 
have the judgment of any group or any 
individual thrust upon him, no matter how 
wise or good that group or individual may 
be. (4) That only by such independence 
of judgment may judgment be trained and 
developed and the training of individuals in 
judgment and everything else is, I take it, 
TH E LAT E INE Z MILHOLLAN D 
what we are here for. (5 ) That such training of individuals to make use of their own 
independent processes is worth ten thousand 
times more than any spoon-fed system of 
seemly conduct that it is possible to conceive. 
But to "let evil flourish" by no means 
ends the responsibility of the lover of individual liberty. He must proceed to set up 
fine standards, worthy standards with which 
to contrast the evil, so that the public may 
have opportunities for comparison and selection. Without such opportunities they 
inevitably absorb the only thing at hand, 
which- happens to be evil. Your liberty 
lover must take pains, too, to point out the 
falsities and dangers of the evil thing, and 
its consequences. All that education is able 
to give in the way of protection from evil 
he must give. The only instrument he may 
not touch is the instrument of the lazy man 
—suppression. 
In the case of "The Birth of a Nation," 
the thing for those of us to do who consider 
it a libel and a forgery, is to say so, and to 
publish all the facts in our possession. 
I protest against "The Birth of a Nation" as vigorously as my neighbor. I find 
it historically false, untrue to life, bad art, 
melodramatic, and meretricious, caddish, 
dull, and exaggerated, but I would not sup-MAMMY 117 
press it for all that, just because it does not 
happen to suit my taste or morals. I would 
try, rather, to extend my taste and morals 
to as many people as possible in the hope 
that next year a production of this sort will 
be aesthetically and ethically impossible to 
a more dramatically educated public. Melodrama on the stage has vanished. Wh y not 
melodrama in the movies? False as it is to 
history, life, and drama the film cannot do 
much harm; not half as much as any attempt to suppress it would do to liberty and 
freedom of thought. The Negroes need not 
be disturbed except by the snobbish attempt 
to picture them as ignoble in every capacity 
except that of servant. 
On the other hand and as a final argument in favor of non-suppression, a discussion of the Negro problem has been precipitated which has done untold good as all discussions do. Points of view have been crystallized, prejudices cleared away and the 
issues between the Negro's friends and his 
enemies made clear. Those who have faith 
in the Negro race and its capacities know 
better the reasons for their faith; while the 
belittlers of the Negro have had a stamp 
given to their opposition which shows its 
true colors. We all know now where we 
are at, at heart. 
From the friction engendered, from the 
clash of view point more light will come— 
an infinitely better thing than any negative 
and apathetic attitude could produce. 
MAMM Y 
A. STORY 
By ADELIN E F. RIES 
"|*y|"AMMY'S heart felt heavy indeed when 
x
 -*• (the time was now two years past) 
marriage had borne Shiela, her "white 
baby," away from the Governor's plantation 
to the coast. But as the months passed, the 
old colored nurse became accustomed to the 
change, until the great jo y brought by the 
news that Shiela had a son, made her reconciliation complete. Besides, had there not 
always been Lucy, Mammy's own "black 
baby," to comfort her? 
Yes, up to that day there had always 
been Lucy; but on that very day the young 
Negress had been sold—sold like common 
household ware!—and (the irony of it 
chilled poor Mammy's leaden heart)—she 
had been sold to Shiela as nurse to the 
baby whose birth, but four days earlier had 
caused Mammy so much rejoicing. The 
poor slave could not believe that it was true, 
and as she buried her head deeper into the 
pillows, she prayed that she might wake to 
find it all a dream. 
But a reality it proved and a reality 
which she dared not attempt to change. 
For despite the Governor's customary kindness, she knew from experience, that any 
interference on her part would but result 
in serious floggings. One morning each 
week she would go to his study and he 
would tell her the news from the coast and 
then with a kindly smile dismiss her. 
So for about a year, Mammy feasted her 
hungering soul with these meagre scraps of 
news, until one morning, contrary to his 
wont, the Governor rose as she entered the 
room, and he bade her sit in a chair close 
to his own. Placing one of his white hands 
over her knotted brown ones, he read aloud 
the letter he held in his other hand: 
"Dear Father:— 
"I can hardly write the sad news and 
can, therefore, fully appreciate how difficult it will be for you to deliver it verbally. 
Lucy was found lying on the nursery floor 
yesterday, dead. The physician whom I 
immediately summoned pronounced her 
death a case of heart-failure. Break it 
gently to my dear old mammy, father, and 
tell her too, that the coach, should she wish 
to come here before the burial, is at her 
disposal. "You r daughter, 
"SHIELA." 
While he read, the Governor unconsciously nerved himself to a violent outburst 
of grief, but none came. Instead, as he 
finished, Mammy rose, curtsied, and made 
as if to withdraw. A t the door she turned 
back and requested the coach, "if it weren't 
asking too much," and then left the room. 
She did not return to her cabin; simply 
stood at the edge of the road until the coach 
with its horses and driver drew up, and then 
she entered. From that time and until 118 THE CRISIS 
nightfall she did not once change the upright 
position she had assumed, nor did her eyelids once droop over her staring eyes. "They 
took her from me an' she died"—"They took 
her from me an' she died"—over and over 
she repeated the same sentence. 
When early the next morning Mammy 
reached Shiela's home, Shiela herself came 
down the road to meet her, ready with 
words of comfort and love. But as in years 
gone by, it was Mammy who took the golden 
head on her breast, and patted it, and bade 
the girl to dry her tears. As of old, too, 
it was Mammy who first spoke of other 
things; she asked to be shown the baby, 
and Shiela only too willingly led the way 
to the nursery where in his crib the child 
lay cooing to itself. Mammy took up the 
little body and again and again tossed it 
up into the air with the old cry, "Up she 
goes, Shiela," till he laughed aloud. 
Suddenly she stopped, and clasping Lhe 
child close she took a hurried step towards 
the open window. At a short distance from 
the house rolled the sea and Mammy gazed 
upon it as if fascinated. And as she 
stared, over and over the words formed 
themselves: "They took her from me an' 
she died,"—"They took her from me an' 
she died." 
From below came the sound of voices, 
"They're waiting for you, Mammy,"—it 
was Shiela's soft voice that spoke—"to take 
Lucy—you understand, dear." 
Mammy's eyes remained fixed upon the 
waves,—"I can't go—g o foh me, chile, 
won't you? " And Shiela thought that she 
understood the poor woman's feelings and 
without even pausing to kiss her child she 
left the room and joined the waiting slaves. 
Mammy heard the scraping as of a heavy 
box upon the gravel below; heard the tramp 
of departing footsteps as they grew fainter 
and fainter until they died away. Then 
and only then, did she turn her eyes from 
the wild waters and looking down at the 
child in her arms, she laughed a low, peculiar laugh. She smoothed back the golden 
ringlets from his forehead, straightened 
out the little white dress, and then, choosing 
a light covering for his head, she descended 
the stairs and passed quietly out of the 
house. 
A short walk brought Mammy and her 
burden to the lonely beach; at the water's 
edge she stood still. Then she shifted the 
child's position until she supported his 
weight in her hands and with a shrill cry 
of "Up she goes, Shiela," she lifted him 
above her head. Suddenly she flung her 
arms forward, at the same time releasing 
her hold of his little body. A large breaker 
caught him in its foanv swept him a few 
feet towards the shore and retreating, carried him out into the sea 
A few hours later, two slaves in frantic 
search for the missing child found Mammy 
on the beach tossing handfuls of sand into 
the air and uttering loud, incoherent cries. 
And as they came close, she pointed towards 
the sea and with the laugh of a mad-woman 
shouted: "They took her from me an' she 
died!" 
EBO N MAI D AN D GIR L O F MIN E 
By Lucian B. Watkins ^ 
rT"1HE sweetest charm of all the earth 
Came into being with her birth. 
All that without her we would lack, 
She is in purity and black. 
The pansy and the violet— 
The dark of all the flowers met 
And gave their wealth of color in 
The ebon beauty of her skin. 
Wrought winds of evening are her face, 
Gentle with love and rich in grace; 
The burning splendors of her eyes 
Ar e jewels from the midnight skies; 
Her nestling-raven hair, close-curled, 
The Ancient wonder of the world 
Seems, in its strange, uncertain length, 
A deathless crown—a mighty strength. 
Her smile—it is the rising moon, 
The waking of a night in June; 
Her teeth are tips of white, that gleam 
Like starlights in a happy dream; 
Her laughter is the Christmas bell 
Of "Peace on earth" and "All is well; " 
Her voice—it is the dearest part 
Of all the glory in her heart: 
The height of joy, the deep of tears, 
The surging passions of the years, 
The mystery and dark of things— 
We feel their meanings when she sings. 
Her garments gracefully caress 
Her tender form of sinlessness, 
And on her bosom's curves sublime 
Make love's eternal rhythm and rhyme. 
Her thoughts are pure and everyone 
But makes her good to look upon. 
Daughter of God! You are divine, 
O Ebon Maid and Girl of Mine! TH E LATE WILLIAM A. HUNTO N 
William ALPHEU S HUNTO N was 
born and educated at Chatham, Ontario. After graduating from Wilberforce 
Institute he secured, at Ottawa, a clerkship 
in the Canadian Civil Service. Soon he connected himself with the Young Men's Christian Association in that city and became 
especially identified with the Bible Class 
work and the boys' work, and his labors 
were very acceptable. 
The attention of one of the international 
secretaries on a visit to Ottawa was called 
to Mr. Hunton, who impressed him of his 
qualifications to be a leader of this movement among colored people. This led to 
him being called to 
undertake the secretaryshi p of the 
colored Young Men's 
Christian Association 
at Norfolk, Virginia. 
At first he almost refused to consider the 
proposition, but said 
he would think it over. 
He came back the next 
morning and said "I 
will go. " Against the 
advice of his pastor 
and friends he went 
to Norfolk to take up 
the work, and to this 
day he is esteemed by 
the citizens , both 
white and colored. 
After beginning his 
work, Mr. Hunton had 
many dark days and 
trying experiences in 
dealing with a group 
of people who were 
unacquainted with the Association work and 
its methods. 
Developing in capacity and leadership as 
secretary of the Norfolk Branch, he rendered occasional service to the International 
Committee in the extension of Association 
work among colored young men. 
The result of this occasional visitation by 
him was so satisfactory that in December, 
1890, he accepted a call to become the first 
colored secretary of that committee. Until 
1898 he was the only secretary of his race 
engaged in supervisory work. He was 
joined in that year by an associate, Dr. J. 
E. Moorland. The force has since been increased to six men. 
As a successful pioneer, Mi'. Hunton traveled throughout, the country as an organizer and he did his best to establish the 
spirit of the movement in the hearts of the 
people. His most outstanding work was 
in the colleges. He had a tremendous influence upon the student life of the colored race. Many promising Negro leaders 
today, and those who will certainly be leaders tomorrow, have been influenced by his 
beautiful, simple, trustful'life. He had no 
interest, whatever, in personal aggrandizement or factional debate, but his one purpose was to advance the unity of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ 
among men of all conditions and races. His 
acceptance as a speaker on convention platForms is well known 
by the brotherhood in 
America and in foreign lands. His address at the World's 
Student Christia n 
Federation, in Japan, 
was one among the 
best delivered and the 
same was said of his 
address a year ago at 
the World's Conference at Lake Mohonk. 
Mr. Hunton was 
married to'Miss Addie 
Waytes, a prominent 
school teacher of Norfolk, Virginia, in 1893. 
He has been a faithful and devoted husband and a loving 
father. His devotion to his brothers and 
sisters was a strong evidence of what the 
ties of kinship may be made to mean in 
this life. He was always a safe confidant, 
and wise counsellor and one who bore the 
burdens of his friends with them. His life 
was true and sweet and will ever be held 
up before young men as an example worthy 
of highest emulation. 
In his last moments he remarked that it 
would be only a few days and he would go. 
He smiled when he was told that 
though he was leaving, his work would 
be carried on and his name never forgotten. 
TH E LAT E WILLIA M A. HUNTO N 
119 National Association for the Ad 
vancement of Colored People 
THE ANNUAL MEETING 
T N accordance with the Constitution of 
The National Association for the Ad ­
vancement of Colored People, our annual 
meeting will be held in New Yor k City on 
January 2, 1917. The afternoon session, 
which will be held in the assembly hall 
of The United Charities Building, 105 East 
Twenty-second Street, at 2:30 P. M., will 
be devoted to the reports of the national 
officers, the election of officers, and the 
transaction of business. The Nominating 
Committee, consisting of Mrs. Florence Kelley, Joseph P. Loud, and Archibald H. 
Grimke, appointed by the Chairman of the 
Board of Directors, Dr. J. E. Spingarn, in 
accordance with Article VIII of the Constitution, submits the following list of nominations for members of the Board of Directors for the term expiring January, 1920: 
Miss Jane Addams, Chicago. 
Dr. C E. Bentley, Chicago. 
Rev. Hutehins C. Bishop, New York. 
Dr. F. N. Cardozo, Baltimore. 
Dr. W. E. B. DuBois, New York. 
Mrs. Florence Kelley, New York. 
Miss Mary White Ovington, Brooklyn." 
Mr. Charles Edward Russell, New York. 
Dr. John G. Underhill, Brooklyn. 
Miss Irene Lewissohn, New York. 
The evening session, through the courtesy 
of Dr. Bishop, will be held at St. Philips 
Church, 212 West 134th Street, at 8.15 
P. M., and will be devoted to the reports 
of the branches, and to a discussion of 
means for effecting closer relations between 
the branches, the directors, and the national executive officers. Each branch is 
urged most earnestly to send an official delegate to report in person, and to send his 
name to the secretary before the program 
goes to press December 26. Every member 
of the N. A. A. C. P. who can possibly reach 
New York should make an especial effort 
to attend. 
Dinner at sixty cents a plate will be 
served between the two sessions under the 
auspices of the New York Branch and we 
want to make it a big party. Please notify 
the National Secretary, Roy Nash, if you 
desire seats. 
THE ABBEVILLE LYNCHING 
T
HE full story of the lynching of An ­
thony Crawford in Abbeville, South 
Carolina, which was investigated on the 
ground by the secretary of the N. A . A. 
C. P., appeared in the Independent for December 11. There are, however, two items 
which must be recorded here; first: A s a 
result of the secretary's visit, Governor 
Manning has written a letter to Oswald 
Garrison Villard, vice-president of the N. AA. C. P., in which he says: 
"I realize the gravity of this offense and 
am determined to do everything in my 
power to bring the offenders to justice. I 
have called on the sheriff of Abbeville 
County to take the necessary steps to prevent any unlawful action with regard to 
the expulsion of the family of Crawford. 
"I am giving serious consideration to 
this matter with a view to making recommendations to the legislature, so as to be 
able to deal with such conditions when they 
arise." 
Secondly, the Crawford family was not 
expelled on November 15. 
GOVERNO R MANNING , OF SOUT H CAROLIN A 
THE VANDERVALL CASE 
T T is a great pleasure to record that the 
attorneys interested by the N. A. A. C. P. 
120 N. A. A. C. P. 121 
in the case of Dr. Isabel Vandervall, who 
was refused admittance to The Women's 
and Children's Hospital, of Syracuse, New 
York, because of her color and after they 
had contracted to admit her as an interne, 
were able to secure a substantial offer of 
settlement for Dr. Vandervall without 
bringing the case to trial. 
GAINING STRENGTH IN THE SOUTH 
4 4'T^ O be a race woman in New Orleans 
A is a crime at best," writes J. B. 
Montgomery, in the Chicago Defender, "but 
to be one and a prisoner is doubly so. Girls, 
mere babes, and women, for the least offense 
are put to work on the public streets of 
New Orleans whenever there is a question 
as to their color. .. . I have spoken to 
the preachers and leading men and women 
of the town time and again to protest these 
wrongs perpetrated on our women and 
every devilish preacher will tell you to keep 
quiet as the white folks are letting us live. 
"On my return to the city, I was glad to 
see the news that The National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People will 
make an attack on the use of our women 
prisoners to clean gutters and public parks 
with a red neck slave driver with a Winchester or automatic to shoot her down 
should she rebel. The association need not 
expect any help from the preachers. . . . 
My last plea to my people is to help the 
N. A. A . C. P. in their fight and ask for the 
resignation of every preacher who cannot 
show a college diploma." 
Without going into the question of the 
justice or injustice of Mr. Montgomery's 
remarks about the apathy of these pastors, 
it is worthy that the other half of his statement should be heralded throughout the 
land. That the N. A. A. C. P. can organize 
in the far South is a noteworthy evidence 
of growing strength; that the New Orleans 
Branch has the courage and the ability to 
initiate and carry on this kind of a fight 
is a fact of which the whole organization 
may be proud. 
THE MODEL SCHOOLS OF GARY, 
INDIANA 
THE Gary Branch is very much worried 
over the question of segregation in the 
schools. A teacher writes: 
"Six years ago when I became connected 
with these schools, the colored children were 
in a building by themselves. Later, a large 
building, The Krocbel School, was completed 
and both colored and white children placed 
in it, the colored classes remaining separate 
as when in the former building. All the formal work of the colored children in the first 
five grades was done with colored teachers 
in separate classes, the special teachers receiving them in the same way as class units. 
"In September last, two classes were removed from the Frocbcl building to a small 
school more convenient to their homes, as 
it appeared, and the idea became spread 
abroad that it was done because they were 
colored. A committee of the Gary Branch 
of the N. A. A. C. P. visited the superintendent and School Board with but small 
satisfaction." 
Of the accuracy of the last statement we 
have no doubt. Superintendent Wirt, in 
reply to a protest from national headquarters, makes it clear that the branch is right 
in entertaining suspicions. He says: "The 
colored children in the public schools in 
Gary, Indiana, have been segregated from 
the very beginning. It is a settled policy in 
this community to continue this segregation." No wonder the Gary schools are considered as models throughout the land. 
OUR CHAIRMAN POPULAR IN THE 
SOUTH 
WE are sure that it was a mere oversight on the part of the reporter that 
the Columbia State omitted to mention that 
the lecturer spoken of below is chairman of 
the Board of Directors of The National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People. 
"The series of five lectures to be delivered 
at the University of South Carolina this 
week by Dr. J. E. Spingarn, formerly professor of comparative literature at Columbia University, on the history and development of literary criticism, saw a gratifying 
beginning yesterday when many graduate 
students and seniors at the university and 
members of the faculties of Chicora College 
for Women, Columbia College, and the seminaries, as well as many women from the 
city, heard Dr. Spingarn's lecture on "Critical Theories of the Greeks and Romans." 
"His lectures are informal and discussion 
and questions by the audience are always 
welcomed. Although he is a leading authority on literary criticism in this country, the 
broad and profound conceptions of the subject which he imparts to his audience are 
clothed with a simplicity and charm that 
render them all the more understandable. 
The pleasing personality of this eminent 
scholar and author adds to the pleasure and 
enthusiasm of the series." The Outer Pocket 
ENCLOSED find my check on Alliance 
Bank of Rochester, N. Y., in favor 
of 0 . G. Villard, Treas., for $10, being another contribution to your Anti-lynching 
Fund; this to cover that at Gainesville, Fla. 
I wonder if I can afford to give $10 for 
every lynching that you describe in a fair 
and unbiased manner—simply stating the 
facts? I am ready to try it—may have to 
cut it down to five. 
G. R. CARTER 
[Ex-Governor of Hawaii.] 
Loon Lake, N. Y. 
Some of the stories and poems which have 
appeared in your magazine I have enjoyed, 
but none have so appealed to me as " A 
Fragment" in a recent number. I have 
read it twice, alone, and to others with a 
choking in my throat. Its beautiful tribute 
to a mother willing to sacrifice all for her 
daughter's education and chance in life is 
most touching. The self-effacing purity of 
the love of the girl for the man she dared 
not love openly, is almost too pathetic. It 
is charmingly written and the story is, I 
believe, a true picture of the ambitions and 
heart-suffering of many of the Negro race. 
It must appeal to the best in every man 
and woman who reads it. If the day will 
but soon come when the Negro may have 
the same chance as those of all other races! 
ALEXIX A CARTER BARRELL. 
Boston, Mass. 
I read with interest "A Fragment" and 
it reminds me of the sayings of the old 
Southern white man, " A Grief Nigger, " and 
I do not think stories of that type should go 
to print in a Negro journal as there is 
nothing to learn or elevating in the reading, 
and the writing substantiates my theory 
that there is little or no hope for the Negro 
along many lines. He is of two bloods and 
each blood is demanding his attention. You 
know the Negro man has always demanded 
the service of his women and confiscated 
their money which accounts for their desire for the love of the white man. 
C. P. DUNCAN. 
Oakland. Cal. 
I noticed in your issue for October a mention of A. T. Smith, of this city and formerly Managing Editor of the Paul Quinn 
Weekly, in which you say he is still in jail 
and has been for a month or more. Smith 
has been in jail for more than four months. 
He was indicted for criminal libel. He was 
tried about three weeks ago and convicted 
and is still in jail serving his sentence. He 
was arraigned for trial without an attorney to defend him and the college for which 
he worked refused to help and left him to 
his fate. I volunteered my services rather 
than see him go to slaughter without an 
advocate. A jury was waived and I tried 
the case before the court. The State asked 
that he be given the extreme penalty—two 
years in jail. The court room was full of 
spectators. The trial began Monday morning and closed Tuesday evening. The judge 
gave him a sentence of one year and allowed him the benefit of the four months 
he had served, making in fact an eight 
months' sentence. They took him to the 
county roads as a county convict under the 
laws of this State to do hard labor. I moved 
to commute his sentence by paying a dollar 
a day and have him remain in jail. The 
court said he was without law to do so, but 
granted me a hearing to show what law I 
had for it, with the effect that Smith came 
back from the road. I had raised among 
the colored folk by subscription about $34 
and paid his first month's wages over to 
the county treasurer. If I can not keep this 
up he will go back to the convict gang to 
work on the roads of the county. The entire trial of Joe Washington was reviewed 
on this trial and the articles that Smith 
wrote were read, and to say the least, he 
took this city to- task harder than any I 
have read on this lynching. I feared violence would be practiced during the trial, 
but everybody choked it down. The colored people here were afraid to help him 
and afraid for me to do so, but I believed 
in his innocence and could not refrain from 
coming to his assistance. It is all over now 
and he faces a jail sentence of about seven 
more months. I wish he could be helped, 
as I feel sure I can do more for him yet 
as white sentiment has changed since the 
trial. 
122 THE OUTER POCKET 123 
There were two of them indicted for the 
same offence; another, Zelford Carter, remains to be tried, but I have almost an assurance that I will turn him loose. 
R. D. EVANS. 
Waco, Tex. 
May I ask you to kindly alter your statement of the purpose of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People so that a humble American citizen 
like myself may be included? The statement 
reads: "It believes colored men and women 
must organize, etc." I do not admit these 
exclusive privileges in that matter and ask 
that you modify the statement to read: "It 
believes American citizens white and colored 
must organize and fight for the full rights 
of colored citizens and all other native-born 
American citizens." 
GEORGE G. BRADFORD. 
Boston, Mass. 
I am a poor, working man and a constant 
reader of TH E CRISIS. It makes my heart 
leap for jo y to know that some one can and 
will help the poor colored people of the 
South. I am a Southerner myself and I 
know something about conditions down 
there. I have only been here one month 
and, of course, a working man from the 
South—you know what chance I have had 
there. 
I only wish I could give the whole $10,000 
for the Anti-lynching Fund and I think 
there are thousands who would gladly do 
so if they were able. I honestly believe 
it is not because we are so narrow-minded 
about helping the fund; I believe it is 
financial matters that keep us from it. 
But in the future I hope I may be better 
qualified to help the good cause. 
L. W. WHITNEK. 
Omaha, Neb. 
As a staunch member of the race I am 
herewith enclosing for your information a 
few facts about this city. The Northern 
Railroad has been recruiting Negroes from 
the South to work on the road. This has 
caused considerable uneasiness among some 
of the white folks here who "make money 
off of Negro labor." The Mayor, Chamber 
of Commerce and quite a number of associations have protested to the president of 
this road asking that these Negroes be not 
taken from here. Whenever the Negroes 
gather around the depot to leave the police 
arrest and beat just as many as they can. 
The Mayor issued orders to arrest any 
Negroes found standing on the street corners or around the recruiting office. The 
police became so bad about beating the Negroes that it was necessary to have the 
Mayor to ask them not to use their clubs 
so freely on these poor fellows. 
The City Council in this city and in many 
others immediately passed a law making the license $1,000 for recruiting, a clipping of which I am enclosing. Notice the 
editorial of one of the leading papers of 
the city. Also note how they are treating 
my people just a few miles from here in 
this lynching matter and yet the white 
people object to them leaving. They are 
wanted here to work cheap and be killed 
for the least thing they do. I hold an important position in this city and for that 
reason will not possibly give you my name 
until I hear from you and you assure me 
that whatever I write you under my signature will be treated confidentially. 
The Federal Government established an 
office in the Post Office Building yesterday 
for the purpose of recuiting Negroes North 
to work. This office was on the fourth 
floor. They would not let Negroes ride up 
on the elevator, but made them walk up. 
The city authorities then got busy and 
placed policemen in front of the building 
and there they began to arrest and abuse 
every Negro they could get their hands on. 
I understand (this I do not know for a 
fact) that the U. S. Marshal then appeared 
on the scene and told the city authorities 
that those Negroes were on Government 
property; that they were not to be molested. Immediately then the Mayor, 
Board of Trade, Chamber of Commerce and 
a few prominent individuals telegraphed 
U. S. Senators Fletcher and Bryan from 
this State and also the Congressmen asking 
that they use their influence to have the 
order revoked in Washington. 
Nearly 1,000 Negroes have left the State, 
and I forgot to tell you that the majority 
of them had to go out to the city limits and 
catch the train as it was passing since the 
policemen would not let them go through 
the depot. This exodus has created great 
amazement down here and what few Negroes are left have had their wages raised 
and are being treated somewhat better. 
Jacksonville, Fla. COLORED RICHMON D 
By E. D. Caffee. 
ICHMOND, VIRGINIA , lies 115 miles 
south of Washington, and ninety miles 
from the mouth of the James River at 
Chesapeake Bay. Originally this modern 
Rome was "delightfully situated on seven 
hills overhanging the James River." The 
city site was founded September 19, 1735, 
by Colonel William Byrd and seven years 
later it was formally established as a 
town by a special act of the Virginia Assembly, in 1742. But soon the white settlers drove back the Indian savages to 
enlarge their borders until they had gone 
far beyond the tidewater settlements. 
Hence, in 1779, the seat of the State Government was moved from Williamsburg to 
Richmond, which was incorporated as a city 
in 1782. 
In 1781, the forty-eighth year after Richmond was founded, its population was only 
1800, over 900 of whom were Negro slaves. 
In 1916, when the city was 181 years old, 
the total population numbered 156,6S7, of 
which 62,676 were Negroes. 
It is evident, then, that Negroes were in 
Richmond before and at the time of its 
founding, many of them having worked on 
the farm of Nathaniel Bacon, the rebel. 
If the truth had been written, we would 
be able to say that Negroes cleared the 
forest on which the city is founded. An 
inscription cornerstone of the old Bacon 
foundation stands near Hancock and Broad 
Streets. 
As Richmond, located at the foot of the 
falls, became the head of commerce and 
industries, it also became the chief mart of 
the slave traders' traffic—"The sum of all 
villainies." As early as March 29, 1779, in 
the Virginia Gazette appeared the following notice of the sale of slaves: "Five likely Virginia-born Negroes will be sold for 
cash, loan certificate or tobacco." Lumkins' slave jail, in which reopened in 1867 
what is now Virginia Union University, was 
the "old slave pen," in which Negroes were 
kept for sale and safety and from which 
they were transported to Virginia, the Carolinas, Georgia, and as far south as Alabama. Could it have been conceived that a 
place like this could be so completely transformed? Facts, surely in this case, become 
stranger than fiction after fiftv years. 
Sunday, April 2, 1865, General Lee dispatched the following message to Jefferson 
Davis, who was found in church: "M y line 
is broken in three places and Richmond 
must be evacuated." Mr. Lumkin, the keeper of the slave-traders' jail, and whose wife, 
Mary Jane Lumkins, was colored, heard of 
Mr. Davis' order of evacuation and "made 
up a coffle of fifty men, women, and children in his jail yard, within pistol shot of 
Davis' parlor window and a stone's throw 
from the monumental church," and hurried 
them to the Danville depot. This sad and 
weeping fifty, in handcuffs and chains, was 
the last slave coffle to tread the soil of 
America. As the Confederate government 
was on the move from the doomed city, 
there was a jumble of boxes, chests, trunks, 
valises, carpet bags, a crowd of excited 
men sweating as never before, women with 
dishevelled hair, unmindful of their wardrobes and wringing their hands, children 
crying in the crowd, and sentinels guarding 
each entrance to the train, pushing back 
at the point of the bayonet the panic-stricken multitude." But there was no room for 
Mr. Lumkin and his slaves on the train 
nor in the world. 
A t the fall of Richmond, therefore, fell 
the auction block of human traffic. While 
Negroes of the West celebrate Emancipation Day as September 22, 1862, the date 
when the preliminary proclamation was issued; and others of the South and North, 
the first day of January, 1863, the day of 
its majority; Richmonders celebrate the 
third day of April, when Richmond fell. 
Negro emancipation not only freed Negroes, but it also freed the white man, for 
it was not until 1870 that a public school 
system was established in the state. One 
year later there were 1915 Negro children 
enrolled, with 72 teachers, 12 of whom 
were Negroes. Even unto this day, with 
but one or two exceptions, all the principals of the Negro schools have been white. 
Since the inception of the public school law, 
a rare change has taken place. The 1915 
enrollment increased to 9,911 pupils with 
225 Negro teachers. From the church 
buildings to old dilapidated rooms, the 
school property for Negro education has increased until it is now valued at $256,-
685.23. In spite of the enlarged oppor-COLORED RICHMOND 125 
ON E OF TH E BUILDING S OF VIRGINI A UNIO N UNIVERSIT Y 
tunity, all the buildings are overcrowded. 
To instance a case: Valley School, the capacity is 746, the attendance is 880. 
It was a strange situation when the 
cradle of the white man's independence became the market of Negro bondage. It was 
here in Richmond that Patrick Henry delivered his deathless speech and closed with 
the words: "Is life so dear and peace so 
sweet as to be purchased at the price of 
chains and slavery? Forbid it, Almighty 
God! I know not what course others may 
take; but as for me, give me liberty or 
give me death." It is difficult how the 
place that gave birth to such immortality 
should hold as chattle in chains a slave of 
any color. But in spite of this anomaly, 
the relations of the races in the Confederate capital have remained very amicable, 
a fact just as strange as the other. A 
friendship has grown up here between masters and servants such as is found nowhere 
else in all the South. This love or friendliness is an indefinable subtle sentiment. 
The spirit of the old "master" is still 
marching on and the old Negro is still 
marching on, too. 
In spite of this friendliness between the 
two races, Richmond, so far as the Negro 
population is concerned, is still characterized by lack of municipal protection. This 
probably is the gravest problem the Negro citizens here face. In addition to the 
"Jim Crow" transportation system and segregated residential sections, municipal discriminations in the most glaring form extend from the educational system throughout the field of sanitation as seen in dry 
closets, lack of city water and sewerage, inadequate public protection in poorly lighted 
streets, badly constructed streets and houses, 
etc. There are seven dumps and crematories in the segregated Negro residential 
sections. 
The legal segregation of the races only 
makes more grievous this sanitary eyesore of colored Richmond. The assessed 
value of Negro property is four million 
dollars. 
When the question of organization is 
raised, it is said that Richmond is superorganized—there are wheels in wheels, fraternities, and societies, and yet Richmond 
seems unnecessarily divisible. Its Negroes 
do not unite themselves solidly enough to 
fight segregation nor anything else effect-126 THE CRISIS 
ively. Some of its leaders have the reputation of being- selfish and non-patriotic. It 
is strange to say that any city where the 
Negroes have demonstrated to the world 
their success in finance, organizations of 
large proportions, culture, proficiency, and 
efficiency of Negro effort, there should be 
this evident incision and divisibility among 
the leading elements. The question is still, 
Can colored Richmond ever solidly unite? 
The State Penitentiary is located in 
Richmond. Its inmates during 1914 totaled 
2182; of these 1672 were colored and 510 
were white. 
Of the four probation officers in Richmond not one is colored. Yet, in 1914, of 
the 997 juveniles handled, 539 were colored. 
The earnings of the white people are 
larger than those of the Negroes, especially 
those who have reached the upper ages. 
Among the Negro boys and girls, earnings 
show little increase with advancing age, 
and this is especially true of the girls. 
Three-fifths of the older boys are engaged 
in work entirely unrelated to their chosen 
occupations. Two-thirds of the older girls 
are engaged in work entirely unrelated to 
their chosen occupations. The following statistics will show the activities of colored 
Richmond: 
Agents, insurance , 54. 
Artists. 4. 
Automobil e repairers, 4. 
Bakers, IS. 
Butlers, 178. 
Bookkeepers, IS. 
Bellmen , 53. 
Butchers. 47. 
Bricklayers. 28. 
Bicycl e dealer am! repairer, 1. 
Barbers, S5. 
Blacksmiths and wheelwrights, 10. 
Bootblacks, 5. 
Caterers, 2. 
Colleges, 3. 
Cooks, 782. 
Coopers, 2S. 
Contractors and builder.-, 10. 
Carpenters, lul . 
Clerks, 120. 
Chauffeurs, 128. 
Coachmen . 101 
Dressmakers. 18. 
Drivers, 720. 
Domesti c service , 1005. 
Dentists, 4. 
Dr y good s and notion businesses, 3. 
Druggists, 6. 
Dyers and cleaners. SO. 
Fish, game and oyste r dealers, tr,. 
Funera l directors and embalmers, 16. 
Engineers, 5. 
Elevato r operators. 43. 
Foremen , 74. 
Hairdressers, 23. 
11 orseshocrs. 0. 
Hucksters, 9. 
Ice cream manufacturer, 1 
Insuranc e companies, 7. 
Janitors. 108. 
Janitresses, 12. 
.funk dealers. 2. 
Laborers, 4339. 
Linesmen , 8. 
Livery , boardin g and sales stables, 2. 
Laundresses, 734. 
Lathers, 10. 
Manicurists, 3. 
Mai! carriers, 72. 
Machinists, 6. 
Maids, 310. 
Midwives, 5. 
Musi c teachers, voca l an d instrumental,]:? . 
Xurses, 99. 
Newspapers and periodicals, 5. 
Notaries, 13. 
Orderlies, 32. 
Paperhangers, 8. 
Painters, 25. 
Pavers, 5. 
Peddlers, 6. 
Photographers, 2. 
Physicians, 30. 
Porters, 841. 
Plasterers, 126. 
Plumbers, gas and steam fitters, 3. 
Postorfice clerks, 7. 
Poultr y dealers, 3. 
Publisher, 1. 
Printers, 3. 
Rea l estate agents and dealers, 0. 
Seamstresses, 2 5. 
Shoemakers an d repairers, GO. 
Sextons, 14. 
Stenographers, 8. 
Teamsters and expressmen , 23. 
Tailors, 6. 
Upholsterers, 5. 
Waiters, 2S2. 
Watchmen, 20. 
Waitresses, 23. 
A most striking feature of Richmond is 
the large number of apparently prosperous 
beneficial societies. Amon g these may be 
mentioned the St. Luke Order, the True 
Reformers, the Richmond Beneficial, the 
American Beneficial, the Southern Aid, Inc., 
and several others of like prominence which 
present interesting examples of Negro thrift 
and business ability. The Southern Aid Society alone owns $200,000 worth of real estate and government bonds, and about $50,-
000 worth of first mortgages on improved 
city real estate. The St. Luke Order operates in twenty-four states with a financial 
membership of 41,200 and assets of $114,-
000. In August, 1917, this organization 
will celebrate its fiftieth anniversary. 
Richmond is noted for its large and 
prosperous Negro churches. Ten of these 
churches have memberships of over two 
thousand each. Of the fifty odd churches, 
all except seven are Baptists. 
Richmond's voice of public sentiment is 
edited through four weeklies: The St. Luke 
Herald, the Richmond Planet, the Reformer, 
and the Progressive Citizen. 
There is no city, probably, in the whole 
country that does as much Negro business 
as Richmond. There are two prosperous BeBusy banks: The St. Luke's Penny Savings 
Bank, and the Mechanics' Savings Bank. 
Each does a business of over two hundred MEN OF RICHMOND 127 
thousand dollars per year, and the last two 
named are members of the American Bankers' Association. 
The leading educational institution m 
Richmond is Virginia Union University, 
which is also one of the leading colleges of 
the country. It is under the control of the 
Baptists. It employs twenty teachers and 
has enrolled sixty-one college students and 
264 students in other departments. Its annual income is about $24,000. 
The Armstrong High School was founded 
in 1S67 by a chaplain of the United States 
Army. For many years it was supported 
by The Freedmen's Bureau. It now occupies a building formerly used as a white 
school and has an enrollment of over five 
hundred students. Land for a new building has been purchased by the city, but no 
building has as yet been erected. Until 
1915, the school had white teachers, but in 
that year colored instructors were installed. 
The Catholics have a school for colored 
children known as the Van do Vyver College. 
It accommodates live hundred students and 
is in charge of the Sisters of the Order of 
St. Francis. It has classes in music, needlework, Latin, and French, and a night school 
for the training of automobile chauffeurs. 
The head of the college is Father Charles 
Hannigan, a well-known friend and defender of colored people. 
MRS . OR A I:. SAUNDER S (Center) AN D SOM E OF HER CO - WORKER S I X Tl 
PROTECTIV E LEAGU E FOR NEGR O GIRLS 
NATIONA L 
Men of Richmond 
T
HE REVEREN D W. H. STOKES , Ph. 
D., studied at Wayland Seminary. He 
received his B. D., in 1899, from Richmond 
Theological Seminary; A. B., Virginia Union 
University, 1903; A. M., 1904, and Ph. D., in 
1906. He has been the pastor of Ebenezer 
Baptist Church since 1902. His work has 
been so effective that Governor Swanson 
commissioned him a delegate to the American Prison Association's session in 1908; 
Governor Mann made him a delegate to the 
Southern Sociological Congress in 1914; and 
Governor Stuart, in 1915, commissioned him 
a delegate to the National Conference of 
Charities and Corrections. Last year Dr. 
Stokes was successful in having closed over 
twenty saloons in the colored residential 
section of Jackson Ward for which the citi-128 THE CRISIS 
TH E REV . W . H. STOKES DR. M. B. JONES DR . W . H . HUGHE S 
MR . JOHN MITCHELL . JR. 
TH E REV . Z. D. LEWI S ATT'Y . J, T. HEWI N MR . G. W . BRAG G MEN OF RICHMOND 
zens presented him a silver loving cup as 
a token of their appreciation for this service. 
T>ROFESSO R CHARLE S T. RUSSELL 
is the superintendent of Virginia 
Union University. He received his early 
training in the Richmond Public schools and 
took up architecture at Hampton Institute, 
and was graduated. He is the only licensed 
Negro architect in Richmond. His interest 
in young men who enter into business activities has made him especially appreciated. 
pvR. MILES B. JONES is a graduate of 
the old Richmond Institute. He attended Richmond Theological Seminary and 
was a teacher for ten years in the Richmond 
public schools. In 1901 he received his 
M. D. degree from Howard University Medical School. He is founder and surgeon-inchief of the Richmond Hospital, physician 
for Virginia Union University, founder of 
the colored branch of the Young Men's 
Christian Association in Richmond, and he 
has been the superintendent of Second Baptist Sunday School since 1889. 
A TTORNE Y J. THOMA S HEWI N was 
born in Dinwiddie County, Virginia. 
He studied in the public schools and at 
Commercial College, at Smithdeal. He is a 
graduate of Boston University Law School. 
For the past sixteen years he has practised 
law in Richmond and become a prominent 
figure in his profession. He is president of 
the American Beneficial Insurance Company and the Improved Order of the Shepherds and Daughters of Bethlehem recently 
elected him Grand Shepherd. 
DR. Z. D. LEWI S is widely known as a 
Hebrew scholar. He studied at the 
public schools and Richmond Theological Institute. He is president of the Baptist 
General Association of Virginia and has 
been the pastor of Second Baptist Church 
for over thirty years. 
DR. W. N. HUGHES ' ability as a surgeon is widely recognized. He received his A. B. from Virginia Normal and 
Collegiate Institute, in 1893; he was graduated in medicine from Shaw University, 
in 1897; a post-graduate at Howard University Medical School; and interne at the 
Freedmen's Hospital from 1897 to 1898. In 
1902 Governor Bliss appointed him to serve 
the government. He resigned this charge 
in 1915 to go abroad. He attended clinics 
at Bartholomew Hospital, in London; 
Pasteur Institute, Paris; and Czerny's Clinics at Heidelberg. He returned to Richmond, where he has since resumed private 
practise. 
MR. JOHN MITCHELL, JR., is one of 
Richmond's bachelors. He was educated at the Armstrong Normal School. He 
has served as an alderman and in other capacities of city government. He is widely 
known as the editor of the Richmond Planet. 
He is Grand Chancellor of the Virginia 
Knights of PythiaSj Worthy Chancellor of 
the Court of Calanthe, founder and president of the Mechanics' Savings Bank, and 
the only Negro member of the American 
Bankers' Association. 
p v R. E. R. JEFFERSO N was graduated 
from Shaw University with the degree of B. S., in 1892; and Leonard Medical 
College, of this university, in 1893. He has 
since been resident physician of this school 
and a professor of physiology and chemistry. He is medical examiner for several 
Negro fraternities in Richmond and Master 
of Exchequer, Grand Lodge, Knights of 
Pythias. 
GEORGE W. BRAG G realized over $100,-
000 through the laundry business. He 
then entered the real estate business. He 
is one of Richmond's most successful business men. 
TAR . J. B. SIMPSON has been professor 
of Greek and sociology in Wayland 
College of Virginia Union University for 
twenty-five years. He has studied at Wayland Seminary, Washington, D. C ; Colby 
College, Maine; Newton Theological Seminary; and the University of Illinois. One 
of his professors has said of him: "Yo u may 
strike Mr. Simpson anywhere, at any time, 
with anything, and he will always ring 
true." He has lived a life of devotion to 
principle regardless of popularity. 
TiyfRS. MAGGIE L. WALKE R is the 
president of the St. Luke's Bank, and 
the only Negro woman banker in America; 
Right Worthy Secretary-Treasurer of the 
Supreme Council of the Independent Order 
of St. Luke, the editor of the St. Luke's 
Herald, and the president of the Colored 
Women's Council of Virginia. She is a 
product of the Armstrong Normal School. 
TV/TRS. ORA B. SAUNDERS studied at 
•*•»-*- the Virginia Normal Industrial Institute, at Petersburg, and was graduated in 
1900. She is the founder and superinten-A GLIMPS E OF SOME • COLORED RICHMON D 132 THE CRISIS 
dent of the National 
League for the Protection of Negro Girls, 
one of the two Negro trustees of Hartshorn Memorial College; and first vicepresident of the Virginia Federation of 
Colored Women' s 
Clubs. 
MISS ADEL A F. 
RUFFI N is the 
secretar y o f th e 
branch of the Young 
Women' s Christian 
Association in Richmond. She took special training for this 
work at the National 
Y. W. C. A., in NewYork City. She studied at Norfolk Mission College and has 
taught in the normal 
schools and colleges in the South. She is a 
religious asset to the young people of Richmond. 
M ISS VIRGINI A E. RANDOLP H is the 
originator of the Randolph System 
used in the public schools of Richmond, and 
is the supervisor of the industrial schools 
DR. G. B. SIMPSON 
of Henrico County. 
She received her training in the Richmond 
publi c schools and 
started her work as 
an educator at Mountain Road school. This 
school has since been 
rebuilt and named 
th e Virgini a E. 
Randolph School in 
her honor. Last year 
she founded the Colored Industrial Exhange in Richmond. 
R S. LUC Y 
BROOK S LEWI S 
was born in Richmond, 
Virginia, March 20, 
1861. She was educated in the Richmond 
public schools. She is 
an active charit y 
worker and was president of the Women's 
Auxiliary of the Richmond Y. M. C. A. for 
six years, and was also president of the 
Richmond Y. W. C. A. from its founding in 
1912 to 1915. Mrs. Lewis is due much 
praise for her untiring and successful efforts in behalf of this branch of the Y. W. 
C. A. during its infancy. 
M i 
MRS . L. B. LEWI S MRS. M. L. WALKE R MISS V. E. RANDOLP H MIS S A. F. R TIFFIN 
TH E FINAL STRAIN 
By G. Douglas Johnson. 
I CLIMBED the craggy hill of fame, 
Heart-sore and wearily, 
Stood on her gleaming goal at length, 
And sighed in ecstacy. 
" 0 God," I cried, "what bliss"—when lo! 
Came stealing like a pall, 
The strains of Life's Last Symphony, 
In Prelude, to—the call. The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
OUBLEDAY , PAGE AN D COMPAN Y 
have issued the long-awaited "Booker T. Washington, Builder of a Civilization," by Emmett J. Scott, and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe (at TH E CRISIS office, two 
dollars, plus postage). 
The book is handsomely done and entertainingly written and may be recommended to the general reader; to those, 
however, who had hoped for a broad and 
discriminating statement of the meaning of 
Mr. Washington and his work, this biography will be a distinct disappointment. 
The facts were furnished by a man who 
knew much more than he revealed and 
they were put into literary shape by another 
man who did not know or sense the real 
problem of the Negro in America. The 
result is, first, a repetition of well-known 
facts without any illuminating additions; 
second, an attempt to defend Mr. Washington wmere no defense is now needed. 
Mr. Washington's work is done. No one is 
attacking him. At the same time those 
who did disagree with him still hold to 
their disagreement and they find nothing in 
this biography to change their conclusions. 
Finally, there are here and there misleading statements which are very unfortunate, for instance, the sneer on page 
twenty-four against the "numerically 
small and individually unimportant' Negroes who opposed Mr. Washington's program" and who were filled with nothing 
but "Latin, Greek, and Theology, and the 
like; " and the statement of. the reasons 
for the failure of the conference at Carnegie Hall, which is not true, and must 
be so recognized by the numbers who took 
part. Evidently we have still to look for 
the real biography of Booker T. Washington. 
Meantime, those who opposed him may 
take comfort in a paragraph of Theodore 
Roosevelt's preface: 
"In the same way. while Booker T. Washington firmly believed that the attention of 
the Colored race should be riveted, not on 
political life, but on success sought in the 
fields of honest business endeavor, he also 
felt, and I agreed with him, that it was 
to the interest of both races that there 
should be appointments to office of Black 
Men whose characters and abilities were 
such that if they were White Men their 
appointments would be hailed as being well 
above the average, and creditable from every standpoint." 
"In Spite of the Handicap," an autobiography of James D. Corrothers, is a very excellent book and one which we can recommend to our readers. (George H. Doran 
and Company. At TH E CRISIS office, $1.25, 
plus postage). 
The story is most entertaining and ends 
with this fine word: 
"The best of my life is now. The great 
gift of life is so pregnant with possibilities 
that no one possessing it should permanently despair, but rather with an assuring hope 
trudge forward ever expectantly. And the 
morn may bring a smile, and the darkness 
blessed dreams, and Life be big with fulfillment for him. Truly, in my own case, I 
think I can say that I have tried to do 
my honest best with that life which held for 
me so humble a beginning." 
M. de Zayas has isued "African NeJAMES D. CORROTHER S 
Whe n Ten Year s Old I:J4 THE CRISIS 
g-ro Art, Its Influence on Modern Art. " 
His conclusions are striking: 
It is certain that before the introduction of the plastic principles of Negro art, 
abstract representations did not exist 
among Europeans. Negro art has re-awakened in us the feeling for abstract form, it 
has brought into our art the means to express our purely sensorial feelings in regard to form, or to find new form in our 
ideas. The abstract representations of modern art are unquestionably the offspring of 
the Negro Art which has made us conscious 
of a subjective state, obliterated by objective education. 
It is unfortunate that after this true word 
he should go so far outside of his field 
as an artist to try and explain Negro 
achievement as the product of the lowest 
of human animals. 
Charles F. Heartman has issued the second volume of his Bibliographica Americana. It is entitled, " A Bibliographical 
Checklist of American Negro Poetry," and 
was compiled by Arthur A. Schomburg. 
Mr. Schomburg has brought together over 
five hundred titles of volumes and pamphlets 
written by American Negro poets. 
THE HEGIRA 
r
T
, H E continued migration of colored la-
•1 borers from the South to the North and 
the West has brought out much editorial com 
ment. Just before the election, the Democratic party suddenly discovered that the 
cause of the migration was political. The 
Watertown, New York, Times said: 
Attorney General Gregory said immediately following election: "I have evidence 
that a large number of Negroes from the 
South moved into northern states within 
ninety days before the election. So far, I do 
not know whether this movement was in 
dustrial or political, although some of them 
attempted to register." 
The American Federation of Labor's resolution will convey to Attorney General 
Gregory the information that the emigration was industrial. How horrible that 
some of these men should attempt to register. The Democrats of the South barred 
the men from voting in their own states, 
and is it a matter of marvel that, deprived 
of citizenship, they were inclined to emigrate and that they attempted to register 
when they got north? 
The federation and all the South knows 
that the movement was industrial, and the 
South wants its cheap labor back home 
again. 
The Buffalo Express puts it thus: 
The administration at Washington is not 
the only power which is four-flushing on 
the question presented by the migration of 
Negro labor from the South to the North. 
The administration affects to believe that 
it is political in character. The American 
Federation of Labor, now in session at Baltimore, alleges that it has discovered that 
such importation of Negroes to Ohio had 
demonstrated to the satisfaction of labor 
leaders in that state that they were being 
brought North for the purpose of filling the 
places of union men demanding better conditions, as in the case of freight handlers. 
The Milwaukee Leader spoke boldly: 
The Negro laborer is becoming accustomed to being deprived of rights that constitutions and legislation have conferred 
upon him. But the peculiar efforts now being made to hold him in the South, where 
he has so long been condemned as a curse, 
must awaken some surprise. 
Three years ago the Federal Department 
of Labor established a free employment bureau. It was hailed as a long step toward 
solving the unemployed problem. A t least, 
it would enable the worker to find the most 
desirable jobs. 
Then came the war and for the first time 
in the history of capitalism, there was really 
no army of unemployed. But there was 
still a very great difference in jobs. Manufacturers and munition workers were paying wages that looked like affluence to the 
Negro field worker. So these workers started North by hundreds of thousands. Many 
of them were assisted in so doing by the 
information furnished by the federal employment offices. 
Now come the legislatures of several 
Southern States and the city councils of 
many cities passing laws and ordinances 
prohibiting the operation of any employment offices. Some municipalities have even 
forbidden the emigration of Negroes. All 
make it a crime to "entice" workmen from 
their employment. 
Hereafter, all legislation pretending to 
confer any rights or liberties should avoid 
such difficulties by attaching a clause providing that it "shall not apply to Negroes. " 
On second thought the clause might as well 
read "all workingmen excepted." 
The resolutions adopted by the American 
Federation of Labor at its recent convention 
in Baltimore were as follows: 
"Whereas, The emigration of Southern 
Negroes to Northern labor centers, which 
has occasioned anxiety on the part of the 
United States Department of Labor, and 
has occasioned aniety on the part of the 
organized labor movement because of the 
danger such emigration will cause the workers in the Northern states; and 
"Whereas, The investigation of such emigration and importation of Negroes into 
the State of Ohio has demonstrated to the 
satisfaction of the labor leaders in that 
state that they are being brought North for 
the purpose of filling the places of union 
men demanding better conditions, as in the 
case of the freight handlers; and 
"Whereas, The shortage of European la-THE LOOKING GLASS 135 
bor has made the Southern Negro an asset 
in the labor markets of the North, and the 
conditions that prevail in Ohio may apply 
in all Northern states; therefore, be it 
"Resolved that this thirty-sixth annual 
convention of the American Federation of 
Labor instruct the president and executive 
council to inaugurate a movement looking 
toward the organization of these men in 
the Southern states, to the end that they 
may be instructed and educated along the 
lines of the trade-union movement, and 
thereby eliminate this menace to the workers of the Northern states." 
Meantime, some colored men have been 
frankly expressing in the columns of Southern white papers their opinions as to the 
cause of the migration of the better class 
of Negroes. Sidney H. Johnson, in the New 
Orleans Times-Picayune, said: 
The Negro is despised by the lower element of white men, who continually aggravate him in town and city, and laws 
that are made to govern all are only meted 
out to the Negro. The better class Negro 
does not violate the law save when compelled to do so—that is to act in self-defense—and the chances are he may never 
get a chance to get safely in jail where 
he can give an account of his actions and 
prove that he was justified in doing what 
he did. There is no protection for us in 
our homes. A white man can kill a Negro 
any time he likes and simply say the Negro assaulted him. He goes free. A Negro 
does not protect himself in the South. Several days ago during the announcing of 
returns of the world's series, I was driving 
up Camp Street. Little boys began spitting in my face. 
Finally, the grown ones did the same. 
In order to save my life I had to endure all 
this. During" carnival times, they beat up 
Negroes terribly. The police never show 
up until it's over. It's useless to appeal 
for protection; you may land in jail. It's 
true the Negro can not exercise his mechanical trade in the North as well as he can in 
our Southland, but it's the peaceful way 
of living that he goes for; a right to his 
rights; a right to live in peace and harmony unmolested by those he does not care 
to be with socially or domestically. 
LYNCHING 
W. F. CLAYTO N writes in the Charles-
* ton News and Courier: 
Ar e we a civilized, enlightened, and Christian people, and allow such things to continue? Why, unless this manner of acting 
by our people is not put a stop to, we arc 
not even half-civilized. In fact, we are 
barbarous. Now, why is this state of 
things allowed? Our people as a whole arc 
not in favor of such lawlessness. The reason is found in the fact that while our 
people have physical courage, they lack 
moral courage to rise up and cry out 
against such outrages. They deplore them, 
but are moral cowards, and keep quiet. 
Even if put upon jury they won't convict, 
so the criminals go unpunished with, as 
they think, a license to continue their 
brutal doings. It is not as a general thing 
the lower order of humanity who inaugurate lynchings. Their position in society 
is such that they can't afford to. Like a 
pack of sheep they will gladly follow leaders from the better class, and they generally get that leadership. 
In confirmation of the above, we have 
received this letter from Abbeville: 
I saw through TH E CRISIS in reading 
about the murder of Anthony Crawford 
that you said it was a crowd of idlers from 
the square. I just want to tell you the mistake. They were not idlers. They were 
clerks from the stores. The merchants 
closed their stores and went out with sticks, 
ax handles, and pick handles to beat him 
with; and there was not but one colored 
person around to say a word—that was a 
woman and she was ordered to leave Abbeville. 
Southern papers are stressing the "pocketbook" argument against lynching. As 
the New York Globe says: 
South Carolina may not be open to claims 
of abstract right and justice, but her business men do not wish to lynch their pocketbooks. 
It is generally recognized that if the oppression of the Negroes is to stop in the 
South the change must come from within; 
must be the work of the Southern people 
themselves; that it can not be introduced 
from without. Comment from the outside 
is practically helpful in so far as it may 
tend to persuade the Southern people themselves to undertake the great work of improving the relations of the two races. But 
the aftermath of the Abbeville lynching 
furnishes evidence that at last a change is 
coming. 
Anthony Crawford is reported to have 
once said to a friend: "The day a white man 
hits me is the day I die." The instinct of 
his manhood led him to resist wrong even 
though he well knew the consequences to 
him personally. He died, but his death 
gives promise of not having been in vain. 
A writer to the Albany, Georgia, Herald asked: 
"Do the people of the South realize that 
one of the most effective arguments used 
to attract Negroes from this section to the 
North is the assurance that there the Negro receives as fair treatment as the white 
man? With the boll weevil just establishing itself in Georgia, do the Georgians who 
fear demoralization in the ranks of farm 
labor realize that when a Georgia Negro is 
told that in New Jersey, for instance, the 
Negro gets a 'square deal' in the courts, 
the argument makes a tremendous appeal 
to him? " 136 THE CRISIS 
The Augusta Chronicle adds: 
The Chronicle agrees with its Albany contemporary in its further comment that inevitably a majority of the Negroes who are 
leaving the South for the North are going 
to be disappointed in the change—as many 
of them have already become—but this is 
not going to keep them from leaving this 
section; particularly, when the appeal is 
made to them that they are in constant 
danger of mob violence. 
The truth of the matter is—these lawless mobs have already cost the South millions of dollars, and it is high time that the 
best farmers and business men were raising their voices in defense of their own 
interests. After all, the pocketbook argument may make the strongest appeal. 
The Columbia State says: 
The matter is one which chiefly concerns 
the southern farmers. If they stand by 
and tolerate the driving of the Negroes out 
of the South by crime and cruelty, their 
complaints about the loss of their labor 
will hardly command attention. 
Every southern lyncher is an emigration 
agent working effectively for northern employers. 
The White Presbyterian Synod of Georgia 
was not so cowardly as The Arkansas Synod. 
The Georgia Synod raised a mighty voice 
against the lynching horror: 
Resolved, that the synod of Georgia, in 
the discharge of its sacred trust as a divinely commissioned expounder of the will 
of God, hereby records its abhorrence of the 
crime of lynching, a crime which can be 
characterized by no milder term than murder, deliberate and premeditated. The 
crime is rather aggravated than paliated 
by the numbers who take part in it. The 
pollution of soul and degradation of character, which inevitably result from such 
a brutal crime, are not distributed in fractional parts, but come as an undivided curse 
upon each participant. The guilt or innocence of the victim modifies but slightly, if 
at all, the quality of the act. Lynchers are 
no more authorized by God or man, by 
human or divine law, to kill a guilty criminal than to kill an exemplary citizen. In 
cither case they defy God, dishonor the 
state, and debase themselves. 
Resolved second, that the synod would 
welcome the corroborative testimony of its 
sister churches that by the combined influence of God's people this crime of lynching 
might be branded with the infamy which it 
deserves, and the public conscience so enlightened and aroused that in the future 
our country should be spared the odium 
which this relic of barbarism has brought 
upon it. 
While Paducah refused even to indict 
her lynchers and Abbeville passed resolutions and arrested five of the lynchers for 
disorderly conduct and immediately released them on bail, Lima, Ohio, acted more 
rationally. The Cleveland Plaindealer 
says: 
It required but thirty-five minutes for a 
Putnam County jury this week to find guilty 
one of the rioters who at Lima last August 
attempted to lynch the sheriff because he 
had spirited away a prisoner whom the 
mob desired to punish. He is a machinist 
who, the evidence showed, climbed a telegraph pole, fastened a rope and then helped 
place the noose about the sheriff's neck. 
This is the second conviction at Lima. A 
grocer has already been convicted on a 
charge similar to that against the machinist. Thirty-two others remain to be 
tried. 
Lima does well. A community may be 
properly blamed for letting its angry passions reach the point of murderous violence. It is more blameworthy, however, 
if, after the event, it is so forgetful of its 
self-respect as to let the riotous participants escape punishment for their crime. 
Two men started for the penitentiary and 
thirty-two on the court's waiting list is 
Lima's answer to the implication of her 
critics of last summer. 
W. E. Wimpy, writing in the Manufacturers' Record, Baltimore, says: 
Lynching in the South is a fact, not a 
theory. In your issue of August 24, I 
showed by statistics seventy-eight lynchings 
in nine and one-half months in the United 
States, and seventy-seven of them were in 
the South. This, I said, was caused by the 
multitude of county governments within the 
southern states, and I stick to it. There is 
no land under Heaven where the officers 
swarm from so many hives as in the State 
of Georgia. 
A few days ago our newspapers were telling of a woman who went to intercede in a 
dispute between her son and an overseer; 
the man attacked the boy's mother; the boy 
felled the overseer and fled. When he was 
captured he did not know the man was dead 
and that his mother had been lynched. The 
man who notices things and remembers 
them will tell you that the majority of those 
lynched never see inside of a courthouse 
from the time the notion is taken to lynch 
until their eyes are closed in death on the 
tree. 
Now, I will give some figures that the 
doubting Thomases can look up. The six 
New England States have combined sixtyseven counties; Georgia has 152. 
The Middle States—New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware — have 
combined 153 counties; Georgia has 152. 
The four Middle States have a population 
of 19,521,214; Georgia has only 2,609,121. 
The six New England States have a population of 6,652,683; Georgia has only 
2,609,121. * 
The sixteen Southern States combined 
have 1.504 counties, which constitute an 
army that is controlled and presided over 
by sixteen state armies or state governments, 
besides a large army of politicians, and a THE LOOKING GLASS 137 
still larger army of more respectable nonproducing gentry, and there are two other 
large non-producing armies that are helping to keep the "dear peepul" away from 
the savings banks of the "dear Solid South." 
Not since one of the 1,504 little county 
or family governments has been born in 
the southern states has papa or the state 
dared to invade or enter therein unless requested by her sheriff, not even when five 
were lynched on one tree, three men and 
two women, and one man shot for good 
measure, all on the same day 
It is unthinkable that the guarantee of 
our nation should be treated as a scrap of 
paper. With several hundred lynched since 
Mr. Wilson took the oath I mentioned above, 
I have yet to hear of him opening his mouth 
or raising a hand toward attempting to protect one life from being lynched. He could 
at least have written one "note." Duck 
and dodge the question as we may, Mr. Wilson has failed in this situation, and it is 
criminal to attempt to deny it. 
THE ELECTION 
EVERYON E concedes that without The 
Solid South Mr. Wilson could not have 
been re-elected. The New Republic, New 
York, says: 
By a narrow margin he has won a vote of 
confidence in his general purpose, domestic 
and foreign, but no one who is candid about 
the electoral aid of the Solid South can 
pretend that the re-election is a nationwide examination and affirmation of his policies. 
The Cleveland Leader is more outspoken: 
No official result of the presidential election, no recounting or corrections, can in 
any way alter one great fact which concerns the opinions, the sentiment and the 
best judgment of the American people. It 
is their decision, by a very large popular 
vote plurality in the states where elections 
mean a free and honest test of beliefs and 
desires, that Charles Evans Hughes, not 
Woodrow Wilson, represented the best policies and the soundest forces in American 
public life. 
Outside of those states in the South, 
where elections are a farce and the Constitution of the United States is absolutely disregarded and trodden upon in every national contest, there is a net margin for 
Hughes over Wilson of at least 300,000. It 
may be 400,000 or more. Excluding Border 
States which have comparatively little vote 
suppression and coercion, the Hughes plurality is fully 500,000. 
This fact is well worth keeping in mind 
and weighing carefully in all efforts to 
judge the real opinion of the American people on great issues of the day. If the Constitution of the United States had any force 
or effect in the gulf states and some states 
on the southern Atlantic coast, in respect 
to the suffrage, there would not have been 
anything close about the result of the national election. 
Even the South now and then recognizes 
its menace to itself. An "Old Confederate" 
writes the New York Tribune, from Virginia: 
The South is perfectly willing to form a 
coalition with any dissatisfied element in 
the North, provided that element is strong 
enough to assure victory and will for the 
time being allow itself to be called Democratic. Every question is of secondary importance to the South in comparison with 
the one which appeals to us every day, 
namely, how does the solution of this question or that question affect our relation to 
the Negro? 
The Negro is before us, in the flesh, tangible; all other questions are theoretical. 
We are going to settle this question—the 
tangible one—to suit ourselves. We have 
no firm convictions on any other question. 
An important question came up some 
months back. President Wilson and his 
Secretary of War, Mr. Garrison, agreed that 
the best way to prepare the country to defend itself against foreign aggression was 
to compel every able-bodied male citizen of 
military age to undergo military training 
for a stated period. 
The president went before the country 
and aroused the people to a realization of 
the danger of unpreparedness. His speeches 
were very effective. He came back to Washington ready to place before Congress his 
plans to raise this great army of soldiers. In 
the meanwhile the Democratic congressmen 
from the South had heard from their constituents. These congressmen went to Mr. 
Wilson and told him that the South would 
not for one minute agree to arming and 
training as soldiers the young Negro men of 
the South. The king can do no wrong, and 
Mr. Garrison was unceremoniously kicked 
out of the cabinet. 
The menace of the South is real. We are 
a menace to ourselves as well as to you. 
Thousands of us vote the Democratic ticket, 
but in our hearts hope the good sense of the 
North will save us from a calamity of our 
own making. 
FROM LAODICEA 
L F ARRISO N RHODES has had two arti-
*• cles on the Negro problem in the New 
Republic, New York, which are stimulating. 
He writes, for instance, speaking of the 
North: 
The practitioners of the new pro-southern 
view never repel the insinuation that 
though they are of the honest industrious 
bourgeois North, they really belong in spirit 
to the impetuous, idle, and aristocratic South. 
And besides these social snobs, there are intellectual ones as well. To say that the 
Abolitionists and their theories were already 
out of fashion has seemed such a brisk modern note, and appeared to suggest so 13S THE CRISIS 
strongly that the thinker of such thoughts 
was both original and independent. To be 
the first in a New England or a northern 
Ohio community to discover that it had 
been a mistake to give the Negro the 
vote was a privilege for anyone who cared 
to be esteemed a pioneer in iconoclastic and 
revolutionary thought 
To a dispassionate observer, the fear of 
social equality between white and black is 
now for the most part a mere bogie-man to 
frighten children with. It is certain that 
the Negro, so soon as he can afford them, 
would like to travel in Pullman cars, go to 
good hotels and enjoy orchestra seats in 
the theatre; but it is also quite probable 
that he would be content that whites should 
be excluded from all these places. The discomforts of the Jim-Crow car are probably 
the chief objection to it. It may be that 
with the years he has seen more of the 
whites, but at any rate it actually seems 
as if the passion for social acknowledgment, 
which no doubt seized upon many Negroes 
after the war has abated if not almost 
wholly passed. It was symptomatic of that 
time; it, or at least its excesses, have gone 
with it. It is extremely doubtful whether, 
as is so often asserted, morbidly ambitious 
blacks are everywhere cherishing that traditional fond hope of being "received at our 
dinner tables." The settlements in the 
Yazoo River districts in Mississippi where 
prosperous agricultural and trading- communities exist, wholly free from whites, may 
quite as likely represent for them an ideal. 
Does it never occur to anyone that the 
Negro might conceivably be tired of the 
white man, of his interference—even of his 
help and his very presence? 
A great deal of genuine feeling both North 
and South against the Negro masquerades 
as traditional race prejudice, and thus, as 
it were, avoids detection and straightforward dealing. Our grievance against him 
today is really largely an economic one. He 
has, to our eyes, two great defects. First, 
he will not work for us when we want him 
to. Second, he has a low standard of living 
and when he will work is often ready to 
accept lower wages than the whites. We 
think it would be presumptuous of him to 
have any higher standard of living and we 
quite think he deserves lower wages, and 
yet—the whole question is a mass of contradictions, almost paradoxes. 
Everyone who has worked with and for 
the Negro knows by this time—or ought to 
know, if he is honest with himself—that it 
is quite impossible to hope that the Negro 
will ever love labor purely for its own sake, 
or long passionately to toil because the 
white man thinks it would lie a virtue in 
him to toil. Are there many whites who 
work in just this way? Art for art's sake 
is sufficiently difficult; hard work for hard 
work's sake even more difficult to indoctrinate 
Now in these troubled days of the twentieth century, with clouded horizons and the 
social revolution like a mirage before us. 
we may still love humanity while we deny 
its freedom and only hope for its equality 
in some future day. Is it not possible, in 
the interests both of black man and of 
white, to leave unsettled the question of the 
black's equality and his destiny, and meanwhile to appreciate his suave good-natured 
contribution to our national tone? And not 
to become too enthusiastic about not giving 
him his chance? 
Reginald Wright Kauffman writes to the 
New York Evening Post and to the Philadelphia Public Ledger: 
Pray permit me, even though it involves 
an introductory mention of my own work, 
space in your columns to point out a habit 
of mind from which I am but one of many 
sufferers. I refer to the habit that forbids 
any Northern writer to write of the South. 
My new novel, "The Mark of the Beast," 
is pitched in the South and revolves about 
the lynching of a Negro for a crime .of 
which a white man was guilty—and the 
South doesn't like it. Southern' papers refuse advertisements; they shout condemnation; not on moral grounds or literary; they 
simply say that I have "failed to understand the Negro problem," simply move Mr. 
Charles W. Chesnutt, for whose "Conjure 
Woman " readers will long be grateful, to 
write me : "The South is so much the 
spoiled child of the American family that 
if ever a writer sees fit to write anything 
about it in any but an adulatory manner, 
he is apt to come in for a very sharp scolding." 
What has spoiled the South? Why, so 
far as it is concerned, may anybody discuss 
graft or the absurdly so-called "white slavery" and nobody child labor or lynching? 
No New Yorker, so far as I can recall, 
scolded me for my exposure of certain New 
York conditions in "The House of Bondage." Wh y all this mystery on the part of 
Southerners, and especially Southern writers, about the "Negro problem." If there 
is a "Negro problem," why do Southerners 
object to its mention? If there is a "Negro 
problem" that Northerners are incapable of 
telling the truth about, why don't the 
Southern novelists tell the truth about it? 
They tell nothing, yet they grant the right 
of fiction to discuss problems, and the word 
"problem" implies something to be solved. 
I have said "The South." Perhaps I have 
there played into the hands of the persons 
I refer to; they call themselves "The South," 
but they are not; they are only a small portion of it. Men such as former Supreme 
Court Justice Gudger, of North Carolina, and Edmund F. Noel, the Democratic 
ex-Governor of Mississippi, have praised my 
book, and Bishop Cheshire, of North Carolina, has written me approving my attitude 
in regard to lynch law. Such men are in 
the majority in the South; they not only 
oppose lynching; they do not' object to 
Northerners opposing it. The fault may, 
therefore, lie with the North, which is too 
ready to accept the loud voice of the fren-THE LOOKING GLASS 139 
zied few for the sober judgment of the highminded many. 
But why the few? And why our acceptance of them? 
MOTON 
PRINCIPA L MOTON, of Tuskegee Institute, Alabama, has again struck the 
wrong note, in the opinion of the colored 
press. The Georgia Baptist confesses, for 
instance: 
That we are tired and sick of the me, too, 
boss, hat-in-hand "nigger." And we are also 
sick of the type whose dictum is: "So I get 
a plenty the devil take the rest of the 'niggers.' " 
We are constrained to believe that a serious mistake has been made in electing 
"Major " Moton principal of Tuskegee. He 
is attempting to follow the path blazed by 
the late Booker T. Washington when he has 
neither the wisdom, the ability, nor the 
vision to do so. 
First, we find him publicly rebuking his 
wife for riding in a Pullman car, according 
to The Associated Press's report, which the 
"Major " has never denied, and now we find 
him telling Negroes to refuse to accept industrial opportunities offered them North 
and to refuse to try to make better the 
future for themselves and for their families. 
So long as no industrial opportunities were 
offered Negroes North, it was well to advise 
them to remain in the South, but now, with 
these opportunities opening more and more 
to our people, it is positively criminal to 
advise them against accepting them. 
A Northern colored paper, the Pittsburg 
Courier, says: 
For the reason that great men of whatever race or color advise those of lesser 
magnitude to seek the best individual advantages, and having found them to give 
the best possible service—Dr. Moton has 
missed an opportunity to achieve still 
greater personal prominence by the utterance of the advice accredited to him—that 
the Negro is essentially a Southern product, 
and should remain in the Southland, and 
that those who have already cast their lots 
in the East, the West and the North would 
do well to return South. 
In this respect we regret that he has not 
measured up to the expected standard. We 
have hailed Dr. Moton as the standard 
bearer for the race, without regard to the 
locality in which its members may be domiciled. He should be equally as representative of the Negro of the other three points 
of the compass as of the Negro who is to 
be found in the South. His spoken word 
should be the result of deep thought and 
consideration and his doctrine apply to the 
Negro's condition, wherever situated. A 
man with the training of Dr. Moton, both 
North and South, should be a broad man, 
and one capable of attracting to his aid 
and assistance men from everywhere. 
The Alabama Urban League, of Newark, 
New Jersey, sends this open letter to Major 
Moton, signed by Miss Eva C. Alford, president, and other officers: 
A representative from our league, who 
is no stranger in and around New York City, 
.spent much time trying to locate such alleged conditions as contained in the statement, "huddled together like pigs," and reports that such a condition does not exist 
and the statement is calculated to do much 
harm. 
We, therefore, go on record as most bitterly opposing the stand you take in the 
matter of Negro exodus from the South, 
the time, place, and manner in which you 
expressed yourself, from and because of 
which great injustice will be done the entire 
race in America. 
POLLARD • 
T T is not that Fritz Pollard is a "colored" 
football player, but that he is a football 
player. The editor of the Yale Alumni 
Weekly writes of the Yale-Brown game: 
We're not in it a minute as things stand 
now. I saw the Brown game. Harvard 
could have licked us 30 to 0 on the basis 
of our play. We apparently had things 
going well into the second quarter,—yet 
lacked the punch for a touchdown on the 
fourth down on their line. Then they cut 
loose with Pollard, the niftiest half-back 
I ever saw. He's great this year, no doubt 
about it; wears no chest or shoulder padding, just a jersey; is a human eel. First 
they carried the ball from the center of the 
field to our forty yard line. Then Pollard cut around our right tackle and was 
going great guns over for a touchdown, 
when our left end took a flying tackle and 
brought him down on the five-yard line. 
Four bangs gained nothing at all,—wonderful defense. I was right behind the play 
in the stand, and saw the finest defensive 
work on Legore's part that I ever looked 
at. He saved that touchdown. He had to 
kick out from behind the line, a high kick 
diagonally between the posts and with the 
Brown men on him. Then they came backby yards and had a first down inside our 
eight-yard line. Again we showed magnificent goal line defense. They got two yards 
in three downs. Then our men spread out 
for a forward pass attack, and they drove 
through guard instead of tackle as Legorc 
expected. The ball was just over our line, 
with the two teams the other side. But 
Pollard's great run was a dandy. He must 
have covered all but ten yards of the entire 
field. He was pocketed three times in a 
mass of players, but wriggled out, dodging 
like an eel. He had a free run from our 
twenty-five yard line on the west line. He 
is a perfect wonder. The ovation to Wilson 
at Madison Square Garden was nothing to 
the handclapping Pollard got as he ambled 
circumspectly back to his position after 
their goal. The Horizon 
MUSIC AND ART 
MISS HELE N E. HAGAN , pianist, gave 
her first recital in Boston, Massachusetts, on November 23, at Steinert Hall. 
The program was as follows: Franck, Prelude Chorale, and Fugue ; Schumann, Carnaval, opus 9; Liszt, Liebestraum; Debussy, Jardin sous la pluie; Coleridge-Taylor, 
Deep River, Let Us Cheer the Weary Traveler, Bamboula; Chopin, Scherzo in B-flat 
minor. The Boston Herald said of the recital: "Miss Hagan's tone is remarkable for 
its quality- and depth. She has abundant 
technique, which is skillfully used for purposes of interpretation. Her legato is 
smooth. She can sing a melody. Her 
touch is now luscious, now caressing. As 
an interpreter, she listens to inner voices. 
In her playing there is idealism, as well as 
youthful intensity. She is both imaginative 
and emotional. In a word, Miss Hagan deserves an honorable place among the 
younger pianists." 
G Mr. Roland W. Hayes, tenor, appeared at 
Jordan Hall, Boston, Massachusetts, on November 17. He was assisted by Mr. Wesley 
Howard, violinist, and Mr. William Lawrence, accompanist. The Boston Transcript 
made note of the excellence of Mr. Lawrence's accompaniments, while the Boston 
Globe said of Mr. Hayes: "His voice is one 
of uncommon beauty, holding deep within it 
that poignant call to the heart which is a 
heritage most of all to the singers of his 
race. The voice has grown year by year; 
its sweetness is no less appealing, and Mr. 
Hayes has increased greatly his breadth 
and authority of style in the delivery of a 
song." 
C Mr. Clarence Cameron White, violinist, 
is now on concert tour in the Middle West. 
He has given successful recitals at Columbus, Ohio, and Chicago, Illinois. On November 15, he was heard in a joint recital with 
Miss Myrtle A. Burgess, pianist, at The 
Wheatley Branch of The Young Women's 
Christian Association, in St. Louis, Missouri. Mr. White played numbers by 
Brahms-Joachim, Hubay, Dvorak-Kreisler, 
Chaminade-Kreisler, and his own "Three 
Bandana Sketches," written after the Negro idiom. 
G Mr. Carl Diton, pianist, and Director of 
the Music Department of Talladega College, Alabama, is filling a series of concert engagements in the North. On November 10, he was heard at the Metropolitan A. M. E. Church, in Washington, 
D. C , where he was assisted by the choir 
of the church, Mr. C. H. Wesley, director, 
and The Dunbar High School Chorus, conducted by Miss Mary L. Europe. 
C Major Walter Loving, the retired conductor of The Philippine Constabulary 
Band, is to become the Director of the 
Washington, D. C , Concert Orchestra, 
which is to be re-organized into a symphony 
orchestra with its membership augmented 
to one hundred. 
C Mme. Mayme Calloway-Byron, soprano, 
of Chicago, Illinois, was enthusiastically 
received at the A. M. E. Zion Church, in 
Washington, D. C , on November 16: Her 
program comprised operatic selections from 
Charpentier, Verdi, Puccini, and Gounod. 
She was assisted by W. Henry Hackney, 
baritone, who sang with Mme. Calloway, in 
addition to his solo, the duet, "O Quant 
Occhi Fisi," from Puccini's "Madame Butterfly." Mme. Calloway has had the distinction of appearing with The Philharmonic Orchestras of Munich, and Dresden. 
C Coleridge-Taylor's "Dawn " was one of 
the English songs that was given the distinction of repetition when sung by Mme. 
Alma Gluck, the noted American soprano, 
at her recital in The Auditorium at Minneapolis, Minnesota, late in October. 
C Mr. Henry T. Burleigh was at the piano 
when Charles Harrison, American tenor, 
sang songs by Burleigh at the second of 
Max Sander's musicales at The Harris 
Theater, in New Yor k City, on November 
5. Orchestral numbers were played by the 
strings and woodwind of The Russian Symphony Orchestra. 
C Messrs. Henry T. Burleigh and James 
Reese Europe participated in a program at 
Kismet Temple, Brooklyn, New York, November 16, to open the campaign for $100,-
000 needed to develop the work of Howard 
Orphanage. This orphanage was started 
by a colored woman, Mrs. S. A. Tillman, 
fifty years ago, and incorporated in 1868, 
140 THE HORIZON 14 1 
and named in honor of General O. O. Howard, who became interested in the project. 
L. Hollingsworth Wood, 20 Nassau Street, 
New York City, is president of the institution. 
G The Orpheum Choral Society has been 
organized in Richmond, Virginia. It made 
its first appearance September 13, before 
a large audience. 
ATHLETICS 
r
T" , H E following football scores have been 
* made: 
Fisk 35—West Virginia 12. 
Fisk 0—Howard 16. 
Morehouse 14—Fisk 0. 
Morehouse 23—Tuskegee 0. 
Morehouse 17—Atlanta 10. 
Hampton 19—Lincoln 7. 
Howard 7—West Virginia 7. 
Livingstone 25—Shaw 11. 
Atlanta 6—Tuskegee 0. 
Prairie View 26—Bishop 13. 
Biddle 14—Benedict 0. 
Biddle 21—Livingstone 0. 
Hampton 12—Howard 3. 
Hampton 15—Virginia Union 6. 
G Mr. P. J. Carter, assistant coach at Howard University, selects the following colored All-American Football Team for the 
Border States: 
End—Brewer (Fisk). 
Tackle—Matthews (Howard), Capt. 
Guard—Puryear (Union). 
Center—Dabney (Hampton). 
Guard—Dawson (Hampton). 
Tackle—Banks (Hampton). 
End—Green (Howard). 
Quarterback—Harvey (Hampton). 
Halfback—Hughes (W. Va. Inst.). 
Halfback—Dorsey (Hampton). 
Fullback—Pinderhughes (Howard). 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
THE city of Rochester, New York, is 
planning to celebrate the one hundredth anniversary of the birth of Frederick 
Douglass, February 15, 1917. 
G Mr. Raymond J. Knox, a colored railway postal clerk running between Kansas 
City, Missouri, and Omaha, Nebraska, has 
made his third consecutive 100 per cent examination of states by routes. 
G Mr. Benjamin Brawley, Dean and Professor of English in Morehouse College, has 
in the Sewanee Review, for October, a 
highly technical article, "English Hymnody 
and Romanticism." Mr. Brawley has had 
an active year of publication. Other important articles have been as follows: "PreRaphaelitism and Its Literary Relations," 
in the South Atlantic Quarterly, for January; "The Negro in American Fiction," 
in the Dial, for May 11; "Lorenzo Dow, " 
simultaneously published in July in the 
Methodist Review and the Journal uf Neyro 
History; and "The Course in English in the 
Secondary School," in the Southern Workman, for September. In addition, Mr. 
Brawley has written the formal "History 
of Morehouse College" that is announced for 
publication in connection with the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of the college, in February. 
G Mr. George W. Wheeler, of Dayton, Ohio, 
has been promoted from the police force to 
detective duty. 
C Mr. Wellington Willard has recently been 
selected as private stenographer to the 
treasurer of The Pennsylvania Sugar Company, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Mr. 
Willard has been with this corporation one 
year as one of eight stenographers employed in the general offices. He won recognition by accuracy displayed in a recent 
efficiency contest held by the company. 
G Negro farmers in Jefferson County, Arkansas' cotton belt, are attracting much attention to themselves. Mrs. Rebecca Dawson, sixty-five years old, owns and 
drives her $1000 automobile; Mr. Frank 
Prewitt, a tenant at Sherrill, has paid his 
$800 debt, $725 on this year's debt, has $500 
cash, and three bales of cotton worth at 
least $350; Mr. Files Sanders, a tenant at 
Ladds, has paid his $1000 debt, and has a 
surplus of $1500; Mr. Drew Sims, on the 
plantation of D. B. Niven, at Tucker, has 
bought for cash a $1250 seven-passenger 
automobile; Mr. S. B. Adams, a blacksmith 
and farmer in Grady, recently left town in 
his $1250 car. 
G Colored policemen attached to the Nineteenth District Station House in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, won several prizes 
and the championship cup awarded the district scoring the highest number of points 
at the Policemen's Carnival held at the 
Philadelphia Ball Park, October 21 . Their 
score was twenty-two, and that of their 
nearest rival, ten. 
C The membership of the colored Young 
Women's Christian Association, in Indianapolis, Indiana, has grown from 200 to 850 
within the past month. 142 TH E CRISIS 
G The machine gun troop of the Nint h 
(Negro ) Cavalry , U . S. A. , has set a new 
record for gun practise. The y went into 
action from a gallop i n 12 2-5 seconds. No t 
only di d they do astonishingly rapi d work, 
but they literall y shot the line of targets 
down after scorin g 73 hits on 65 per cent of 
the targets, firin g 240 rounds i n a minut e 
and ten seconds, the range being battle 
sight. A t another time durin g the same 
series of tests, the troop scored 50 per 
cent of figures hit at 550 yards i n thirt y 
seconds' firing, and 96 per cent of figures 
hit at 780 yards i n one minut e of firing . 
C A health association i n connection wit h 
The St. Luke's Hospita l and Trainin g 
School for Negroes, Inc., at Columbia , 
South Carolina , has been organized and in ­
corporated under the laws of the state. 
C A t a meeting of The Missouri State 
Boar d of Denta l Examiners held in Jefferson City , October 9 to 11, six colored applicants were successful. 
0 Mr . Monroe N . Work , of Tuskegee Institute, has been made a member of The 
Nationa l Institute of Efficiency, wit h headquarters at Washington , D . C. H e was 
nominated for membership by Hamilto n 
Holt, of the Independent. 
C Majo r Willia m Stewart Robertson, a colored man, has been awarded a medal for 
gallantry . He is a member of the Britis h 
Army , and The Roya l Highlanders. He is 
now on duty near or around Flanders. 
G Charit y Hospita l and Trainin g School 
for Nurses, which was founded by colored 
citizens of Savannah , Georgia , twenty-three 
years ago, is askin g for $20,000 to buil d and 
equip a modern hospital. Mr . P. A . Denegal l is president. 
G Dr . and Mrs. Noa h Elliott , forme r slaves, 
over ninety years of age, have contributed 
$500 to the colored Youn g Men's Christia n 
Association's buildin g i n Columbus, Ohio. 
C The white people of Albany , Ne w York , 
have held a meeting to help the colored population in various ways. 
C Mr . Charle s C. Allison , Jr., forme r secretar y of boys' wor k wit h The Nationa l 
League on Urba n Conditions Amon g Ne ­
groes, in Ne w Yor k City , was recently made 
secretary of the colored Bi g Brothe r movement. 
C A n infirmar y for colored people has been 
opened i n Birmingham , Alabama , at 1508 
Seventh Avenue . 
G The Pythian s of Tennessee have started 
a campaig n to raise $25,000 fo r the purchase of the two-story structur e wit h a 
fifty-five foot frontage on Ceda r Street, and 
120 feet on Fourt h Avenue , Nashville , for 
their Pythia n Temple . 
G Th e Baltimore , Maryland , colored Youn g 
Men's Christia n Associatio n has secured 
propert y at McCullo h and Dolphi n Streets, 
for their new $100,000 building . 
C The followin g is the report of the colored Carnegi e Librar y at Houston , Texas, 
for the month ending October 31 : Visitors 
to readin g room, 1,011; meetings i n build ­
ing , 32; new borrowers, 18; tota l numbe r of 
borrowers, 2,527. Fine s collected, $7.79. Cir ­
culation of books, 1,501. 
EDUCATIO N 
P
ALME R MEMORIA L INSTITUTE , i n 
Sedalia , Nort h Carolina , has celebrated 
its fifteenth anniversary . Mrs. Charlott e 
Hawkin s Brown , the founder, has raised a 
$15,000 fund for the institution . 
C Th e late Mrs. Marth a H . Andrew , a 
whit e millionaire , has wille d $50,000 each to 
Tuskegee and Hampton . 
G Dr . Samue l G. Elbert has been appointed 
to the trustee board of The State College, 
near Dover, Delaware , by Governo r Miller . 
Althoug h this college is composed of colored students, Dr . Elbert is the first Negr o 
to hold the position of trustee. 
C Professor Fran k Trigg , principa l of Vir ­
gini a Collegiat e and Industria l Institute , 
Lynchburg , who has been engaged i n school 
work for thirty-five years, has been elected 
to succeed Dr. J . E . Wallace , who recently 
resigned as president of Bennett College, 
Greensboro, Nort h Carolina . 
G The Colored Hig h School at For t Worth , 
Texas, has been compelled to transfe r more 
than one hundred of her pupils to a build ­
in g formerl y used by the whites. 
G Fiv e colored men received their degrees 
wit h honor among the fifty-six graduates of 
Queen's University , Kingston , Ontario . 
The y were : Messrs. F . F . Carter, M . B. , of 
San Fernando , Trinidad ; J. W . T. Case, 
M . B. , of Georgetown, B . G. , who received 
the degrees of M . D. , and C. M. ; O. K. 
Blackett, of Port of Spain , Trinidad ; G. H . 
Clarke , of Manzanilla , Trinidad , and C. A . 
Palme r of St. Ann's Bay , Jamaica , received 
the degree of M . B . 
G The Tri-Count y Institut e of Colored 
Teachers of Wicomico , Somerset and THE HORIZON 143 
Worcester Counties, Maryland, held its second annual session at Princess Anne, November 27 to 29. When the registration was 
completed it was found that the 118 teachers of the three counties were present, with 
only two exceptions. 
C The purchase of a $3,000 site at Nelson 
Street and East Vine Avenue, Knoxville, 
Tennessee, for the erection of a library for 
Negroes, has been authorized by the City 
Commission. 
C In December, 1916, Mr. Howard Fisher, 
of Sharon Hill, Pennsylvania, will complete his eighteen months' term of office as 
president of The Darby Township School 
Board. He has served for one term of six 
years and has been re-elected for a similar 
term. He is the only colored member of the 
board which has under its control three 
schools, one white, one mixed, and one colored, which are taught by seven white and 
four colored teachers. 
C Plans are under consideration for the 
erection of a §100,000 high school for colored pupils in Richmond, Virginia. 
C The public schools of Richmond, Virginia, 
have installed lunch rooms where school 
children may get wholesome and nutritious 
lunches at reasonable prices. The first 
lunch room was established at The George 
Mason School, by a colored woman, Miss 
Theresita B. Chiles, head of the domesticscience department. 
C The Board of Trustees of Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute has unanimously elected Mr. William G. Willcox, president of The Board of Education of New 
York City, and a member of the Tuskegee 
Board of Trustees for ten years, to succeed the late Mr. Seth Low, chairman of the 
Tuskegee board. 
INDUSTRY 
A CCORDING to the New York World, 
Negroes have left the South for the 
North as follows, since the recent immigration: From Alabama, 60,000; Tennessee, 
22,000; Florida, 12,000; Georgia, 10,000; 
Virginia, 3,000; North Carolina, 2,000; 
Kentucky, 3,000; South Carolina, 2,000; 
Arkansas, 2,000; Mississippi, 2,000. 
C Ten thousand Negroes recruited in South 
Africa as a military unit, are doing labor 
service in Europe. 
(I Ira J. Mix, the well known milk dealer, 
in Chicago, Illinois, recently sold out to 
Kee and Chapel. When the latter firm took 
hold of the business all the Negro employees 
were discharged, despite the fact that they 
belonged to The Milk Wagon Drivers' Union. 
([ Three hundred and fifty colored men arcbeing employed at Galesburg, Illinois, by 
The C. B. and Q, Railroad Company. The 
Rev. John Garrison, pastor of The A. M. E. 
Church, at Galesburg, is interesting himself in these men and their families and inviting them to the churches so that they 
may become acquainted with the citizens, 
and be made welcome to the city. 
{[ A Negro farmer in Eufala, Alabama, 
got $166.32 for a 770-pound bale of cotton 
and seed, the largest brought to the city 
this year. 
C Mr. Charles M. Schwab is planning to 
give Negro labor a chance at his steel works 
plant near Baltimore, Maryland. 
([ Mr. G. W. Richardson, a Negro, won 
first prize in the live stock department of 
hogs at the Southeast Texas Fair, a white 
concern, but open to all contestants. 
C The colored undertakers of North Carolina are promoting a movement to erect a 
$40,000 casket factory and embalming school 
in that state, probably at Durham, where 
colored men and women will be given lucrative employment. This is a worthy undertaking, for it is said that nearly one million dollars is expended yearly by Negro 
undertakers to white firms for funeral supplies. Mr. A. L. Garrett is the promoter of 
the movement. 
C Fifty Negro men and women of Helena, 
Arkansas, met October 17, and made plans 
for the establishment of a bank in Helena, 
to be capitalized at $25,000. Nearly $5,000 
of the stock has been subscribed. 
C Thirty-five Negro mechanics are employed at the Holyoke Machinery Plant, in 
Holyoke, Massachusetts, as machinists, 
foundrymen, pattern makers and laborers, 
at wages ranging from two to four dollars a 
day, with a chance for promotion. The families of many of these men have also taken 
up residence in Holyoke. 
C The National Benefit Association, in 
Washington, D. C , celebrated its eighteenth 
anniversary, October 23. The following figures are worthy of mention: Claims paid, 
$82,000; Real estate, $153,000; Bonds and 
cash, $260,000; Insurance in force, $5,656,-
588. 
C Mr. J. W. Andrews, a colored farmer, is 
having erected a $10,000 two-story brick 144 THE CRISIS 
and basement building; near Sherman, Texas, for colored tenants. He has employed a 
colored contractor with all colored help. 
C Mr. M. Lafayette Dean won the first 
prize for a handmade library table at the 
white industrial and agricultural exposition held in Fort Smith, Arkansas. 
G The National League on Urban Conditions among Negroes has sent Mr. James W. 
Johnson, contributing editor of the New 
York Age, to investigate the cause of the 
migration of Negro laborers from the South 
to the North. His main effort is with the 
press. 
POLITICS 
SENATO R BOISE PENROSE, of Pennsylvania, announces that he will introduce into Congress a bill for federal supervision of national elections. 
G The Rev. R. W. Christian, a colored man, 
of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, has been appointed special agent for the U. S. Census 
Bureau in the collection of Negro religious 
statistics. 
G Major-General R. R. Jackson has been 
re-elected to the Third District of the Chicago, Illinois, State Legislature. 
G Mr. Ebenezer H. Harper, a Negro of McDowell County, West Virgina, has been 
elected to the State Legislature. He received 55,000 votes and led his ticket by 
over 1000 votes. Mr. Cazewell Donally, 
another Negro, was elected Justice of the 
Peace of Norfolk District, in the same 
county. 
G Mr. William L. James, after fifteen years' 
service in the transcriber's office at the City 
Hall, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, has 
been appointed by Mayor Smith as Inspector 
of Highways at a salary of $1500 a year, 
and the use of an automobile. 
C Mr. E. P. Fawlkes, the colored Justice of 
the Peace of Newport News Magisterial District, Warwick County, Virginia, is to retain his office, despite efforts to have him 
removed. 
G Mr. Henry Lucas has filed a suit for 
$10,000 damages against Messrs. Breckenridge Long, John J. Kennedy, and Theodore 
Sandmann, white Democratic leaders, as the 
first of a series of damage suits of Negro 
voters who were intimidated, arrested, or 
otherwise interfered with at the recent election in St. Louis, Missouri. That Mr. Long, 
president of The Wilson Club, was the head 
of a movement to challenge Negroes in 
wholesale lots was the substance of a statement purporting to be from him in the St. 
Louis Republic, November 7, "I believe that 
the throwing out of these 3000 votes will 
put St. Louis in the Democratic column." 
G The Lincoln Republican League in Memphis, Tennessee, R. R. Church, Jr., founder 
and president, scored against The Lily 
White Republican Party in an open contest 
at the ballot box in the recent election. 
G East St. Louis, Illinois, did not have a 
Woman's Hughes-Fairbanks Club, as had 
been planned, because some of the white 
women refused to meet with Negro women. 
G Mr. Lee Beatty, a colored lawyer in Cincinnati, Ohio, was made a representative in 
the Ohio State Legislature by. the recent 
election. 
G Mr. N. W. Pardon, a colored lawyer of 
East St. Louis, Illinois, has been appointed 
an assistant state's attorney. His salary 
will be $1200 a year. 
G Governor Brumbaugh has announced the 
appointment of Mr. John W. Parks, a colored attorney in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 
as assistant to the attorney general at a 
salary of $5000 a year. He is the first 
Negro to hold a position of this kind in 
the State of Pennsylvania. 
C Mr. W. D. Allen, of Portland, Oregon, is 
the first colored man to be elected a county 
committeeman by the popular vote of the 
people in Multnomah County. 
G Before an audience of some of New 
York's most prominent citizens gathered at 
The National Theatre to welcome The 
Hughes Women's Train, Colonel Theodore 
Roosevelt said of the Honorable Charles W . 
Anderson: "Mr. Charles W. Anderson was 
the first colored man to be appointed to an 
office of high honor and responsibility in the 
North. His record was admirable. He 
made good. If he had not, I would not 
have continued him in the office even if 
every colored man in the United States 
had requested me to do so. But he not only 
made good, he made a record as high as 
any man that ever held that great office, if 
not indeed a little higher, and having done 
so, I should have continued him in it even if 
every white man in the United States had 
asked for his removal. It is worth, not 
birth, that should count, wholly regardless 
of the nationality, creed or color o f the 
man." THE HORIZON 145 
PERSONAL 
r
T"'H E following marriages are announced: 
* Dr. Loring B. Palmer, of Atlanta, 
Georgia, to Miss Rose E. Harris, head 
nurse of the Pairhaven Infirmary, Atlanta; 
Mr. W. A. Joiner, head of the C. N. & I. Department, Wilberforee University, to Miss 
Ada Roundtree, instructor of nurse training at Wilberforee. 
C W e regret to learn that our note concerning Mr. Harry Simmons, of Butte, Montana, in a recent number of TH E CRISIS, was 
untrue in its essential particulars. 
C Judge and Mrs. Robert H. Terrell celebrated the silver anniversary of their marriage, October 28 , at their home in Washington, D. C. The family and a host of friends 
were present. 
C Mrs. Booker T. Washington, after four 
years' time, has received $5,00 0 left her by 
the late Mrs. Elizabeth Russell, a white 
woman of Minneapolis, Minnesota, through 
Lawyer W. T. Francis, of St. Paul. 
C Captain William M. Watson, mayor of 
Grayson, Oklahoma, a thriving Negro town, 
and Justice of the Peace for nine years, is 
dead. Last September the late Captain 
Watson and his wife celebrated the fiftieth 
anniversary of their marriage. 
C The late Miss Martha R. Cohen, a colored 
washerwoman, who died in Passaic, New 
Jersey, recently, at the age of eighty-two, 
has left an estate of $25,000 . Five thousand 
dollars has been willed to clear the indebtedness of Bethel Church, which she helped to 
organize more than forty years ago; the rest 
is to be divided among relatives and friends. 
C Mr. W. H. Judd Malvin died in Washington, D. C , October 28 . He had served for 
forty years as messenger in the Supreme 
Court and in the Adjutant General's office of 
the Wa r Department. 
C. Dr. Henry T. Noel, the first Negro physician to be established in Nashville, Tennessee, is dead. Fo r thirty-six years he had 
served as a member of the Meharry Medical School faculty. 
C Miss Maria L. Jordan, for forty-two 
years a teacher in the colored schools of 
Washington, D. C , died in Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, November 29 . 
C Mr. Edmund Crogman, eldest son of Professor and Mrs. Crogman of Clark University, Atlanta, Georgia, and brother of 
Mrs. R. R. Wright, Jr., is dead as the result 
of an automobile accident. He had been a 
railway mail clerk for ten years. 
(L Mr. Daniel H. Murray, Jr., of Washington, D. C., died November 22 . He was a 
violinist of considerable merit and the composer of many songs and arrangements for 
the violin. 
C The late Mr. Samuel Carter, an illiterate 
Negro, in Louisville, Kentucky, has left an 
estate of $10,000 . More than a half century 
ago he began to buy property. The beneficiary is Miss Frances Virgina Owens, a 
teacher in The Western Colored School. He 
had never married and had no immediate 
relatives. 
C Mr. James Henry Townsend, a Boston 
colored man, has been buried with full military honors in Arlington Cemetery, Washington, D. C , for his heroic act in remaining 
at his post in the nreroom of the armored 
cruiser Memphis when she was blown ashore 
at Santo Domingo. Mayor Curley has said: 
"When congress convenes in the winter I 
shall see that a special bill is presented at 
Washington in behalf of Mrs. Townsend, 
who is left absolutely without means of support." 
C The Honorable George H. Mayes, a veteran letter carrier in Jacksonville, Fla., has 
recently resigned his position after thirty 
years' service. The postmaster expressed 
deep regret at having him leave. A t one 
time he was superintendent of carriers, and 
had served on the local Civil Service Examing Board. 
CHURCH 
rpHE REV. DR. GEORGE F. BRAGG 
has celebrated his twenty-fifth anniversary as rector of St. James Protestant 
Episcopal Church, Baltimore, Maryland. 
C The Albemarle Conference of The A. M. 
E. Zion Church, held in Edenton, North 
Carolina, approved the plan of The Federated Churches of Methodism in America 
for the separation of races in the church. 
It is said that the federated churches are 
working for two great quadrennial bodies of 
white and colored Methodists. 
C On October 30 , the mortgage of The 
Mount Zion Baptist Church of Germantown, 
Pennsylvania, was burned. The church is 
worth $80,000 , which has been entirely paid 
in twenty-six years. It has had only one 
pastor, the Rev. Morton Winston. More 
than 25 0 of his members have become property owners during this period. 
C The Rev. C. R. Eucles, S. S. J., the first 146 TH E CRISIS 
Negr o to be ordained a Catholi c priest i n the 
Unite d States, wil l observe shortly i n Baltimore, Maryland , the twenty-fifth anniversar y of his ordination. 
C The Zio n Baptist Church , Denver, Colorado, started a week's celebration, November 19, i n honor of its semi-centennial anniversary . It is the oldest Negr o church 
west of the Missouri River. 
d The Fifteent h Street Presbyteria n 
Church , Washington , D . C , celebrated its 
seventy-fifth anniversar y wit h a three-days' 
session beginning Novembe r 19. The anniversar y sermon was delivered by the pastor, 
the Rev. Francis J. Grimke . 
MEETINGS 
T
H E ful l list of officers elected at the Na ­
tiona l Medica l Association's session 
last August is as follows: President, D . W . 
Bryd , Norfolk , Virginia ; Vice-Presidents, 
Dr. J. C. Johnson, Birmingham , Alabama , 
and Dr . A . C. Wallace , Okmulgee , Okla ­
homa ; Genera l Secretary, Dr. W . G. Alex ­
ander, Orange , Ne w Jersey; Chairma n of 
the Executiv e Board , Dr . G. E . Cannon , 
Jersey City , Ne w Jersey; Edito r of the 
Journal , Dr . C. V . Roman , Nashville , Ten ­
nessee; Associat e Editor, Dr. F . F . Bishop, 
Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . 
(I A Conference of Employe d and Voluntee r 
Workers Amon g Colored Wome n was held 
i n Richmond , Virginia , December 6 to 10, 
under the direction of The Nationa l Boar d 
of Youn g Women's Christia n Associations of 
The Unite d States of America . Miss Ev a 
Bowles, of The Nationa l Board , was the 
speaker at the opening meeting. 
C The Charit y Club , the leading Negr o 
women's organization i n Pittsburgh , Penn ­
sylvania , held a tea Novembe r 9, at whic h 
more than three hundred persons were present. The object of the gatherin g was to 
forwar d a movement for the co-ordination 
and co-operation i n racia l uplift wor k among 
the organizations of Negr o women i n Pittsburgh . Mrs. George H . Wilso n is president of the movement. 
C The fifth annua l meeting of The Na ­
tiona l League on Urba n Conditions Amon g 
Negroes was held December 6 at its headquarters i n Ne w Yor k City . 
C The tenth anniversar y of The Southern 
Medica l Associatio n was held i n Atlanta , 
Georgia , Novembe r 13 to 17. Dr. E . W . 
Carpenter, of Greenville , South Carolina , 
spoke on "Some Interesting Conditions Seen 
i n the Ey e of the Negro. " 
C The comin g Tuskegee Negr o Conference, 
Januar y 17 and 18, 1917, wil l be devoted 
mainl y to the discussion of Negr o health. 
Nationa l Negr o Healt h Wee k wil l be conserved Apri l 22 to 28, 1917. 
C Dr . Pau l M . Pearson, of Swarthmor e 
College, spoke on "Th e Colored Man , the 
Futur e of His Rac e i n Ligh t of the Past, " 
at a meeting of The Youn g Friends' Asso ­
ciation i n Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . H e 
said : "Th e histor y of the Negr o is tha t of 
Amei-icanism and Africanism ; he wanted to 
be both withou t being spat upon. " 
C Negr o citizens i n Richmond , Virginia , 
have organized a loca l chapter of The Na ­
tiona l Sociologica l Society to co-operate wit h 
the whit e loca l branc h of the society. The 
Rev. W . H . Stokes, Ph . D. , has been elected 
president. 
GHETT O 
MR. OM A HOUGHTON , a whit e Southerner, i n Boston, has been placed under 
a 5300 bond for insultin g two youn g colored 
women. H e remarked : "Wh y down South 
where I came from they'd have saken hands 
wit h me for that"—whic h was a lie. 
(I Wil l Rush , a whit e man , has been sentenced to life imprisonment, i n Oklahoma , 
for the killin g of Charli e Reynolds, a Negro . 
This is the first lif e sentence ever imposed 
for a Negro's death i n eastern Oklahoma . 
(I Tw o Negr o women i n Ne w Yor k Cit y 
have received $100 each i n a discriminatio n 
case enacted Jul y 9, 1916, against The Ne w 
Yor k Restaurant, at Coney Island. Mr . 
Robert P. Lattimor e was their attorney. 
(I "Ji m Crow " seats i n the cit y court room 
at Oklahoma City , Oklahoma , is the latest 
step i n segregation, accordin g to signs i n the 
court room. 
C Edwar d Hall , a thir d alleged participant i n the attempted lynchin g of Charle s 
Daniels, a colored man , at Lima , Ohio, Au ­
gust 30, and of the rioters who attacked the 
sheriff, Sherma n Ely , when he refused to 
tell where he had hidden his prisoner, has 
been placed on trial . 
C Justic e Shannon of Sawtelle , has granted 
a judgmen t of fifty dollars and costs to Mrs. 
Columbus, a Negr o woman , who brough t suit 
fo r discriminatio n against Th e L a Petit e 
Theatr e Company , i n Lo s Angeles, Cali ­
fornia . Attorne y E . Burto n Cerut i represented her. THE HORIZON 147 
C Mr. J. H. Fay, a Negro, who was beaten 
with a strap with tacks in it by a mob at 
Keo, Lonoke County, Arkansas, July, 1915, 
has been given a verdict of $1,000. 
C A discrimination suit against The Eagle 
Restaurant Company, Chinese, in Boston, 
Massachusetts, has been decided by Judge 
Sullivan in favor of the five Negro plaintiffs, awarding them twenty-five dollars 
each. 
C Many of the stores in Louisville, Kentucky, discriminate against Negroes to the 
extent that colored women cannot get a glass 
of water, but Crutcher and Starks, men's 
clothiers, at Fourth and Jefferson Streets, 
recently outdid them all by advertising a 
selling proposition to "white parents" only 
in the Sunday Herald. 
C A petition to initiate "an ordinance providing for limited segregation of the black 
and white races" is being circulated throughout Denver, Colorado. The Denver Property Owners' Protective League is back of 
the movement. 
C Dr. James E. White, while going from 
St. Louis, Missouri, to Memphis, Tennessee, 
over the St. L. I. M. and S. Road, as a 
Pullman car passenger, was forcibly ejected 
and received injuries that confined him to 
the hospital for several days and robbed 
of his personal property. He has brought 
suit and Attorney Booth is to represent him. 
C A street car in Savannah, Georgia, 
caught fire in front, due to a blow-out. Only 
the passengers in the front of the car were 
affected, and three white women were killed. 
Hence, the transfer of the Jim Crow section from the rear to the front of the cars. 
C Judge Henry E. McGinn, of the Circuit 
Court in Portland, Oregon, has decided 
against the swimming of white and colored 
people together in the public school tanks. 
G The Birth of a Nation has been barred 
from Evanston, Illinois. 
C A mob of over one hundred white citizens in Jackson, Tennessee, started toward 
the home of Walter Elkins, a Negro, to 
lynch him for having struck a white fellow 
workman over the head with an iron bar, 
at the Illinois Central shops. Negro citizens armed themselves and went to the 
home of Elkins. The mob has not yet arrived. 
C The school board at Downingtown, West 
Chester, Pennsylvania, is making an attempt at segregation. The colored citizens 
have engaged counsel to oppose the action 
as against the educational and state law. 
G Fifteen hundred colored tenants of Harlem, N. Y., met and protested against the 
high rents charged them. The trouble arose 
through the substitution of Negroes for 
white tenants on 143d Street, because the 
colored tenants paid higher rents. Notwithstanding the protest 6 houses have been 
filled with colored tenants. 
0 The postmaster of Akron, O., refused to 
appoint a colored man, J. R. Johnson, to a 
clerkship, although Johnson successfully 
passed two examinations, and stood among 
the highest on the lists. Johnson is a graduate of the University of Worcester. 
(From the Columbia, S. C , State.) 
ABBEVILLE MEN UNDER ARREST 
Charged of Lynching Negro and Rioting 
Hold Hearing Today 
Preliminary Before Magistrate Hammond 
Scheduled for Noon. Nineteen Warrants Served. 
Special to the State. 
ABBEVILLE, Dec. 4.—Sheriff Burts and 
Deputy Sheriff J. E. Jones began serving 
warrants today on the parties charged with 
lynching Anthony Crawford, a well-to-do 
Negro, on October 21, and rioting on the 
streets of Abbeville Monday following the 
lynching. Ten arrests were made in the 
lynching case and nine in the riot charge. 
The preliminary hearing will be before 
Magistrate Hammond at noon on Tuesday. 
Solicitor R. A. Cooper will be here to represent the State. 
Ten men are charged with participation 
in the lynching as follows: Jeff Cann, 
Sam Cann, Lester Cann, Will Cann, Burt 
Ferguson, J. S. Banks, Eugene Nance, Sam 
Adams, J. V. Elgin, and George White, 
Jr. Nine are charged with rioting: Sam 
Cann, Jeff Cann, Lester Cann, Will Cann, 
Burt Ferguson, Sam Adams, J. A. Brock, 
W. D. Bell, and Irwin Ferguson. J. A. 
Brock, W. D. Bell, and Irwin Ferguson 
waived a preliminary hearing and were released by Magistrate Hammond under bond 
of $200. 
C. The following lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: 
At Bay City, Texas, November 5, Joe 
Johnson—hanged. He was accused of killing a white man. 
At Melville, Louisiana, November 16, 
James Grant—hanged for alleged murder. 
At Clarksville, Texas, November 29, Buck 
Thomas—hanged for alleged assault on a 
man and his wife. 148 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
A Dolla r Fo r You r Thought s 
The tremendous advantage of an emblem distinctive of one's business and a 
catch phrase or slogan in its advertising has long been acknowledged. Tremendous sales campaigns have been built up around trade-marks. Wh o does not immediately recognize the little green pickle, and the phrase "57 Varieties," as indicative of the product of a particular house? Do you not know without any 
other wording just what is advertised by the phrases, "His Master's Voice," 
"There's A Reason," "No Metal Can Touch You, " "Eventually, Why Not Now, " 
and a host of others? Every well read person knows the name of the insurance 
company using the Gibraltar trade-mark, and the queer little ancient emblem on 
products of a certain biscuit company. The soft drink with the greatest sale in 
the world has a distinctive lettering for its name and a very useful little oil is 
readily recognized by its claims of "3 in 1." 
The above emblem, typical of double strength and holding powers, of safety 
and security in the time of greatest need, representing by the very proportions of 
its construction stability and dependability, has been designed as a trade-mark 
for STANDARD LIFE. Application has been made for registry under the Patent 
Laws of the United States to protect us in its use. We believe the double anchor 
is a new idea. We plan to make it as famous as a certain little fox terrier, or a 
celebrated old rock. We want a catch phrase to go with it, just a few words, the 
shorter and fewer the better, which will express tersely the service and strength 
of STANDARD LIFE. We want to pay you to help us find the right words. 
CONDITIONS 
The contest is open to anybody. Just send us your suggestion of an appropriate catch phrase which will embody the idea we wish to convey and send it in 
with your name and address. For the best such phrase with a suggestion as to 
how it may be used with the emblem we will pay $10.00 cash. For the second 
best suggestion of arrangement of a phrase and the emblem we will pay $5.00. 
For any idea that we can use in our advertisement we will pay $1.00. The officers 
of the Company will judge the contest. Every idea submitted will be given careful 
consideration and every idea available for use will be paid for. 
If you have read our advertisements on this page for the past three years 
you will understand what wc mean. The wonderful growth and development of 
this Company, operated on the Old Line, Legal Reserve plan, capably and honestly managed by Colored people, its three-fold service to the race, of Protection, 
Employment and Investment, offer a wide appeal to your imagination. We want 
something as new and original as the emblem. Do not use hackneyed phrases. 
The contest will close January 15th and all answers should be in our hands by 
then. If possible, the winner will be announced in the March number of the 
CRISIS. Checks will be mailed immediately to the successful contestants. Send 
your suggestion early. 
Standar d Lif e Insuranc e Compan y 
OLD LINE LEGA L RESERVE 
Hom e Office: Atlanta , Ga . 
BRANCHES IN NINE STATES. 
HEMA N F. PERRY, President. HARR Y H. PACE, Secretary-Treasurer. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . SOLD EVERYWHERE In USA. 
MME.C.J . WALKER'S 
Preparations for the hair 
Supreme in reputation 
Start the New Year using 
"WALKERS"- ^ hair restorer 
and treatment of no regrets. Distinctive in its superiority. 
LELI A COLLEG E 
WALKER' S HAI R PARLO R 
Eastern Branch : 110 W . 136th St., Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Home and Main Office. 
6-10 N. West St.. 
Indianapolis, Ind. 150 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
BOOK S B Y COLORE D AUTHOR S 
Nearly a quarter of a century has passed since the Neale house was founded. Hundreds 
of its publications are in active circulation. None of these are more vitally important to 
the American people than those that relate to racial problems. They comprise a library 
in themselves. Limitations of space enable us to announce here but a few of these books 
by prominent colored authors. 
Race Adjustment: Essays on the Negro in 
America. By Kelly Miller, colored; Dean 
of the College of Arts and Sciences and Professor of Mathematics, Howard University. 
Third thousand. $2.15 by mail. 
Chicago News: "Th e boo k is written with great 
ability, in English quite fre e from fault, and its logi c 
is fairly inexorable. " 
New York Evening Post: "A s admirabl e fo r its 
calmness and goo d tempe r as fo r its thoroughness 
and skill. " 
Out of the House of Bondage. By Kelly 
Miller, colored; Dean of the College of Arts 
and Sciences, Howard University. $1.65 by 
mail. 
Boston Transcript: "Writte n in a clear and decisive style, with a comprehensiv e and convincin g 
comman d o f the subject. H e neither denounce s no r 
condemns; he analyze s and constructs possibilities 
upo n the fundamenta l basis o f huma n nature . N o 
man o f his rac e has so sur e a powe r o f prunin g the 
fallacies with passionless intellectual severity fro m 
the perniciou s arguments o f the prejudice d demagogues. " 
The Facts of Reconstruction. By John R. 
Lynch, colored; formerly Member of Congress; later Fourth Auditor of the Treasury; 
at present Major in United States Army. 
Fourth thousand. $1.65 by mail. 
Chicago Tribune: "This boo k is perhaps the most 
important contributio n whic h has bee n mad e b y any 
political write r durin g recen t years to the political 
literature o f the reconstructio n era. " 
The Key; or, a Tangible Solution of the 
Negro Problem. By James S. Stemons, 
colored; Field Secretary of the Joint Organization of the Association for Equalizing 
Industrial Opportunities and the League of 
Civic and Political Reform. Mr. Stemons 
contends that industrial opportunity, rather 
than industrial education, is the basic need 
of the Negro. He presents his arguments 
in vigorous English of extraordinary 
purity, and the book may easily be classed 
with the foremost literature of the Negro 
race. $1.00 by mail. 
Racial Adjustments in the Methodist Episcopal Church. By John H. Reed, D. D., 
K. C , colored; with an introduction by Adna 
B. Leonard, D. D., LL. D. $1.60 by mail 
Philadelphia Christian Recorder: "Th e boo k is 
filled with splendid idealism, and in spite o f its 
somewha t verbos e character, presents a fine argument, whic h in this da y o f compromis e fo r the present 
exigencie s ma y no t be heeded. " 
Haiti: Her History and Her Detractors. By 
J. N. Leger, colored; formerly Minister 
from Haiti to the United States. Illustrated. Two editions: one in English and 
the other in French. Each edition $3.20 
by mail. 
The Nation, Ne w York : "Haiti, at last, has a 
champio n wh o is entitled t o be heard ; fo r he speaks 
from fullness o f knowledge , an d fro m a positio n o f 
political eminenc e send s fort h n o uncertai n sound . 
It is no t to o muc h t o say that the latest boo k o n 
Haiti is also the best that has eve r appeare d respecting the so-called 'Blac k Republic ' Ministe r Lege r 
has struck a ne w note , for, unlike others wh o have 
written o n the subject, he place s himself against a 
veritabl e wall o f facts, an d no t onl y ward s off the 
blow s that are aimed at his country , bu t takes the 
aggressiv e against he r critics. " 
The New Negro; His Political, Civil, and 
Mental Status. By William Pickens, Lit. 
D., colored; Dean of Morgan College, Baltimore. Dr. Pickens was graduated from 
Yale in the highest grade of his class and 
won the Phi Beta Kappa Key and the Ten 
Eyck Oration. Although a young man, he 
has won distinction as a scholar; he is 
among the foremost men of his race. $1.60 
by mail. 
Negro Culture in West Africa. By George 
W. Ellis, K. C , F. R. G. S., colored; recently, and for eight years, Secretary of 
the United States Legation in Liberia; 
author of "Liberia in the Political Psychology of West Africa, " "Islam as a Factor 
in West African Culture," "Dynami c Fac ­
tors in the Liberian Situation," and other 
works. Profusely illustrated. $2.15 by 
mail. 
Chicago Tribune: "It is the third consecutiv e con ­
tribution mad e b y a note d ma n to ou r knowledg e 
o f condition s and people s in West Africa. " 
Albany Times-Union : "It is easily on e o f the most 
important contribution s eve r mad e to the literature 
o f the Negr o race. " 
New York Crisis: "This histor y ough t to be in 
ever y American's library. " 
The Black Man's Burden. By William H. 
Holtzclaw, colored; Principal of the Utica 
Normal and Industrial Institute for the 
Training of Colored Youn g Men and Young 
Women, Utica, Mississippi. With an introduction by the late Booker T. Washington. 
Illustrated. Third thousand. $1.60 by mail. 
New Orleans Times-Picayune: "It is an interesting study o f Negr o achievemen t and shoul d b e an 
inspiration to the youn g me n an d the youn g wome n 
o f the race. " 
Prof. Wm. E. Chancellor, Ph. D., the eminent historian and educator, writes: "The 
Neale Publishing Company to-day represents high-water mark in America for its historical 
works. Upon its list are to be found the best books upon each and every side of the common issues of our public life. Such is the authority of the list considered as an entirety 
as to lend luster to each separate title, creating a presumption in its favor. " 
Order through 
THE NEALE PUBLISHING CO. , W^To r THE CRISIS, S " 
Mention TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 151 
<3fie Authorized 
Biography of 
BOOKER T. 
WASHINGTON 
Builder of a Civilization 
By EMMET T J. SCOT T 
JOT 18 Years Secretary to Booker T. Washington 
and LYMA N BEECHE R STOW E 
Preface by Theodore Roosevelt 
Th e dramatic accurat e story o f on e wh o rose from 
slave bo y to be the recognized leader o f his race and 
to take his plac e fo r all time amon g America's great 
ITiCi'l. 
A trenchant and graphic picture o f the man himself 
as know n b y those nearest him ; o f his contributions 
to education, his position o n the rights o f the Negr o 
and race prejudice , etc. 
Th e serious matter is relieved by man y o f the inimitable stories fo r whic h Washingto n wa s noted. 
This boo k furnishes a sequel to "U p from Slavery. 
Illustrated, Net $2.00 
For sale at all book stores and at 
TH E CRISIS , 70 Fifth Ave., New Yor k 
DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & CO. 
Garden City N. Y. 
GIV E BOOK S 
100 0 ON E THOUSAN D DOLLAR S SAVE D 100 0 
SPECIA L BOOK BARGAIN S 
Masterpieces of Negro Eloquence..$1.50 postpaid Race Relationship in the South, set, 
Life and Times of Frederick Douglass 2.50 
The Black Phalanx 3.00 
YOUNG'S BOOK EXCHANGE 
7 vols ". $5,00 postpaid 
N. B. Catalogue of new rare hooks, 
pertaining to the colored race. 
135 West 135th Street. New York City 
EXCELLENT OPPORTUNITY FOR YOUNG MEN AND WOME N 
SCHOOL OF MECHANICAL DENTISTRY 
A. O. BRANSON & CO. 52 WEST 1 35TH ST. NEW YORK CITY 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 15 2 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
EVERYTHIN G CONCERNIN G TH E NEGR O RAC E 
fafBBBBBBMBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBMMBtMBBBMMMMBBBBBtBBBBBBmBBtBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB 
Th e Champio n Magazin e 
EDITED BY FENTON JOHNSON 
CONTAINS 
ARTICLES BY THE LEADING WRITERS OF THE RACE. 
A REVIEW OF CURRENT NEWS EVENTS AND MOVEMENTS AMONG NEGROES. 
A REVIEW OF LEADING EDITORIALS CONCERNING THE NEGRO. 
A PICTORIAL REVIEW OF RECENT RACE EVENTS IN LETOGRAVURE. 
A REVIEW OF STAGE, MUSIC AND ATHLETICS BY LEADING AUTHORITIES. 
DRAWINGS AND SKETCHES BY TALENTED COLORED ARTISTS. 
COMMENTS: 
"Shoul d play an important part in encouragin g the Negr o and educating the white-"— 
Chicago Evening Post. 
"TH E CHAMPIO N MAGAZIN E is neatly gotte r up and its severa l departments are 
no t onl y appropriate , but well arrange d fo r the convenienc e o f the reader. W't like the 
modest y o f you r claims and the sincerity o f you r purpos e as expresse d in your openin g 
editorial and we hop e you r efforts art goin g to be rewarde d with ever y success possible. " 
—Principal R. R. Moton, Tuskegee, Ala. 
" I congratulat e yo u most heartily on the text and appearance o f TH E CHAMPIO N 
MAGAZIN E and wish it. as yo u must know , the success it deserves."— William Stanley 
Braithwaite. 
Issued Monthly 
ON SALE EVERYWHERE! 
Ten Cents per Copy 
4724 Sout h Stat e Stree t 
Forty-eight to Sixty-four Pages, Illustrated 
AGENTS WANTED EVERYWHERE! 
One Dollar a Year 
OFFICES: 
Chicago , Illinois 
Th e Journa l o f 
Negr o Histor y 
Published Quarterly 
100 Pages 
Edited by CARTER G. WOODSON 
TH E JOURNA L O F XEGR O HISTOR Y is 
the official orga n o f the Association for the 
Study of Negro Life and History, which is 
no w trying; not to promot e an isolated research into the history o f the black race but 
to show ho w civilization lias bee n influenced 
by contac t with the peopl e o f color. This 
publication aims to populariz e the movemen t 
to save and make available the scattered historical materials bearin g o n the Negro . In 
it appear scholarly articles and valuable docu ­
ments giving; informatio n generally unknown . 
It is concerne d with facts, not with opinions. 
Subscription price, $1.00 per year. Foreign 
subscriptions, 25 cents extra. Single numbers, 25 cents; 30 cents by mail. 
Checks should be mad e pavabl e to T11E 
JOURNA L O F NEGR O HISTOR Y and 
addressed to 
CARTE R G . WOODSO N 
1216 You St., N. W. Washington, D. C. 
Universit y Literar y Burea u 
Manuscrip t Criticize d 
an d Revise d 
Poems, Short Stories, Novels, Scenarios, 
Magazine and Press Articles, Sermons and 
Addresses. 
Advice on Publication 
Correspondence Solicited 
Strictly Confidential 
Montgomery Gregory Alain Leroy Lock 
ADDRESS : Box 102, Howard University, 
Washington, D. C. 
WANTE D 
Agents for THE CRISIS, Dignified work 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Good Buggies 
at 
Low Prices for Cash 
Write for Catalog 
C.R. PATTERSON & SONS 
GREENFIELD, 0. 
Negro Firm Buggy and 
Automobile Makers 
Mentio n TH E C B THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 153 
// It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
W e manufacture Lodge Regalia fo r ever y 
Fraternal Society. Cash o r Installment 
Plan. Cheapest Badge House in the Country , Catalogue for your Society FREE . 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES. Pre*, 
N. E. Cor. 8th & Plum 
Cincinnati , Ohi o 
PEOPLE ' S HAI R Books ? 
KATTJBAX FKOST TA.RV 
Covers Entire Head 
MSAMM 
Latest Styles of Wigs, Plats, Transformations, Puffs, Electric Combs. W e are the 
largest firm in this line. Send 2c for our 
new Catalogue. 
Th e Ol d Reliable 
MME. BAUM'S HAIR EMPORIUM 
486 8th Ave., New York City 
The SLAUGHTER SYSTEM introducing 
LYDA'S HAIR BEAUTIFIER 
Guaranteed lo Grow llalr In SIX TREATMENTS 
or Money Refunded. Price 50 cents per box. 
Agents Wanted. System Taught by Mail or at College. 
MRS . £ . SLAUGHTER GAMBL E 
3001 LAWTON AVENUE 4T. LOUIS. MO." 
AGENT S $6 0 WEEKL Y 
RpbinBonFoldingBathTiib. BiKseller. Oonta 'ittle. no plumbing, little water. Weight pound*, fold- into small roll. Full length bathn, far better than tin tuba. Guaranteed 10 v.-nrs. $10 rj.-ty easily made. Write for free tub offer. •» eOlOISOl CABINET MF6. CO,4287 Factories Bldg., Toledo. Ohio 
Sagene Compound Restores Gray Hair Naturally 
stops falling hair and chases dandruff In a few applications. 
No dyes. Pure powdered Sage and Sulphur. So trouble to 
mix; Just add water and hay nun. Si-nd 10c. for nainple 
package. Full nl/f $1.00. 
SAGENE MFG. CO. Box 672A CHICAGO. ILL. 
' See the Selected Liston 
the Back Cove r 
i 
Special Offer ^;^ f 
clothes. This handsome, handtailored $15 Suit, in 18 different 
new styles, special price only 
$8.50. We offer you The Biegest 
Values in Tailoring, and please 
remember always: We Will Not 
"ecp One Penny Of Your Money 
Unless you are WELL PLEASED. 
Bi g Pay-Eas y Wor k 
Agetlts! Make $35 to $65 a week 
, nghtin your own town. Part time or ail. We furnish Tailor Book with styles, samples, wholesale •—ice and ad instructions FBE£. ''rue for it Today. 
THE CHICAGO TAILORS ASSN . 
DprtlRl 515 So.FranKlin St., Chicago. 
>AINLESS treatment 
JOHNS, BUNIONS. INirtOWN NAn.S, and ALL 
ler AILMENTS of the FEET, 
mlna tlon and Adrico Free 
^MW DR. WILLIAM J. CARTER 
CHIROPODIS T 
Telephone 1284 Audubon. 107 West 136th St., New York City. 
Comfor t Indoor Close t 
• Odorless, Sanitary, Germ 
placed anywhere in home, 
healthy, sanitary conditions, 
- ABOLISH OUTDOOR CLOSET 
Have city conveniences. Germ-life killed instantly by chemicals. Emptied once a monlh. Needs no other attention. Boards of Health endorse. Write for literature. Agents wanted —exclusive territory 
COMFORT CHEMICAL CLOSET CO.'^edo.'om?"'-
•Oof. Call bi 
A guarantee of 
LADIES WANTED TO TAKE THE QUIN0 COURSE ^&ST%£ : 
....,„ Be our aeent. Sell our goods and make money. Qui no Hair Grower, 50c., Temple Oil, 
7o£r Try a box. Write QUINO, 636 Fogg Street, NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Mention TH E QJISIS 154 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlant a Universit y 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
19 Monograph* Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY u ATLANTA. GA. 
Th e Curse o f Rac e Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street •:• New York, N. Y. 
"GLEANING S FRO M DIXIE-LAND " 
Ten poems by 
£fpie T. Battle, A.M . 
"Mrs. Battle has an individual gift of melody." 
—Springfield Republican. 
*'You owe it to your race to publish your poems in 
book form."—Editor. Southwestern Christian Advocate. 
"Verses are smooth, graceful, high-minded and clear, 
reverent to all truth, appreciative of all beauty and 
true inspiration."—George W . Cable. 
PRIC E 25 CENTS . 
Address: Okolona Industrial School, 
Okolona, Miss. 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
(nay be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street NE W YOR K 
The Truth Abou t the Bible " 
This book deals with the sex of the Bible. "It 
will empty our jails, insane asylums and hospitals 
in time ; it should be in every home in the world." 
—J. H. Powell, M. D. "For ideas, it is the world's 
greatest book."—J. Silas Harris, A. M. "It is 
the world's most revolutionary book; it means a 
better race."—W. A. Swan, M. D. Read this 
book. Price $2,#0. Address the Author, Sidney 
C. Tapp, Ph.B., 601 Delaware St.. Kansas City. Mo. 
Crura:*?*! CiallJti^ Cayiisf 
POPULAR STYLES FOR LADIES OR GENTLEMEN. 
100 FOR 50 CENTS OR 50 FOR 30 CENTS, NO 
EXTRA CHARGE FOR ADDRESS. ALL ORDERS 
FILLED PROMPTLY. ATTRACTIVE PROPOSITION 
FOR AGENTS. WRITE FOR SAMPLES AND TERMS 
THE HOUSE OF CHOWNING 
INDIANAPOLIS. INDIANA 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR..GERTRUDE E. CURTIS 
SURGEON DENTIST 
188 W. lttth Street New York City 
T.UUn... /Centra l 104-W Telephones: | Maj n fi, 
HARRY E. DAVIS 
Attorney-at-Law Notary Puilic 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohl» 
Office L. D . Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L. D . Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORGE A. DOUGLAS 
Counsellor-at-Law 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS 
Attorney and Counsellor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROWN S. SMITH 
Actorney-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykea Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis If bin. 
TeL BirTfrt Hiir Cable Addreu , Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
Attorney and Counsellor-at-Law 
34 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W . Aihbi e Hawkins George W . F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHEN 
ATTOR N eys-AT-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md . 
Telephone Central 3087 
HARR Y M . COOPER 
Druggists' Specialties 
Chemicals, Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 
Write for Quotations 
Room 612, 58 W. Washington St. CHICAGO, ILL. 
SPLENDID OPPORTUNITY FOR A DENTIST 
desiring to locate in Philadelphia, Pa. For 
particulars address Frank Dawson, 1020 Chestnut Street. 
a good town where a colored business would be appreciated? Have money and services for the right 
town. Correspondence invited. Address: J. L . T. , 
care TH E CRTSTS. 7 0 Fifth Avenue. New York. N. Y. 
WHO KNOWS 
Bi g Entertaine r 
120 Poirlor Games. 5 Comic Recitations, 
15 Tricks with Cards. 187 Jokes, Riddles 
and Funny Readings. 73 Toasts. 3 Monoloenes, 50 Money Making Recipes.* All 
-> for 10 Cents* 3 for 20 Cents. Postpaid. 
DORN, 709 S. Dearborn St.. Dept. 75. Chicago. 11. 
AGENT S WANTED ! 
For our new book. Progress and Achievements of the Colored People. Showing the 
wonderful doings and new opportunities of 
our race, low price, many pictures, lightning 
seller, $10.00 per day. Ask for terms. Writ e 
quick. . AUSTI N JENKIN S CO., 
7th St., Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISI S A Ne w Boo k b y Dr . D u Boi s 
TH E NEGR O 
By W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS , author of "Souls of Black 
Folk, " "Quest of the Silver Fleece," "Select Bibliography of 
the Negro American, " etc. 
This is the authentic romanc e o f the black man. It is a 
history o f him at onc e scholarly, earnest and eloquent. H e is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread o f his fascinating story is followe d in Africa , America , and whereve r 
else it has appeared. T o loo k at the Negr o against the backgroun d o f his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in whic h most American s have seen him. 
256 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
At the low price of 50 cents net—By mail 56 cents 
Dr. Du Bois's new boo k is the latest addition to a remarkable 
series of low-priced new books with which everybody should become acquainted. 
TH E HOM E UNIVERSIT Y LIBRAR Y 
9 4 volume* now ready 
Published by HENRY HOLT & COMPANY, 34 West 33d Street, New York 
Is made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY, H. A. L. FISHER, W. T. BREWSTER 
and J. ARTHUR THOMSON. 
Cloth bound, good paper, clear type, 256 pages per Cf "L^ » 4-
volume. Each complete and sold separately - - OvfC . Tl6 l 
Postage extra 
" A growin g wonde r o f enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume , entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledge d 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condense d authority 
—and at the nominal price o f 50 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES: 
EVOLUTION By J. A. Thomson LATIN AMERICA By W. R. Shepherd 
THE FRENCH REVOLUTION VICTORIAN LITERATURE 
By Hilaire Belloc By G. K. Chesterton 
ROME By W. Warde Fowler GERMANY OF TODAY 
PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY By Charles Tower 
By Bertrand Russell EURIPIDES AND HIS AGE 
NAPOLEON By H. A. L. Fisher By Gilbert Murray 
THE CIVIL WA R By F. L. Paxson UNEMPLOYMENT By A. C. Pigou 
Order through the publishers or through 
Th e CRISIS , 70 Fift h Avenue , Ne w Yor k 
Mention TH E CRISI S Che CRISIS Book mart 
Yo u can order through the CRISI S any boo k printed at 
the regular publisher's price. 
"Th e true University o f these days is a collection o f books."—Carlyle. 
}\ Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
NATIVE LIFE IN SOUTH AFRICA. (Sol. J. Plaatje) $1.50 
HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF AN EX-COLORED MAN . (Anonymous) . 1.20 
NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY. (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF ELACK FOLK. (W. E. B. Du Bois) 1.25 
TH E WHITE MAN' S BURDEN. (T . Shirby Hodge) 1.00 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.00 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
HALF A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
JOHN BROWN. (W. E. B. DU Bois) 1.25 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINCE HALL AND HIS FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford) . . . 1.00 
NEGRO CULTURE IN WEST AFRICA. (George W. Ellis) 2.00 
TH E NEGRO. (W. E. B. Du Bois) 50 
TH E EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861. (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.00 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R. Lynch) 1.50 
LIFE AND LETTERS OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR. (W. C. BerwickSayers) 2.25 
MASTERPIECES OF NEGRO ELOQUENCE. (Alice Moore Dunbar, 
Editor) 2.50 
POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.00 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H. E. Krehbiel) 2.00 
OUT OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman Beecher 
Stowe) 2.00 
Address, THE CRISIS, : : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
iiimiiiiiiiii MM 