THE CRISIS TE N CENTS SEPT 19
Frank Walts President 
MOORFIELD STOREY 
Vice-Presidents 
ARCHIBALD H. GRIMKE 
REV. JOHN HAYNES HOLMES 
BISHOP JOHN HURST 
JOHN E. MILHOLLAND 
MARY WHITE OVINGTON 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FOR THE 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE 
Chicago 
JANE ADDAMS 
DR. C. E. BENTLEY 
Boston 
JOSEPH PRINCE LOUD 
BUTLER R. WILSON 
Baltimore 
BISHOP JOHN HURST 
Buffalo 
MARY B. TALBERT 
Springfield, Mass. 
REV. G. R. WALLER 
DIRECTORS 
Washington 
PROF. GEO. WILLIAM COOK 
CHARLES EDWARD RUSSELL 
Brooklyn 
DR. V. MORTON JONES 
New Haven 
GEORGE W. CRAWFORD 
Philadelphia 
DR. WILLIAM A. SINCLAIR 
St, Louis 
HON. CHARLES NAGEL 
New York 
REV. HUTCHINS C. BISHOP 
MRS. FLORENCE KELLEY 
PAUL KENNADAY 
CAPT. ARTHUR B. SPINGARN 
CHARLES H. STUDIN 
DR. JOHN G. UNDERHILL 
LILLIAN D. WALD 
WILLIAM ENGLISH WALLING 
DON'T BE CONTEN T JUST T O REA D ABOU T TH E WOR K OF TH E 
N. A. A. C. P. READIN G MA Y MAK E YO U "FEEL GOOD " OVE R 
SOME OF TH E THINGS ACCOMPLISHED , BU T JOIN TH E ARM Y 
THA T IS "PUTTING THE M OVER " AN D FEEL THA T YO U AR E 
HELPING T O MAK E AMERIC A TH E KIN D OF COUNTR Y YO U 
WAN T IT T O BE, WIT H FULL PARTICIPATIO N O N TH E PAR T OF 
COLORE D PEOPLE IN TH E CIVIC, POLITICA L AN D ECONOMI C 
LIFE OF TH E NATION . 
Prepare for the fuller democracy for which the nation is fighting by participating in the work of the one organization which includes the black man in its 
every effort and seeks to include him in every American right and privilege. 
Don't shirk. Join Now. One dollar or more annually makes you a member. 
Date , 1918. 
The Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying two dollars or more. 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD, Treasurer, 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
SIR: 
I enclose $ in payment of membership dues for one year 
in the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, 
with the stipulation that one dollar of any amount remitted herewith in 
excess of one dollar is for one year's subscription to THE CRISIS. 
Name 
Street 
City and State 
Executive Officers 
MARY WHITE OVINGTON, Acting Chan 
man of Board. 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD, Treasure 
DR. W. E. B. DU BOIS, Director of Publications and Research 
JAMES WELDON JOHNSON. Field Secretary 
WALTER F. WHITE. Assistant Secretary 
JOHN R. SHILLADY, Secretary TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY AND COPYRIGHTED BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY. CONDUCTED BY W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS; AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, BUSINESS 
MANAGER 
Vol. 16—No. 5 SEPTEMBER, 1918 Whole No. 95 
PICTURES 
Page 
COVER: Portrait of Gertrude Royal in "Chu Chin Chow" by Frank Walts 
THE DOUGLAS HOME 233 
Y.M.C.A. SUMMER INSTITUTE 234 
NEGRO EDITORIAL CONFERENCE 234 
MEN OF THE MONTH 235 
ARTICLES 
WHA T OF LIBERIA? By Plenyono Gbe Wolo 220 
THE WORK OF A MOB. By Walter F. White 221 
THE CASE OF DR. BUNDY 224 
THESE THINGS SHALL BE. By John Haynes Holmes 226 
GOD GAVE US SONG. A Poem. By Otto Leland Bohanan 226 
PASSING OF THE EX-SLAVE. A Poem. By Georgia D. Johnson 226 
COMPENSATION. A Poem. By E. Ralph Cheyney 226 
DEPARTMENTS 
EDITORIAL 215 
THE OUTER POCKET 218 
THE LOOKING GLASS 227 
MEN OF THE MONTH 235 
THE HORIZON 237 
THE OCTOBER CRISIS 
The October Crisis is Children's Number. Baby pictures must REACH us by September 8. 
No photographs can be returned. 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTRA 
RENEWALS: The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANGE OF ADDRESS: The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and DRAWINGS relating to colored people are desired. They will be received at 
the sender's risk, but if postage is enclosed effort will be made to return them safely, if unavailable. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the Post office at New York, New York, 
under the Act of March 3, 1879. 212 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Training Schoo l 
DURHAM , NORT H CAROLIN A 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
THOUG H IT IS YOUN G IN HISTORY, THE INSTITUTION FEELS A JUST PRIDE IN THE WOR K THUS 
FAR ACCOMPLISHED, FOR ITS GRADUATES ARE ALREADY RILLING MAN Y RESPONSIBLE POSITIONS, 
THUS DEMONSTRATING THE AI M OF THE SCHOOL TO TRAIN ME N AND WOME N FOR USEFUL 
CITIZENSHIP. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
TH E GRAMMA R SCHOOL TH E TEACHE R TRAININ G DEPARTMEN T 
TH E ACADEM Y TH E DIVINIT Y SCHOOL 
TH E SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SCIENCES TH E COMMERCIA L DEPARTMEN T 
TH E DEPARTMEN T OF MUSI C TH E DEPARTMEN T OF HOM E ECONOMIC S 
TH E DEPARTMEN T OF SOCIAL SERVICE 
In Equipment and Teaching Force it is Not Surpassed by Any School for the 
Training of Colored Youth in the South. 
THE FALL TERM OPENS OCTOBER 1, 1918. 
FO R FURTHER INFORMATION AN D CATALOG, ADDRESS 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
THE AGRICULTURAL AND 
TECHNICAL COLLEGE 
What College Shall I 
Attend this Session? 
YO U SHOULD ATTEND THE A . & T . COLLEGE. ITS TWENTY-FIFTH ANNUAL SESSION BEGINS OCTOBER 1, 1918. YO U WILL HAVE THE 
ADVANTAGES OF THREE STRONG DEPARTMENTS: 
AGRICULTURAL. MECHANICAL, AND ACADEMIC . 
A NEW DEPARTMENT FOR TEACHER TRAIN ­
ING IN VOCATIONAL AGRICULTURE WILL ALSO 
BE AVAILABLE. 
UNSURPASSED OPPORTUNITIES FOR MILITARY TRAINING AND ADVANCEMENT. 
FOR CATALOG AND FURTHER INFORMATION 
WRITE TODAY TO 
President. James B. Dudley , 
GREENSBORO, N . C . 
The Cheyney Training School for 
Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNA. 
For reasonably mature students 
who have a good secondaryschool preparation, and who desire to become teachers, courses 
are offered during the regular 
term in academic work, domestic 
science, domestic art, physical 
training, elementary school methods, wood and metal working, 
and agriculture. Board room and 
laundry privileges for the year, 
$125 . Fall term begins Wednesday, September 18 , 1918 . 
Mention T H E CriSIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 21 3 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located In the City of Atlanta, Ga. 
The courses of study include High School, Normal 
School and College, with manual training and domestic science. Among the teachers are graduate! 
of Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth and Wellesley. Fortynine years of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. Graduates are almost universally successful, 
For further Information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, GA. 
Knoxvllle College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. The 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid 
Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and 
Thorough Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term Begins September 18, 1918. 
For information address 
President R. W. Mc GRANAHAN 
KNOXVLLLE, TENN. 
THE FLORIDA A. & H. COLLEGE 
Tallahassee, Florida 
Offers long and short courses in 
Mechanic Arts, in Home Economics 
in Agriculture, in Education and in 
Science. 
For Catalog Address 
NATHAN B. YOUNG, President 
P. O. DRAWER 524 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1917 
SOUTH ATLANTA GEORGIA 
Most beautiful campus of 70 acres, commodious buildings WITH modern conveniences. 
High Scholarship — Talented Faculty — Well 
equipped library and laboratories—Literary 
societies—Athletics—Co-educational—Expenses 
very low. $100 per year of eight months 
will pay tuition, board, room, etc. 
Comfortable dormitories WITH steam heat 
and gas light. 
COURSES OF STUDY 
Domestic Science for girls, cooking, sewing, 
dressmaking and embroidery. 
Pre-Academy—7th and 8th grades. 
Academy—Four years with diploma. 
Pre-Medical— Two years above academy. 
College—Four years leading to A. B. degree. 
Normal—Five years above grades with diploma. 
FIRST SEMESTER OPENS OCTOBER 2, 1918. 
EA1E Y ANDREWS KING, President. 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of the Sisters of St Mary. 
Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
609 N. 43d St. W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA, G A 
College, Academy, Divinity- School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M W . DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE, President 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
CO-EDUCATIONAL 
The largest institution of learning in the Sooth 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training. Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester begins September, 1918. 
For further information address 
W . A . FOUNTAIN, President 
BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Board 
Mention The Crisis. 214 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
LIVINGSTONE COLLEGE 
SALISBURY, N. C. 
A Religions Co-Educational School with a 
Tradition 
Open to All Negroes: Only Merit Counts 
STUDENTS COME FROM Twenty-nine 
STATES IN THE UNION, FROM CANADA, 
AFRICA, THE WEST INDIA ISLANDS and 
CENTRAL AMERICA. AND GRADUATES MAKE 
GOOD. 
SALISBURY, NORTH CAROLINA, AN IDEAL 
PLACE FOR STUDY WITH A MILD, EQUABLE 
CLIMATE, PURE WATER, BREEZES FROM 
PINE AND OTHER FORESTS A CONSTANT 
TONIC—THE GREATEST DEGREE OF HEALTHFULNESS. 
New Girls' Dormitory with all Modern Conveniences Accommodating 210 just Completed 
and Ready 
Courses of Study: Grammar School, Academy, 
Normal, College, Divinity, Music and 
Industries for Boys and Girls. 
Expenses Moderate. 
Thirty-sixth Session opens October 2, 1918. 
For Further Information Address 
D. C. SUGGS, PRESIDENT OR 
J. E. Aggrey, Registrar. 
Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, Ohio 
(.Established 1856) 
THE SCHOOL WITH THE RECOGNIZED 
MILITARY DEPARTMENT. A STRONG AND 
THOROUGH COURSE IN MILITARY SCIENCE 
AND TACTICS GIVEN ALL MALE STUDENTS, 
BY REGULAR U. S. OFFICER. GRADUATES 
IN GREAT DEMAND BY U. S. GOVERNMENT FOR SELECTED SERVICE. GIVEN 
QUOTA OF 20 MEN FOR FOURTH OFFICERS' 
TRAINING CAMP, FT. DODGE, LA. 
COURSES OF STUDY—COLLEGE (SCIENTIFIC, CLASSICAL AND EDUCATIONAL) ; NORMAL (ELEMENTARY AND INDUSTRIAL 
TEACHERS) AND VOCATIONAL; THEOLOGICAL (REGULAR AND ENGLISH); ACADEMY 
—FOUR YEARS WITH DIPLOMA. $40,000.00 
GYMNASIUM JUST COMPLETED. 
SCHOOL OPENS SEPTEMBER 17th. FOR 
INFORMATION ADDRESS 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH, 
PRESIDENT. 
TOUGALOO COLLEGE 
MISSISSIPPI 
" THE BEST SCHOOL FOR NEGROES IN THE 
STATE."—BISHOP THEODORE D. BRATTON. 
COLLEGE 
REGULAR FOUR YEAR A. B. COURSE 
TWO YEAR TEACHER TRAINING COURSE 
ACADEMY 
CHOICE OF SEVEN COURSES — COLLEGE 
PREPARATORY, AGRICULTURAL, MECHANICAL, 
HOME ECONOMICS, COMMERCIAL, PEDAGOGICAL, MUSICAL. 
OUT IN THE COUNTRY. EXPENSES LOW. 
Four Prize Scholarships of $25.00 Each Offered 
Boys for Best Entrance Examinations to 
Eighth and Ninth Grade. 
FOR PARTICULARS 
Write President W. T. HOLMES 
TOUGALOO, HINDS COUNTY, MISSISSIPPI 
The Slater Industrial and 
State Normal School 
FOR COLORED YOUTH OF BOTH SEXES 
WINSTON-SALEM, N, C. 
I. Offering: Standard Courses 
In Academic Subjects, 
In Industrial and Vocational Subjects, 
In Education. 
II. Graduates receive the Teacher'S Certificate. 
HI. Located amid the foothills of the mountain section of Western North Carolina and the health conditions are ideal. 
IV. Accommodations excellent and expenses 
moderate. 
For further information communicate with 
S. G. ATKINS, PRINCIPAL 
SLATER STATE NORMAL SCHOOL. 
Winston-Salem, N. C. 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND, LA. 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Home 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H. Society of New York. Students 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN, President 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Will Help You Get A Better Paying Position. 
REGISTER NOW REASONABLE TERMS 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 22, Wilberforce, O. 
Educational Institutions 
Continued on page 243 
Mention The Crisis. THE CRISIS 
Vol. 16-No. 5 SEPTEMBER, 1918 Whole No. 95 
Editorial 
THE GREATER CRISIS. 
BEGINNING with Volume 17 
of THE CRISIS (November, 
1918), this magazine will 
be enlarged to- sixty-four 
pages, with a four-page cover in colors. It will contain each month two 
leading articles of timely interest 
and permanent value written by experts; a story and ten pages of illustrations. The departments will remain as usual, except that a special 
children's section will be added; The 
Horizon will be illustrated and enlarged, and some historic figure of 
Negro blood will be noted each month. 
A literary editor will be added to the 
present staff, insuring a prompt reading of manuscripts and a larger editorial correspondence. All accepted 
articles will be paid for on publication. Effort will be made gradually 
to inaugurate services of various 
sorts for our subscribers, as, for instance, information of every character, employment and certain lines 
of mail order purchases. 
The price of the enlarged magazine 
will be fifteen cents a copy and $1.50 
a year, but new subscribers and renewals for any number of years will 
be received at the present rate of one 
dollar a year up to November 1. 
COOPERATION. 
A CONFERENCE of those interested in establishing cooperative enterprises among 
colored people throughout 
the country is hereby called to meet 
at the office of THE CRISIS, Monday 
and Tuesday, August 26 and 27, 1918. 
The first session will be at 2 P.M., 
Monday. Experts will be in attendance and this conference is preliminary to a national conference in 1919. 
Please inform us of your intention 
to attend. 
A MOMENTOUS PROPOSAL. 
A PLAN of far-reaching constructive effort to satisfy the 
pressing grievances of colored Americans has been under serious consideration by the military authorities at Washington for 
two months. On June 15, Dr. DuBois 
was called in and asked if he would 
accept a captaincy in a bureau of the 
General Staff, if one was established, 
for the above purposes. Dr. DuBois 
replied that he would, provided he 
could retain general oversight of THE 
CRISIS, and provided that his captain's salary (which was $1,000 less 
than his present salary) could be supplemented from THE CRISIS income, 
so that he would suffer no financial 
loss. The military authorities saw no 
objection to these conditions. Dr. 
DuBois then consulted the President 
of the Board of Directors of the N. A. 
A. C. P., the chairman and the acting 
chairman of the Board and several 
members, including Dr. H. C. Bishop, 
Bishop Hurst, Dr. Bentley, Mr. A. H. 
Grimke, Colonel Charles Young, Rev. 
G. R. Waller, Hon. Charles Nagel and 
Dr. V. Morton-Jones. All of them, 
except Mr. Grimke, agreed with the 
conditions and urged acceptance. Mr. 
Grimke expressed deep sympathy, but 
asked more time for consideration. 
No decision, however, as to establishing the Bureau was arrived at and 
when the regular July meeting of the 
Board took place, the priority of the 
215 21 6 THE CRISIS 
Government's claim on Dr. DuBois 
was recognized, but doubt was expressed as to the advisability of his 
continuing in charge of T H E C RISIS . 
A puzzling dilemma between devotion to his life work and duty to his 
country in time of war was thus 
forced upon Dr. DuBois. His final 
conclusion, painful as it had to be, 
was to accept the commission. When 
thousands are giving their lives to 
their country, how could he long hesitate in risking far less? This delicate situation was further complicated by vague rumors which led 
friends of the Association with more 
zeal than thought to charge the Government with attempted "bribery" 
and Dr. DuBois with being a 
"traitor." Some who disagreed with 
the July editorials of T H E C RISI S saw 
in them further evidences of a "corrupt bargain," not knowing that those 
editorials were written two weeks before Dr. DuBois had the slightest intimation that his services were to be 
asked, and were in print before he 
reached Washington. 
Finally, the General Staff, after 
carefully considering the matter from 
all angles, has decided not to establish the proposed bureau "at present" 
as its broad scope might lead "beyond 
the proper limits of military activity." 
Here the matter rests. It is deplorable that this splendid and statesmanlike plan has been abandoned and 
equally unfortunate that any question 
as to its desirability should have ever 
arisen among black folk. The personal side of it is of less consequence 
and has left Dr. DuBois in unruffled 
serenity. No one who essays to teach 
the multitude can long escape crucifixion. 
OUR SPECIAL GRIEVANCES. 
THE leading editorial in the 
July C RISIS , called "Close 
Ranks," has been the subject 
of much comment. To a few 
it has seemed to indicate some change 
of position on the part of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and T H E 
C RISIS . It is needless to say that it 
indicates nothing of the sort. This 
Association and this magazine stand 
today exactly where they have stood 
during the eight years of their work; 
viz., for the full manhood rights of 
the American Negro. 
The July editorial is not in the 
slightest degree inconsistent with 
these principles. It was submitted to 
prominent members and officers of 
the board before printing and found 
no objection. 
The editorial seeks to say that the 
first duty of an American is to win 
the war and that to this all else is 
subsidiary. It declares that whatever 
personal and group grievances interfere with this mighty duty must wait. 
It does not say that these grievances are not grievances, or that the 
temporary setting aside of wrongs 
makes them right. But it does say. 
and T H E C RISI S repeats the word, 
that any man or race that seeks to 
turn his country's tragic predicament 
to his own personal gain is fatally 
cheating himself. 
What T H E C RISI S said is precisely 
what in practice the Negroes of America have already done during the 
war and have been advised to do by 
every responsible editor and leader. 
The editorial was in exact accord 
and almost in the very words of a 
resolution written by the same hand 
and passed unanimously by the thirtyone editors of all the leading Negro 
publications in America. 
Did Negroes refuse to serve in the 
draft until they got the right to vote? 
No. they stormed the gates of the 
army for the right to fight. Did they 
refuse commissions because their 
army school was segregated? No, 
they were eager to enter and diligent 
to learn. Have we black men for one 
moment hesitated to do our full duty 
in this war because we thought the EDITORIAL 21 7 
country was not doing its full duty 
to us ? Is there a single Negro leader 
who advised by word, written or 
spoken, rebellion and disloyalty? 
Certainly not. Then somebody "forgot his special grievance" and fought 
for his country, and to him and for 
him THE CRISIS speaks. THE CRISIS 
says, first your Country, then your 
Rights! 
THE REWARD. 
CERTAIN honest thinkers 
among us hesitate at that 
last sentence. They say it 
is all well to be idealistic, 
but is it not true that while we have 
fought our country's battles for one 
hundred fifty years, we have not 
gained our rights? There is just 
enough fact in this half truth to 
make it a whole and a very mischievous lie. No, we have not gained all 
our rights, but we have gained rights 
and gained them rapidly and effectively by our loyalty in time of trial. 
Five thousand Negroes fought in 
the Revolution; the result was the 
emancipation of slaves in the North 
and the abolition of the African slave 
trade. At least three thousand Negro 
soldiers and sailors fought in the War 
of 1812; the result was the enfranchisement of the Negro in many 
Northern States and the beginning of 
a strong movement for general emancipation. Two hundred thousand Negroes enlisted in the Civil War, and 
the result was the emancipation of 
four million slaves, and the enfranchisement of the black man. Some 
ten thousand Negroes fought in the 
Spanish-American War, and in the 
twenty years ensuing since that war, 
despite many set backs, we have doubled our landholding acreage and 
quadrupled our accumulated wealth. 
We have established a strong leadership of education and character, we 
have expanded our business interests 
and we have established the N. A. A. 
C. P., with forty thousand members. 
God knows we have enough left to 
fight for, but any people who by loyalty and patriotism have gained what 
we have in four wars ought surely to 
have sense enough to give that same 
loyalty and patriotism a chance to 
win in the fifth. 
And we are winning right now. 
Since this war began we have won: 
Recognition of our citizenship in 
the draft; 
One thousand Negro officers; 
Special representation in the War 
and Labor Departments; 
Higher wages and better employment ; 
Abolition of the color line in railway wage; 
Recognition as Red Cross nurses; 
Overthrow of segregation ordinances ; 
A strong word from the President 
against lynching. 
Blessed saints! Is this nothing ? 
Should it not discourage slackers and 
fools? Come, fellow black man, fight 
for your rights, but for God's sake 
have sense enough to know when you 
are getting what you fight for. 
OUR TASK. 
WE must raise in the next 
twelve months between 
twenty and twenty-four 
billio n dollars. About 
one-quarter or one-third will be collected by various methods of compulsory taxation. About two-thirds 
must, therefore, be raised by voluntary savings. Each one of us must 
try to save. It is estimated that if 
each one of us saves only ten cents of 
every dollar we earn, one-half the necessary amount will be raised. Some 
can save more. If we do not earn 
enough to save anything, we must try 
and earn more money. We must each 
and all earn more or spend less, and 
so, by each one doing his small bit, 
we shall save this stupendous sum. The Outer Pocket 
I THIN K you can render very important 
service to the Association by accepting 
the position which is offered you, and that 
you should be able to rely on as large an income as you now have. In my office and 
others, young men have gone to the wa r 
and received from their employers enough 
money to assure them no loss of income 
by going into the service of the Government, 
and I think you are entitled to the same 
treatment from the Association. 
MOORFIELD STOREY, 
Boston, Mass. 
* * * 
I think the race would be extremely favored in having you connected with the 
Military Intelligence Bureau during the war. 
I trust that the plan will be carried through. 
JOHN HURST, 
Baltimore, Md. 
* * * 
This is not only a splendid opportunity 
and great gain for the Association, but a 
most significant vindication of your unfaltering position in matters vitally affecting 
the race. I trust the matter will go through. 
HUTCHINS C. BISHOP, 
New Yor k City. 
* * * 
Yo u must know that it is the personal 
esteem we have for you, the confidence we 
have in your integrity, the belief we have 
in your sincerity of purpose, our knowledge 
of your possession of high ideals, all these 
qualities reflected through the pages of THE 
CRISIS allied with a literary merit of its 
own which has given that magazine a place 
in our affections and has made it the most 
popular and influential magazine published 
today. 
I trust you have no thought of throwing 
it away. 
The words in your July editorial which 
seemingly have given offense to Mr. Trotter 
appear to me eminently wise. If he were 
at that gathering of editors in Washington, and understood the import of that meeting, he could hardly doubt the prudence of 
their utterance. 
D. R. LEWIS, 
Pittsburgh, Pa. 
* * * 
I want to commend you for the splendid 
editorials in the July and August numbers 
of THE CRISIS, and for the stand you take 
regarding the attitude of our people while 
our country is at war. 
No one feels more keenly than I the bitter humiliations to which we are subjected. 
I believe that we are entitled to, and should 
receive every right and privilege common 
to all other American citizens; but, while 
our country is at wa r with an intolerant 
and brutal foe, we must not waver in our 
loyalty by quibbling for redress, but rather 
welcome and seize the opportunity to again 
show our loyalty and patriotism, and that 
we are worthy of these rights. 
GEORGE W . FORD, 
Camp Butler, Springfield, Ill. 
* * * 
"Whereas, there appeared in the July 
number of THE CRISIS an editorial in which 
the Editor used the expression: "Let us, 
while this wa r lasts, forget our special 
grievances," etc., 
"Be It Resolved, That we, the members 
of the District of Columbia Branch of the 
National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People, hereby express our opinion that such an appeal as this is not timely 
and is inconsistent with the work and spirit 
of the Association. 
"Resolved, Second, That we solemnly and 
unreservedly declare our fidelity and allegiance to our own country and flag, and cheerfully and willingly offer the best there is 
of us in life and fortune to help win victory 
for the cause of freedom against the tyrrany which the allied armies are fighting, 
and that we appeal to the colored people 
to support the President and the United 
States in every wa r measure adopted; but 
at the same time, we see no reason for 
stultifying our consciences by pretending 
or professing to be ignorant of, or indifferent to the acts of indignity and injustice 
continually heaped upon us, or by admitting 
that they are to be excused or forgotten 
until they are discontinued." 
Resolutions of Washington 
Branch, N.A.A.C.P. 
* * * 
I hope your poise will not be disturbed by 
the noise made over the "Close Ranks " editorial in THE CRISIS. I have read the stories written about it only to regret to see 
we still have among us men who, unprin218 THE OUTER POCKET 219 
cipled and faithless themselves, are the first 
to charge honest men with that fault. They 
are the ones who live more by cunning methods than by merit won in service, that see, 
rather, pretend to see, turpitude in the actions of the upright. When thrift fails to 
follow fawning, and the just, honest man 
of integrity is preferred to them, it is their 
habit to charge the preference to fawning 
by which they hoped to accomplish their 
selfish, craven purpose. 
V. P. THOMAS, 
New Orleans, La. 
* * * 
I am utterly astounded and confounded 
by the leading editorial of the July CRISIS. 
In no issue since our entrance into the war 
am I able to find so supine a surrender— 
temporary though it be—of the rights of 
man In God's name, what a reversal, so abject on the part of THE CRISIS, 
which advises Negroes to forget their grievances because there chances to exist a war, 
so manly on the part of the Secretary of 
Wa r who advises the same Negroes to bring 
forward their grievances and have them 
righted. I could never have believed it of 
THE CRISIS and I can but hope this advice 
will have no more weight with Negroes 
than the President's note of December, 1916 
— the-Germany-must-not-be-defeated-peacewithout-victory-note— had with the Allies 
and the individuals who hoped never to see 
the end of this war until the forces which 
throttle freedom are forever dethroned. 
WILLIAM H. WILSON, 
Washington, D. C. 
* * * 
I have, in common with the millions of 
Negroes in America, become such a positive 
debtor of yours in your great fight for better 
things for Negroes, and so much of the terrible curtain of prejudice and hate has been 
torn from the aspiring vision of my children by your mighty blows for a fairer 
chance, that I am disconsolate at tidings of 
any change in your work that will take you 
from the forum of sentiment-making for us. 
It certainly will not be news to you to be 
assured that in dear old mob-stricken 
Georgia, each Negro who is worth while 
joins me in the expression of this sentiment. 
HENRY LINCOLN JOHNSON, 
Atlanta, Ga. 
In this crisis in our National Association when you are called upon to make an 
important decision, I wish to assure you 
that whichever way you decide I have implicit confidence in your loyalty to the race 
and to the great cause to which you have 
so far given your life. 
IDA GIBBS HUNT, 
Washington, D. C. 
* * * 
It is rumored that there may result as a 
consequence of your acceptance of a commission in the U. S. Army, a severance of 
your relations with THE CRISIS. I hope 
nothing of the kind can take place. Certainly, I trust you will not on your own part 
consent to any such severance. THE CRISIS 
is largely, almost solely, what you have 
made it. Without your personality, it would 
not be THE CRISIS. 
I have just read your editorials in the 
August number, and the situation could not 
be presented in a more sober, manly light. 
They are the words of a sound philosophy, 
a rational patriotism, and sound sympathy 
with the forlorn conditions under which the 
darker races labor, as well as a formulation 
of their determined aspirations. 
T. G. STEWARD, 
Wilberforce, Ohio. 
* * * 
In extending my hearty congratulations, 
let me say that I notice some controversy 
going on in the papers concerning the wisdom of your accepting the appointment. 
I notice also the suggestion that you have 
gone back on your former position and become lukewarm, for the sake of the position 
to which you have recently been appointed. 
Let me say, Dr. Du Bois, that a large 
number of your friends do not take that 
view of the situation. We think that your 
editorial in THE CRISIS concerning the duty 
we now owe in relation to winning the war 
was just the kind of an editorial you should 
have written 
I read the editorial over and over to 
which some of the radicals are making complaint, but as over against some of these 
complaints I have heard some of the ablest 
men of the race congratulate you upon 
the position you take. 
I. GARLAND PENN, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, WHA T OF LIBERIA? 
By PLENYONO GBE WOLO. 
TH E writer labors under the painful disappointment that the colored people 
of the United States do not appreciate the 
political and racial significance of the entrance of the Republic of Liberia into the 
present world conflict. That a lonely government of blacks which has maintained a 
recognized national autonomy on the huge 
continent of Afric a (in the very jaws of 
fickle and at times very dangerous diplomacies) should have thrown in its moral 
forces with the Allies is a plunge into the 
labyrinth of international policies, born only 
of courage peculiar to a people of commendable aspirations. It is, indeed, a sorrowful 
thought that such a feat should be little 
regarded by colored Americans. 
But the political and racial aspects are 
not the only considerations. The economics 
of the case must not be ignored. It is an 
old story that the soil of Liberia is rich; 
that the banana, cocoa, cocoanut, coffee, 
lime (lemon), oil-palm, orange, pineapple, 
rice, rubber, sugar-cane, sweet potato, and 
many other delicious tropical fruits and 
vegetables, both known and unknown to 
most of the readers, are indigenous to and 
grow in Liberia; that our poultry and cattle 
raising and fisheries are unorganized; that 
these necessary marketable products are not 
secured through modern scientific methods 
(a fact which attests the possibilities involved) ; that manufacturing and industrial 
operations, as understood in most countries, 
are practically unknown. The following 
facts ought also to be known to the average 
colored American: that our trade is chiefly 
with European nations, and that before the 
war about seventy per cent, of this trade 
was with Germany; that certain very valuable commercial African products (the palm 
oil, kernel, etc.), before the wa r unknown 
in American markets, are being introduced; 
that the rubber and the cocoanut have acquired additional value because of increased 
demand—the rubber for former usefulness 
plus wa r exigencies, and the cocoanut because of its oil, which is very fast becoming 
indispensable for food purposes, and the 
charcoal from the shell of which has been 
recently discovered the only successful 
neutralizer of the effect of the Teutonic 
gas; that chartered steamers are now plying directly between the United States and 
West African ports, and are bringing in the 
raw products of Africa . And it ought to be 
observed that these commodities, once introduced, and the appetite for them developed, 
are not likely to be eliminated from the 
market; and that the chemical and other 
processes (known chiefly heretofore by the 
European commercial institutions) by which 
these raw materials are prepared for ultimate consumption, are, simultaneously with 
the materials, transplanted into the United 
States. Now, since these necessary products 
are to come direct from Afric a to America , 
somebody will have to take advantage of 
the importation. Would it not be a proper 
thing if black Americans made the African 
trade an integral part of the American 
commerce? And bear in mind that all the 
commodities named, and many more, are 
grown in Liberia, and that the preference 
for American goods is becoming national. 
Wha t might not a well-organized group 
of Afro-Americans do? A group (say 20, 
50, 100 and more ) of men and women—tireless, thoroughgoing—including those of managerial capacity and of ideas, agriculturalists, doctors, engineers, scientists, those 
trained in business principles, lawyers, and 
men and women schooled in the various 
handicrafts, gathered together in some 
place, agreeing and disagreeing, but, finally, 
harmonizing upon a prospectus for a serious 
consideration of the Liberian situation— 
such a group, with little patience, ought to 
make a success in some of the many indispensable commodities mentioned. Nor is it 
ill-advised to add that once on the spot, the 
eye of the experienced individual will see 
other evident potentialities; for it should be 
obvious that there has been no mention of 
minerals or valuable woods, which would 
interest some other readers. And the time 
is now, if ever, for the colored Americans 
to make vital connections with the same 
uncontaminated Africans—a contact which 
would be a real education fo r both parties. 
This added reason still the more emphasizes 
the fact that for the colored American, Liberia is one great opportunity. 
220 THE WORK OF A MOB 
An investigation by Walter F. White, Assistant Secretary, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, in Brooks and Lowndes 
Counties, Georgia. 
THE recent strong letter of President 
Wilson on lynching was undoubtedly 
called forth by representations from colored 
people following the lynchings in Brooks 
and Lowndes Counties, Ga., May 17-24. 
Hampton Smith, a white farmer, was 
killed, and newspaper dispatches report six 
persons as having been lynched for complicity. Investigation shows that at least 
eleven persons were killed. 
Brooks and Lowndes Counties are situated in the southernmost part of the state 
of Georgia, near the Florida line. They are 
in the heart of the richest section of the 
state. 
Hampton Smith, whose murder was 
the immediate cause of the holocaust of 
lynchings, was the owner of a large plantation in Brooks County. He bore a very poor 
reputation in the community because of ill 
treatment of his Negro employees. 
Smith's reputation in this respect had become so wide-spread that he had the greatest difficulty in securing any help whatever. 
He, therefore, adopted the expedient of going 
into the courts and whenever a Negro was 
convicted and was unable to pay his fine or 
was sentenced to serve a period in the chaingang, Smith would secure his release and 
put him to work out his fine on his (Smith's) 
plantation. Sidney Johnson, the Negro who 
admitted before his death that he killed 
Smith, had been fined thirty dollars for 
gaming. Smith paid his fine and Johnson 
was put at work on the former's plantation 
until the thirty dollars had been worked out. 
Johnson had worked out the period and had 
put in considerable more time and had asked 
Smith to pay him fo r the additional time 
that he had served. Smith refused and a 
quarrel resulted. A few days later Johnson 
did not show up for work in the fields and 
Smith went to Johnson's cabin to discover 
the reason. Johnson told Smith that he was 
sick and unable to work. Smith thereupon 
began to beat him, in spite of the protestations of the victim. Johnson is said then 
to have threatened Smith and a few nights 
later, while sitting in his home, Smith was 
shot twice through the window near which 
he was sitting, dying instantly. His wife 
was also shot, the bullet passing through 
the center of her breast, miraculously missing both her heart and lungs. Her wound 
is not believed to be serious. The attending 
physician, Dr. McMichael, is said to have 
stated that she would recover. 
There seems to be no evidence that Mrs. 
Smith was raped in addition to being shot. 
As soon as news of the murder reached 
the community, great crowds of men and 
boys from the two counties hurried to the 
spot. Excitement ran high and posses were 
immediately formed to search for Johnson, as suspicion was immediately fastened 
on him because of the threats he had made 
against Smith's life. There was also talk 
of a conspiracy among a number of Negroes 
to kill Smith, and reports were circulated 
that the group involved had met at the home 
of Hayes Turner, another Negro who had 
suffered at the hands of Smith, and his wife, 
Mary Turner, whom Smith had beaten on 
several occasions. Hayes Turner, it is said, 
had previously served a term in the chaingang for threatening Smith, following 
Smith's beating of Turner's wife. Nevertheless, after his release, Turner had gone 
back to work for Smith again. 
The first of the mob's victims to be captured was Will Head, a Negro of the community, who was caught on Friday morning, 
May 17, at 8:30, near Barney, Georgia; the 
second was Will Thompson, seized later on 
the same day. That night both were lynched 
near Troupeville, about five miles from Valdosta. Members of the mob stated to the 
investigator that over seven hundred bullets were fired into the bodies of the two 
men. The investigator learned from a man 
who admitted being in the mob, but who 
stated that he had no part in the lynching, 
the names of the two leaders of the Friday 
night mob and of fifteen of the other members of the mob. These names were given 
to the investigator on his promise that he 
would not divulge the name of the informant, as to do so would mean that he would 
undoubtedly be subjected to bodily violence 
and perhaps death, for having given the 
221 222 THE CRISIS 
information. These names were furnished 
to Governor Hugh M. Dorsey, of Georgia, 
on July 10, by the investigator in person. 
In addition to those named to the Governor there were many more from Quitman 
and a large number from Valdosta and the 
surrounding country whose names were not 
learned. 
On Saturday morning Hayes Turner was 
captured and lynched near the fork of the 
Morven and Barney roads. On being captured he was placed in the Quitman jail 
and for some reason unknown to the investigator was taken later in the day by Sheriff 
Wade and Roland Knight, the clerk of the 
county court, ostensibly to be carried to 
Moultrie for safekeeping. Turner was 
taken from these men en route to Moultrie, 
at the fork of the roads about three and 
a half miles from town. He was lynched 
with his hands fastened behind him with 
handcuffs and was allowed to hang there 
until Monday when he was cut down by 
county convicts and buried about half a 
hundred feet from the foot of the tree on 
which he was lynched. During Sunday following the lynching, hundreds of automobiles, buggies and wagons bore sightseers 
to the spot while many more tramped there 
on foot. 
Another Negro was lynched on Saturday 
afternoon near Morven at a spot known 
as the Old Camp Ground. This person may 
have been Eugene Rice whose name appeared in the Georgia press among the identified and acknowledged victims, but who 
was never even remotely connected with 
Hampton Smith's killing. 
About a week after the tragedy, or tragedies, started, the bodies of three unidentified 
Negroes were taken from the Little River, 
below Barney. It is not known whether 
these bodies were those of some already accounted for or whether these were additional 
victims of the mob. A t the last accounts 
the bodies themselves had disappeared and 
could not be located. 
The murder of the Negro men was deplorable enough in itself, but the method by 
which Mrs. Mary Turner was put to death 
was so revolting and the details are so horrible that it is with reluctance that the 
account is given. It might be mentioned 
that each detail given is not the statement 
of a single person but each phase is related 
only after careful investigation and corroboration. Mrs. Turner made the remark that the killing of her husband on 
Saturday was unjust and that if she knew 
the names of the persons who were in the 
mob that lynched her husband, she would 
have warrants sworn out against them and 
have them punished in the courts. 
This news determined the mob to "teach 
her a lesson " and although she attempted 
to flee when she heard that they were 
after her, she was captured at noon on 
Sunday. The grief-stricken and terrified 
woman was taken to a lonely and secluded 
spot, down a narrow road over which the 
trees touch at their tops, which, with the 
thick undergrowth on either side of the 
road, made a gloomy and appropriate spot 
for the lynching. Near Folsom's Bridge 
over the Little River a tree was selected for 
her execution—a small oak tree extending 
over the road. 
A t the time she was lynched, Mar y Turner was in her eighth month of pregnancy. 
The delicate state of her health, one month 
or less previous to delivery, may be imagined, but this fact had no effect on the 
tender feelings of the mob. Her ankles were 
tied together and she was hung to the tree, 
head downward. Gasoline and oil from the 
automobiles were thrown on her clothing 
and while she writhed in agony and the 
mob howled in glee, a match was applied 
and her clothes burned from her person. 
When this had been done and while she 
was yet alive, a knife, evidently one such 
as is used in splitting hogs, wa s taken and 
the woman's abdomen was cut open, the unborn babe falling from her womb to the 
ground. The infant, prematurely born, gave 
two feeble cries and then its head was 
crushed by a member of the mob with his 
heel. Hundreds of bullets were then fired 
into the body of the woman, now mercifully 
dead, and the work was over. 
Chime Riley, another Negro who was 
supposed to have left the community, was 
found b y the investigator to have been 
lynched instead. By the time that he was 
killed, the mob evidently had begun to become fearful of too many outrages and determined to conceal his body. Although no 
one seems to have even remotely connected 
him with the murder of Smith, he was 
lynched, his hands and feet tied together 
and turpentine cups, made of clay and used 
to catch the gum from the pine trees when 
"chipped," thus becoming very heavy, were THE WORK OF A MOB 223 
tied to his body and he was thrown into the 
Little River near Barney. The informant 
in this case, seen on the spot where Mary 
Turner was lynched, stated that when the 
river was low he had gone down to see if 
the body had come up. Finding no trace 
of the body, he assumed that it had become 
lodged in a sand bar. He stated that he 
found one of the cups, however, which he 
was keeping as a "souvenir." 
During the outbreak, another Negro by 
the name of Simon Schuman, who lived on 
the Moultrie Road near Berlin, was called 
to the door of his home one night between 
eight and nine o'clock. He was seized and 
had not been seen since up to the time (seven 
weeks later) that the investigator was in 
the section. The interior of his house was 
demolished, his family being driven out, and 
the furniture was hacked to pieces. His 
family, at the time of the investigator's 
visit, was living on the Bryce Plantation, 
near Berlin. The offense alleged against 
Schuman is unknown. 
Contrary to press reports, Sidney Johnson was not hiding in the swamps near Valdosta, but was in Valdosta from the time 
of the murder of Smith to the time that 
he was killed. During this time, he is said 
to have made the statement to several persons that he alone, was implicated in the 
killing of Smith and that he alone killed 
him. There was no suspicion of Johnson's 
presence in Valdosta until Johnson went to 
another Negro, John Henry Bryant by name, 
and asked for food and aid in making good 
his escape. Apparently it was Johnson's 
intention to wait until the vigilance of the 
mobs was relaxed and the roads no longer 
watched and then flee from the country. 
Bryant gave Johnson the food and then 
hastened to town to tell where Johnson was. 
The house was immediately surrrounded by 
a posse headed b y Chief of Police Dampier. 
This was done with caution as Johnson 
was known to be armed and had sworn 
that he would never be taken alive. Johnson had only a shot-gun and a revolver, 
while the posse was armed with highpowered rifles. The firing began and the 
Chief was wounded in the hand and one 
of his men in the neck. 
Afte r the firing had gone on for a few 
minutes, Johnson's firing ceased. A few 
more bullets were fired into the house for 
good measure as it was thought that the cessation of firing might be a ruse on Johnson's 
part. When it did not resume, still acting 
cautiously, the house was rushed and Johnson's body was found, dead. Cheated out 
of its prey, the crowd took the body, unsexed it with a sharp knife, threw the amputated parts into the street in front of 
the house, and then tied an end of a rope 
around Johnson's neck. The other end was 
tied to the back of an automobile and the 
body dragged in open daylight down Patterson Street, one of Valdosta's business thoroughfares, and out to a place near Barney 
and near the scene of the crime. There 
the dead body was fastened to a tree and 
burned to a crisp. 
Very careful attention was given by the 
investigator to the accounts given at the 
outbreak of the affair that it was caused 
by the circulation of pro-German propaganda in the section prior to the outbreak 
in the hope of stirring up racial disturbances. Absolutely no evidence was found. 
Since the lynchings, more than five hundred Negroes have left the immediate vicinity of Valdosta alone and many more have 
expressed the determination that they too 
were going to leave as soon as they could 
dispose of their lands and gather their 
crops. This wholesale migration occurred 
in spite of threats made that any Negro 
who attempted to leave the section would 
thus show that he was implicated in the 
murder of Smith and would be dealt with 
accordingly. Hundreds of acres of unfilled 
land flourishing with weeds and dozens of 
deserted farm-houses give their own mute 
testimony of the Negroes' attitude toward 
a community in which lynching mobs are 
allowed to visit vengeance upon members 
of their race. 
All of the facts outlined above, including 
the names of mob leaders and participants, 
were given in a memorandum presented by 
the investigator on July 10 to Governor 
Hugh M. Dorsey. Governor Dorsey received the information gladly and has promised to take action on the evidence submitted. In a message addressed to the Georgia 
legislature on July 3, 1918, Governor Dorsey 
denounced mob violence in strong terms, 
saying: 
"Mob violence should be suppressed, and 
by State authorities. 
"If this is not done, ic is very probable 
that Federal intervention will not be long 
delayed." The Case of Dr. Bundy 
THE National Association for the Ad -
vancement of Colored People is no 
longer connected in any way with the further defense of Dr. Leroy N. Bundy, of 
East St. Louis, with whose defense against 
the charge of complicity in the East St. 
Louis riots of July, 1917, the Association 
has heretofore been associated. 
The St. Louis, Mo., Branch of the N. A. 
A. C. P., under whose immediate supervision the National Headquarters had 
placed all matters connected with the defense of Dr. Bundy, informed the National 
Officers of the N. A. A. C. P. some weeks 
ago that it wished to withdraw from further responsibility for the defense of Dr. 
Bundy, owing to departures by Dr. Bundy 
from the conditions established by the N. 
A. A. C. P. for the proper management of 
the Bundy defense and for the collection, 
disbursement and accounting of funds. 
The National Board of Directors and the 
executive officers of the N. A. A. C. P. deferred action regarding the matter, notwithstanding the recommendations of its 
St. Louis Branch, pending a full consideration of all the circumstances of the case, including the opportunity given Dr. Bundy 
to be heard in person concerning his relations with the Association's representatives 
in St. Louis. 
Following a request of Dr. Bundy that he 
be given a hearing by the National Board 
of Directors, a committee was appointed by 
the Board to hear and pass upon his version of his relations with the St. Louis 
Branch. This committee appointed a special time, agreeable to Dr. Bundy, and met 
with him on July 11 in New York at the 
office of Charles H. Studin, Chairman of 
the Legal Committee. 
A t the outset of the hearing, upon the 
alleged ground that he was not represented 
by his own attorney and did not have his 
own stenographer present, Dr. Bundy refused to make a detailed statement in explanation of his relations with the St. 
Louis Branch. His demeanor throughout 
the hearing impressed the committee as 
lacking in frankness and was characterized 
by an apparently strong desire to avoid 
disclosing the real facts in the situation to 
the committee. Based upon the meagre 
statement he was willing to make, and 
upon the well authenticated facts in the 
case, the committee came to the following 
conclusions: 
1. That the N. A . A . C. P. had employed 
competent and well-known attorneys to 
defend Dr. Bundy and that these attorneys 
were and are ready to defend him whenever his case comes to trial. The attorneys 
in question were employed under the personal supervision of the Hon. Charles 
Nagel of St. Louis, former Secretary of 
Commerce under President Taft, and a member of the Board of Directors of the N. A. 
A. C. P. 
2. These lawyers were employed with 
the approval and consent of Dr. Bundy and 
are among the most prominent attorneys 
of the bar where the trial is to take place. 
The N. A. A. C. P. has already paid them 
the sum of $1,500 as fees to represent Dr. 
Bundy. 
3. That all the professional assistance 
required for Dr. Bundy's trial has been 
provided by the N. A. A. C. P. Further, 
the National Headquarters has at all times 
stood ready to raise all the funds necessary 
for Dr. Bundy's further defense needs. 
4. That since Dr. Bundy has been released on bail, he has been going over the 
country collecting funds for the alleged purpose of engaging additional lawyers whose 
services are in our judgment entirely unnecessary for the proper conduct of his 
case. 
5. That, although the N. A. A. C. P. had 
provided him with the services of two excellent law firms, Dr. Bundy now claims 
that he wants in addition three more firms 
to assist in the trial of his case; to one of 
these he states that a retainer fee of approximately $3,000 is to be paid, to another 
$1,000 has already been paid, and to the 
third another fee has been promised. In 
the judgment of the committee, assuming 
that Dr. Bundy's statement is true that 
he. or others on his behalf, are paying 
224 N.A.A.C.P. 225 
money for these lawyers, this multiplicity 
of lawyers can only mean a waste of funds 
and a duplication of work for which other 
retained attorneys have already been paid 
and which they are prepared to perform. 
6. That Dr. Bundy has used at least part 
of the funds collected by him for the support and maintenance of himself and his 
wife, and he refuses to support himself in 
any other way pending his trial than upon 
the proceeds of funds raised for his defense. 
7. That Dr. Bundy has declined to account for funds which have been contributed to him for his defense. In view of 
this attitude on the part of Dr. Bundy, 
there is no method by which that part of 
the public which gives him its money will 
ever be able to compel him to render an 
account of what he does with it. 
Fo r the aforesaid reasons, the committee 
recommends that no further contributions 
on behalf of Dr. Bundy's defense be solicited or received by the N. A. A- C. P. or 
any of its branches. The committee believes that a great imposition may be practised upon the public if Dr. Bundy is permitted to solicit and receive money in the 
promiscuous manner that he has been following. 
The National Association for the Ad ­
vancement of Colored People has made it a 
principle never to receive money for any 
purpose which was not entered in its regularly audited books and which it would not 
account for upon request. It cannot countenance any departure from such procedure 
and is of the opinion that any other practise 
may become the source of a scandal which 
would bring shame to the cause of the colored people. 
The following examples, which speak for 
themselves, are taken from the stenographic 
report of the hearing granted Dr. Bundy by 
the Legal Committee of the Association: 
"Mr. Studin: Wha t is your source of income? 
"Dr. Bundy: In any way I could get it. 
"Mr. Studin: Have you worked? 
"Dr. Bundy: I don't think that concerns 
you. 
"Mr. Studin: Have you lived on contributions that have been made to you by 
people who are spending money for your 
defense? 
"Dr. Bundy: No, sir, I have not. 
"Mr. Studin: How have you lived? 
"Dr. Bundy: That does not concern you. 
"Mr. Studin: Have you incurred any 
bills that you think the National Association is responsible for ? 
"Dr. Bundy: Yes. 
"Mr. Studin: Wha t bills? 
"Dr. Bundy: All bills. 
"Mr. Studin: Will you name them? 
"Dr. Bundy: No. 
"Mr. Studin: How much do they amount 
to? 
"Dr. Bundy: I don't recall. 
"Mr. Studin : # In round numbers. 
"Dr. Bundy: I don't know. 
"Mr. Studin: Wha t were they for? 
"Dr. Bundy: I am through with this conversation. 
"Mr. Studin: Did you ever say to the 
St. Louis Branch that you expected them 
to support yourself and your wife until 
the trial? 
"Dr. Bundy: I can explain that. They 
said they refused to let me go out and 
make lectures whereby I might raise funds 
for the purpose of assisting myself in living during the term between March and 
September. I said, 'Will you furnish me 
money to support myself?' 
"Mr. Studin: Wa s it your idea that you 
should go out and raise money to pay your 
personal living expenses? 
"Dr. Bundy: Yes. 
"Mr. Studin: That is your present idea? 
"Dr. Bundy: Yes, that is my idea now. 
* * * * * * 
"Mr. Studin: How do you propose to 
raise money for your defense? 
"Dr. Bundy: Do the best I can. 
"Mr. Studin: Ar e you going to work? 
"Dr. Bundy: I cannot. Wh y should I 
work ? 
"Mrs. Bundy: Perhaps he doesn't have to 
work." 
(Signed) CHARLES H. STUDIN. 
Chairman, Legal Committee. 
(Signed) JOHN R. SHILLADY, 
Secretary. 
National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People. THESE THINGS SHALL BE! 
BY JOHN HAYNES HOLMES 
ON my desk to-day, I find a post-card 
from a beloved friend, bearing the 
following inscription: 
"A t Newport, N. H., this morning at 
seven o'clock, a band and five hundred people escorted the only Negro boy in town to 
the train. He had answered Uncle Sam's 
call to war—a sight I shall never forget. " 
One may imagine all kinds of philosophizing upon this simple village episode. 
The pessimist might ask if this is to be accepted in compensation for lynchings. The 
cynic would point out that the popularity 
of the blacks is in inverse proportion to 
their density of population. The Yankee 
would vindicate afresh New England's record of justice for the Negro. The optimist 
would behold the reconciliation at last, under 
the beneficent influence of the war, of two 
great races. 
It is doubtful, however, if any of these 
sweeping generalizations can be regarded 
as sound. Wh y try for so much? Wh y not 
take this incident for what it is—"a slice of 
life"—a very lovely example of the possibilities of human nature at its best? The 
nation is in peril. It calls to each citizen 
for the noblest service and uttermost sacrifice that he can give. A lone member of a 
race for ages despised, down-trodden and 
oppressed, even now bearing the social handicap of prejudice and unequal opportunity, 
answers the call. And his townsmen of another color, rich and poor, high and low, together, turn out with one accord, to do 
him honor! 
Wha t could be finer? And at the same 
time, what could be more natural? This is 
what men like to do, when they are free to 
act upon instinct and conviction. This is 
what men will to do, when lifted upon tides 
of deep emotion. Such a happening gives 
one courage, just because of its spontaneity 
and genuineness. It shows what's coming— 
a future possessed by Democracy! It shows 
what's here—a present not unfamiliar with 
the love of man for man! 
GOD GAVE US SONG. 
By OTTO LELAND BOHANAN 
GOD gave us the gift of song, 
And bade us fill the world with tears 
Of happiness; when days were long, 
To make a melody of fears. 
God gave us the power to feel 
The joy of passions exquisite, 
Courage to suffer, and the zeal 
Of yearning for the infinite. 
God gave us the strength to die, 
To follow through the dark agrope, 
A stretch of dreary, rimless sky— 
God gave us the boon of hope. 
PASSING OF THE EX-SLAVE. 
By GEORGIA D. JOHNSON. 
SWIF T melting into yesterday, 
The tortured hordes of ebon-clay; 
All muted grows the dulcet strain, 
The rhythmic chanson of their pain. 
Their mounded bodies dimly rise, 
To span the gulf of sacrifice, 
And o'er their silent hearts' below, 
The mantled millions softly go. 
Some few remaining still abide, 
Gnarled sentinels of time and tide, 
Soft mellowed by a chastened glow, 
That lighter hearts will never know. 
Winding into the silent way, 
Spent with the travail of the day, 
Full royal in their humble might, 
The Uncrowned Pilgrims of the Night! 
COMPENSATION. 
By E . RALPH CHEYNEY. 
THOUG H great the crimes that we do 
you, brothers of darker skin, 
You have our envy sad in our arrogance, 
dumb in our sin; 
Forever you've had, in the face of wrong, 
The lance of laughter, the shield of song. 
226 The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE. 
ALLEN TUCKE R in the New York 
• Times: 
Down the street, between the waiting 
crowds, they come— 
The Buffaloes, 
The Black Regiment! 
The band ahead, 
Thumping, crashing, 
Booming, smashing, 
"Onward, Christian soldiers," fills the air. 
Black are the lines— 
All splendid black, 
Beneath the sharp bayonets, 
Under the high waving flags; 
A long wa y they have marched, 
Down the long years they have come, 
Through suffering and despair, 
From Afric a to Manhattan, 
From slavery to freedom, 
Men—citizens—at last! 
No masters, no protectors! 
Owning themselves, 
Saving themselves, 
Marching, marching, 
Rank on rank, 
Black—all black! 
Afric a here— 
Embattled! 
Free ! 
Now ready to fight for us, 
Now ready to fight with us, 
Ready to fight for themselves— 
Ready to fight, 
Ready to die, 
Fo r Freedom! 
* * * 
Recent treatment of the Negro in periodicals : 
Negroes Move North, G. E. Haynes, Survey, May 4, '18. 
American Negroes and the World War, 
R. R. Moton. World's Work, May, '18. 
Negroes in Africa, R. M. Andrews, New 
Republic, March 16, '18. 
Negro Educators and Our Wa r Efforts, 
Survey, May 4, '18. 
Thirty Cent Cotton and the Negro, C. 
Lewis, Illustrated World, May, '18. 
The "Buffaloes," O. E. McKaine, Outlook, 
May 22, '18. 
President Wilson Chills Africa, Literary 
Digest, marc h 16, '18. 
African Riddle, E. H. Gruening, New Republic, March 9, '18. 
Native Question in British East Africa, 
Contemporary Review, April, '18. 
Uncle Sam's African Understudy, S. 
Wood, World Outlook, Feb., '18. 
Benjamin Brawley, of Atlanta, has published a little book of essays, "Your Negro 
Neighbor," Macmillan. 
A symposium on "The Path of Labor " has 
been issued by the Council of Women for 
Home Missions. A Southern white woman, 
Mrs. L. H. Hammond, writes on Negro laborers and concludes her excellent chapter with 
these words: 
Justice before the law for all men alike— 
that Christian America must achieve if she 
fights with honor this war for human freedom; opportunity for every child of every 
race—this human right we must secure for 
Negroes as for others if we are to be a 
Christian nation. But fundamental to both 
these things lies respect for womanhood as 
such. To those who have glimpsed something of their struggle, the fight of Christian colored women for the purity and safety of colored girls is one of the most moving things to be found in America. Wh o 
can help them but the Christian white 
women? And women belong together; God 
has appointed it so. There is no standard 
but a common standard, no security but a 
common security, no right but a common 
right. 
MOB ACTION. 
PRESIDEN T WILSO N has said and said 
strongly and well the word on lynching 
for which we have long waited. The president says in part in his letter of July 26: 
There have been many lynchings, and 
every one of them has been a blow at the 
heart of ordered law and humane justice. 
No man who loves America, no man who 
really cares for her fame and honor and 
character, or who is truly loyal to her institutions, can justify mob action while the 
courts of justice are open and the governments of the States and the nation are ready 
and able to do their duty. We are at this 
very moment fighting lawless passion. Germany has outlawed herself among the nations because she has disregarded the sacred obligations of law and has made 
lynchers of her armies. Lynchers emulate 
her disgraceful example. I, for my part, am 
anxious to see every community in America 
rise above that level, with pride and a fixed 
resolution which no man or set of men can 
afford to despise. 
We proudly claim to be the champions of 
democracy. If we really are, in deed and 
in truth, let us see to it that we do not discredit our own. I say plainly that every 
American who takes part in the action of a 
mob or gives it any sort of countenance is 
no true son of this great Democracy, but its 
betrayer, and does more to discredit her by 
that single disloyalty to her standards of law 
227 228 THE CRISIS 
and of right than the words of her statesmen or the sacrifices of her heroic boys in 
the trenches can do to make suffering peoples believe her to be their savior. How 
shall we commend democracy to the acceptance of other peoples, if we disgrace our 
own by proving that it is, after all, no protection to the weak? Every mob contributes 
to German lies about the United States what 
her most gifted liars cannot improve upon 
by the wa y of calumny. They can at least 
say that such things cannot happen in Germany except in times of revolution, when 
law is swept away! 
I therefore very earnestly and solemnly 
beg that the Governors of all the States, the 
law officers of every community, and, above 
all, the men and women of every community 
in the United States, all who revere America and wish to keep her name without stain 
or reproach, will co-operate,—not passively 
merely, but actively and watchfully,—to 
make an end of this disgraceful evil. 
The Springfield, Mass., Republican commenting on this says: . 
The president is often called the most 
powerful ruler in the world to-day, He 
commands an army of millions of soldiers. 
The railroads of the United States are under 
his thumb. He can dictate how much coal 
you may burn next winter, and, if you are 
between 21 and 31 years of age, order you 
to work or fight. Ye t if a Georgia mob 
burns a human being at the stake, this wa r 
president of ours can do no more than wring 
his hands. It is as pitiable a contrast between vast power and extreme impotence, 
embodied in one person as can be found 
on the face of the earth. 
In these circumstances, so familiar to the 
American people, the demand for the establishment by law of federal jurisdiction over 
lynchings and mob violence in the states is 
steadily gaining strength. * * * 
If lynchings do not cease in this country, 
some way will be found to place the federal 
government and courts in control of the situation. The president now seeks to arouse 
a public sentiment that will suffice to end 
the disgrace. One cannot be very hopeful 
that he will succeed. President Roosevelt 
thundered from the White House against 
the mobs, without avail. They have pursued 
their work of lawlessness and savagery in 
spite of presidential admonitions and adjurations, always counting on the feebleness of 
local authority and the cowardice of local 
juries to escape punitive justice. 
It may be, however, that Mr. Wilson's 
appeal is the last one of the sort. If it is 
followed by no discernible improvement in 
conditions, it will be high time for the president of the United States to attack the 
problem from another side and seek for the 
federal courts a jurisdiction capable of erasins: this murderously black stain forever and 
vindicating America's right to pose as the 
champion of the principles of exact justice 
and equality under the laws for all people. 
PHILADELPHIA. 
THE Quaker City makes the first grim 
response to President Wilson's appeal against lawlessness. The Philadelphia 
Press says: 
There is no ill feeling, generally speaking, between the white and colored population of this city. They do not as a rule annoy each other. The removal of colored 
families into white districts is not relished 
and does tend, where it exists, to create a 
limited race hostility. It cannot well be 
helped, however. A decent Negro who can 
pay the price has as much right to rent an 
unoccupied house as a white man, even 
though the neighbors may not like his color. 
Negroes generally prefer to live with their 
own color, but with the growth of their 
population they must from time to time pick 
out new districts. The law determines their 
rights and the police are bound to give 
them free protection in their rights. 
The Public Ledger adds: 
As for the racial phase of it, social workers, college settlement investigators, housing experts, political reformers have for 
years protested against the socio-political influences that have forced large elements of 
the colored population to live under physical 
conditions conducive to vice, crime and lawlessness, conditions violating all the decencies of life and making progress for the 
better members of these neighborhood 
groups, almost if not wholly colored, either 
extremely difficult or virtually out of the 
question. 
J. S. Stemmons in a letter to the daily 
papers of Philadelphia says: 
That the entire situation represents a 
heartless persecution of the colored race is 
evinced by the following undeniable facts: 
From the very first the police and the newspapers have treated the Negroes as though 
they were the aggressors and the criminals. 
In almost every clash it has been the Negro 
who was disarmed by the police, and then 
clubbed and shot and arrested and thrown 
into jail. Regrettable as was the death of 
a policeman, it must be remembered that he 
lost his life in a brave effort to arrest a 
Negro who seemed inclined to defend his 
home from a mob. It would seem to be far 
more within the province of the police to 
disperse or arrest these unlawful mobs than 
it is to arrest Negroes who are trying to defend their own homes. 
# # * 
Colored ministers representing 55,000 people presented this memorial to the Mayor of 
the city: 
We represent large constituencies who reside in the zone of the race riot which seems 
now in progress. We have visited the homes 
of scores of these people, and are well informed concerning conditions. THE LOOKING GLASS 229 
W e wish to say that we deplore the fact 
that your police have not been able to protect our citizens from mob violence. We 
deplore the fact that Philadelphia thus gives 
the first answer to the noble statement of 
President Wilson against mob violence with 
such a mockery. 
W e desire you to understand that we 
put the whole blame upon your incompetent 
police force. But for the sympathy of the 
police, their hobnobbing with the mob, what 
has now become the disgrace of Philadelphia 
would have been nothing more than a petty 
row, if that much. 
You r police have for a long time winked 
at disorder, at the beating up of Negroes, 
the stoning of their homes, and the attacking of their churches. In this very neighborhood divine worship has time and again 
been disturbed by white hoodlums, and there 
has been no redress. In nearly every part 
of this city decent, law-abiding Negroes 
of the home-owning type, who have saved 
money by years of frugality and thrift, and 
moved into their own homes, have been set 
upon by irresponsible white hoodlums, their 
property damaged and destroyed while your 
police seemed powerless to protect. This 
has happened a score of times before this 
riot, and going with but slight rebuke, it 
is not to be wondered at that the mob 
thought it could scare Negroes from their 
homes with impunity. 
W e have also to call your attention to the 
facts now clearly established: That this riot 
was not started by Negroes; that the Negroes who were annoyed were of the orderly, law-abiding type ; that your police 
arrested Negroes almost exclusively and let 
white hoodlums roam the streets to do more 
damage, and when some of these were pointed out to the police, they were not molested. 
PUZZLING PSYCHOLOGY. 
JOHN D. BARR Y says in a recent syndicated article which we clip from the 
New Yor k Telegram: 
He was an amiable old Senator, mellowed 
after years of easy going success and authority, greatly beloved by his colleagues 
in Washington. His rich accent at once 
proclaimed his relation to the South. He 
moved with ponderous dignity. He talked 
with deliberate impressiveness. His smooth 
face, freshly shaven, had the pinkness of a 
child's. He wore the air of one well pleased 
with life and assured of holding sound 
opinions. 
It was b y chance that he touched on the 
Negro question. "The Negro, " he remarked 
with amiable solemnity, "is not adapted to 
public office." 
* * * 
I found my interest sitting up. Here 
was a point of view I was not very familiar 
with. It was as if I heard the voice of 
Southern aristocracy coming out of an earlier period. 
"Wh y isn't the Negro adapted to public 
office?" I asked, with an effort to keep any 
hint of challenge out of my voice. 
On the part of the Senator there was no 
suspicion of challenge. His answer came in 
a tone of profound conviction. "To o close 
to slavery." 
"But since the days of slavery, many of 
the Negroes have made considerable advance, haven't they? " 
"Some of them have done very well, industrially. There is no reason why they 
shouldn't prosper as farmers and mechanics. Booker Washington had the right idea. 
He sure was one sensible fellow. He believed in keeping the nigger in his place. 
I wish all the other fellows that try to be 
leaders of the race had as much sense." 
"But don't you think that Booker Washington's idea was founded on expediency? 
It accepted the conditions that the Negroes 
had to work against, including the tremendous prejudice. I don't believe that Washington had any idea of keeping the race 
down socially and economically for all time." 
"They'll never rise. They belong where 
they are. When they get power they can't 
be trusted. In the South we don't propose 
to stand for arson, assault and murder." 
* * * 
"Ar e those crimes unknown among the 
white population?" 
"Some crimes have been committed 
against the Negroes by white men, it's true, 
if you mean that. But the point is that the 
South belongs to the whites, and it's going 
to continue to belong to the whites. The 
Southern people like the Negroes as individuals, those Negroes that behave themselves, I mean, and there are a great many 
of them that do. The Northern people claim 
that they like the Negro race, but they show 
that they hate the individual. A nigger is 
as humble as a dog in the presence of Southerners. We thought we settled the question 
years ago. But it stalks before us like a 
ghost all the time." 
"Isn't it true that many successful Negroes are coming up in the South, men of 
character and ability, who are making good 
in spite of all the obstacles, men of education, too? " 
"When you educate a nigger you spoil a 
mighty good fellow. Wha t I don't seem to 
be able to get into your head is that the 
niggers are all right in their place. Why , 
we still have in our family an old nurse that 
took care of me when I was a baby. W e all 
love her as if she was a relative of ours. 
And she loves me as much as she loves her 
own children. But she never thinks of 
presuming. Every time I stand fo r election 
she prays fo r me. She doesn't know enough 
to understand just what an election means 
or even "what a ballot is. But some one 
once told her that I needed ballots. So she 
goes round the house, saying under her 
breath, 'Oh, Lord, shower dem ballots all 
over his head. Shower dem ballots.' Then 230 THE CRISIS 
there was another nigger we had during the 
Civil Wa r and long before the Civil War. 
Some time after he got his freedom he went 
to New Orleans and made money. He heard 
that my father and the rest of us were having a pretty hard time as a result of the 
wa r and he wrote my father a letter. It 
said, 'Let. me know if you need money. I 
will send you some.' Why, I could tell you 
stories of that kind by the yard. It was 
perfectly wonderful, the wa y the Negroes 
stood by us during the war. Those of the 
younger generation in this country don't 
know what the wa r meant to us. W e think 
the situation in Belgium is terrible. So it 
is. But the Belgians are having a big relief work done for them. W e didn't have 
any relief work done for us. W e lived on 
husks. While our men were all fighting, the 
Negroes stayed at home and took care of the 
children. If they had risen against us, the 
wa r would have been over in thirty days." 
"And the Southern people are grateful for 
their devotion?" 
"Grateful! Of course, we are grateful!" 
* * * 
"B. W. S." adds this letter in the New 
York Evening Post: 
W e were seated on Columbia Campus, in 
the sunset glow, a truly cosmopolitan crowd, 
students and residents of the neighborhood, 
many people from many lands, come together to listen to music, the "universal language. " 
Directly in front of me sat three fine 
looking women, evidently students. One of 
them looked very weary. Next her was an 
empty seat. Presently it was occupied by 
a fine looking Negro, also evidently a student. The young woman straightened up 
with a start, looked significantly at her 
companions, and then deliberately turned 
in her chair so that her back was toward 
the colored man. This deprived her of the 
support of the chair back, but so she sat 
until the end, except when we stood to sing. 
The man just glanced at her, then sat quietly, his eyes on the musicians, but his face 
settled into lines of sadness, and I wondered how much of the jo y of the evening 
was gone for him. 
The band had not played "The Star-Spangled Banner" at the beginning of the concert. After the third or fourth number Dr. 
Goldman announced that he had waited until we should all be there so that we could 
sing it "in honor of the splendid work our 
boys are doing in France. All sing," he 
urged. "Sing it so that they can hear it 
'over there.' " 
When we rose, the young woman stepped 
deliberately in front of the colored man, and 
so standing sang the national hymn of this 
great democracy. 
Above us shone out the first faint stars of 
evening, the kindly, impartial stars, the 
same stars that shine on our boys "over 
there"—and some of those boys are black. 
THE BETTER SPIRIT. 
THE Boston Evening Transcript writes: 
"Americans including black Americans." This phrase is from the German 
official bulletin listing the troops that were 
found fighting against them on the Marne 
salient. "I thank thee, Jew, fo r teaching 
me that word. " "Americans including black 
Americans"—no comma ; the words all run 
together—is a phrase which should outlast 
the war. It is a deserved tribute to the 
spontaneity and bravery of the service of the 
colored regiments now fighting in France, 
and a token of the oneness of their citizenship with all other Americans. These brave 
soldiers are not hyphenated; they may be 
black, but that word is only an adjective 
spelled with a small letter, like "white " or 
"young, " or "tall" or "spry. " It is also 
a token of the fact that other nations, including our enemies, recognize that the term 
"Americans " includes the brave black men 
on the same fighting basis as the white. 
We do not hear from any source whatsoever 
that the black Americans did any less well 
in the battle than their white brothers. 
Relative to the task which the nation has 
in hand, the white soldier and the black 
soldier are one. 
The devotion of these troops and their 
brave union with all the other self-respecting peoples in the world in resistance to the 
Prussian aggression is a full answer to those 
among the colored people in this country 
who told them, not so very long ago, that 
this was not their war, and that it should 
be left to the white people to fight out. 
The "black Americans " did not accept that 
view at all. They are proving their solidarity of sentiment and duty with all other 
Americans. Let them have full honor for 
it, and let it be remembered in the future 
to their credit. 
In a similar strain the Boston Post says, 
"Very well." 
Perhaps the Cologne Gazette thinks it is 
uttering a fearsome threat when it says 
that as American Negro soldiers "are fighting with the whites side b y side, we must not 
fail to recognize this true comradeship in 
the prisoners who fall into our hands and 
always put the same number of 'colored 
gentlemen' with an equal number of whites." 
Very well; wha t of it? It is true, as the 
Gazette says, that our colored troops are 
comrades-in-arms of our white—and gallant 
and fine fighters they are, too. This being 
so, could there be any manly objection to 
being quartered with them as prisoners—if 
the Huns shall manage to take any, which 
they are not doing to any extent just now? 
If the German thinks the color line is 
drawn in our armies at the front, he is as 
muddle-headedly mistaken as usual. 
* * * 
The Baltimore, Md., Manufacturers' Rec-THE LOOKING GLASS 231 
ord in a special letter from Jackson, Miss., 
writes: 
Increasing; evidence of the determination 
among the better classes of white citizens of 
Mississippi to give the Negro a square deal 
is to be found on every side. 
Fo r the first time in the history of the 
State, prominent white men and leaders 
among the Negroes conferred on the problems of the two races, when the Mississippi 
division of the Southern Sociological Congress met at Gulfport. The question of the 
"new freedom" and its effect upon the relations of the two races was discussed, and it 
wa s evidently the opinion of the thinkers, 
white and black, that after the wa r a new 
spirit must animate the white people in their 
dealings with the Negroes. 
Improvement of rural schools, better pay 
for Negro teachers, equitable treatment of 
Negro farm labor, absolute justice for all 
races in the courts and betterment of health 
conditions among the Negroes were discussed, and it was agreed that through 
these progressive measures the Negro stood 
the best chance of finding his place in 
American civilization. 
Negro speakers were heard with intent interest. Bishop Cottrell, of the A. M. E. 
Church, declared world democracy was 
bound to mean greater freedom for his race. 
J. W . Abercrombie, of the United States 
Department of Labor, said there were no 
more loyal people in the world than the 
American Negroes, and told of the large 
part their work and their fighting were doing in winning the war. He said Negro labor, for the most part, was loyal labor, and 
would be more so if given the opportunity 
by the whites. 
The Negro Co-operative and Community 
Congress, recently organized in Mississippi 
entirely b y Negroes, has just concluded a 
meeting in this city well attended. Roscoe 
Conkling Simmons, considered the most eloquent speaker of his race, delivered an address which was heard by many white persons. 
In patriotic campaigns, such as Liberty 
Loan, Wa r Savings, Red Cross and Y. M. 
C. A. drives, some of the most prominent 
white citizens of the State have held meetings with the Negroes, have spoken to them 
on the aims of the wa r and have met with 
a remarkable response. In fact, the Negroes have come as near proving themselves 
100 per cent, patriotic as the whites of the 
State, which is saying a good deal, since the 
State has exceeded all its recent wa r quotas. 
In the Delta section, where the center of 
Negro population is located, and where for 
years a sort of modified slavery existed—a 
more or less benevolent system of peonage— 
the Negro laborer is no longer regarded as a 
chattel. The largest planters of that section are seeing to it that their colored employees have good schools, good churches 
and comfortable houses. The Negroes themselves in many instances, through the remarkable crops of the past few years, have 
bought their own farms, furnished their 
homes in handsome style and own automobiles. 
The State Department of Education is 
thoroughly in sympathy with the Negroes' 
effort to raise themselves, and has an official 
supervisor of colored schools, who is assisted 
by a Negro teacher. While legislative appropriations for Negro schools have been 
somewhat small in the past, the policy in 
that direction is broadening, and illiteracy 
is rapidly disappearing among the younger 
generation. 
The spirit of justice may be found generally in dealing with the Negroes, which may 
be counted upon to increase as whites and 
blacks grasp the real significance of the 
war. 
* * * 
Even the Macon, Ga., Telegraph shows encouraging "complexity" of thought on seeing the drafted Negroes march by : 
There must have been confusing and complex thought processes in the minds of the 
white people of thinking intelligence who 
saw them march past Monday, speculations 
as to what the war is bringing to the Negro 
and with him, of course, in a large measure 
to the white man, how things will be after it 
is all over and Johnny comes marching home. 
Conjecture is ready, it is not entirely undisturbing and certainly it calls back no answer to the riddle at this stage. 
MILITARY LAW. 
COMMENTIN G on the dismissal of Captain Rowan, a white Southerner, for 
refusal to obey an order because it included 
mixing of white and Negro troops, the Pittsburgh, Pa., Leader says: 
The color line in the army has appeared 
so frequently since the United States entered the wa r and met with such cold response from the American people that every 
new case is worth noting for its lack of 
patriotism and ethical balance. The Negro 
citizen is an American citizen, and the Negro soldier an American soldier, whatever 
prejudiced parochial political opinion may 
declare. Public opinion has stood by the 
Negro as a citizen and army authorities evidently do not propose to retreat from a defense of the Negro as a soldier. 
* # * 
The Omaha, Neb., Bee says: 
The justice of the action is plain. A man 
who undertakes at this time to discriminate 
against another because of his color is unfit 
to wear the uniform of an American soldier 
much less to represent the government as an 
officer. If our fight for freedom means anything at all, it includes every race, tribe 
kindred, sect or creed under the sun. We 
can not say to this: "W e recognize you as 232 THE CRISIS 
brothers, and the proper object of our sacrifice," and to that: "We know you not— 
your skin is red, or black, or yellow, and 
you have nothing in common with us." Liberty to all men is our aim. To achieve it we 
have taken into our army men from every 
quarter of the world who are physically 
and morally fit; not only this, but for many 
years we have granted all the rights and 
privileges of citizenship without regard to 
"age, color or previous condition of servitude." Old Glory knows no color line, and 
men called to service under that flag must 
understand the fact. 
* * * 
The St. Louis, Mo., Star says: 
Equal and impartial administration of 
military law is shown by the hanging of 
Negro soldiers at Fort Dodge for attacking 
a girl, and a white soldier at Camp McArthur, for the same kind of crime. Also 
the superiority of military court proceedings is shown in the fact that in each case 
the punishment followed the crime within 
a few weeks. 
THE PRESIDENT AND THE 
NEGRO EDITORS. 
THE thirty-one representatives of the 
Negro press which assembled in Washington in June addressed a special memorial 
to the President of the United States and 
the Committee on Public Information. This 
memorial was drafted by Dr. W. E. B. Du 
Bois, and criticized and amended by a committee consisting of Dr. R. E. Jones, Chairman; Fred R. Moore, Benjamin J. Davis, 
John Mitchell, Jr., W. T. Andrews, and 
R. R. Moton. After one verbal correction 
it was adopted unanimously by the assembled editors and other distinguished guests. 
This address was published in the August 
CRISIS. In answer to it the President of 
the United States says in a letter: "It is 
cheering to see that the fine philosophy of 
democracy, which is at this time the inspiration of the great effort of our country, was 
felt and expressed by these conferees as 
the dominating thought which ought to control all Americans in the present crisis." 
MISCELLANEOUS. 
DR. JAME S H. DILLAR D says in School 
and Society: 
When the Negro was freed he had practically nothing to start with but the false 
discipline of slavery. He was not helped as 
he should have been helped, and the efforts 
that were made were utterly inadequate. 
The whole nation should have felt the obligation to afford means of education to the 
freedmen, for the presence of the Negro on 
our continent and his use as a slave were 
due not to the South alone but to the whole 
country. The country, as a whole, consented 
and abetted. Justice therefore demanded 
that when the change of status came, the 
whole country should share the consequent 
obligation of education. This obligation has 
never been met and the demand for meeting it still calls as a matter of simple justice 
to the Negro. It is also a matter of justice 
to the South. The South, chief promoter of 
slavery and also chief sufferer, should not 
have been expected to bear the whole burden of the public education o f the freedmen. The beginning and the end of slavery 
affected, involved and concerned the country 
as a whole. I would base national aid to 
Negro education on simple justice, justice 
to the Negro and justice to the South. 
* * * 
A colored paper, the Omaha, Neb., Monitor, warmly commends Secretary McAdo o 
for his attitude toward Negro labor: 
Now, one step further, please, Mr. Mc ­
Adoo. Enforce equal accommodations for 
equal fares on AL L railroads in the United 
States. When we pay for first-class accommodations on public carriers we are 
entitled to receive just what we pay for. 
The law says equal accommodations. This 
law is flagrantly violated and openly and 
wantonly defied. Yo u have corrected the 
injustice of unequal wages; now please 
correct that of unequal accommodations. 
* * * 
A n Associated Press dispatch of June 20, 
published in the New York Times says: 
One regiment of Negroes in the American 
Army (number deleted by censor), has had 
its baptism of fire on the fighting fields of 
France and acquitted itself so well that the 
French commander of the sector has cited 
the whole regiment as worthy of receiving 
the Wa r Cross. This regiment's repulse of 
the enemy attack on the early morning of 
June 12 was briefly referred to in the official communique. 
A later and official report of the engagement brings out interesting details and gives 
credit to the officers and men for fine fighting qualities displayed in their initial experience under shell and machine gun fire. 
The French commander of that sector has 
given the regiment the highest possible commendation for the results accomplished and 
the splendid fighting spirit sho w by the 
American Negroes. 
* * * 
The Outlook, New Yor k City, says: 
A transport lay at the dock in an American port. The decks swarmed with men in 
khaki. A passenger boat passed near her. 
and a passenger aboard saw that these men 
in khaki were Negroes. "Those men are going over to fight our battles," this passenger 
later remarked, in describing the sight, 
"and I can never again think of Negroes as 
I used to think." 233 
THE DOUGLASS HOME ANACOSTIA, D. C, NOW HEADQUARTERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COLORED WOMEN, WHO BURNED THE MORTGAGE AT THEIR DENVER MEETING, JULY, 1918. Y. M. C. A. SUMMER INSTITUTE, HARPER'S FERRY. 
NEGRO EDITORS' CONFERENCE, WASHINGTON. D. C. Editors of S. W. Christian Advocate. AfroAmerican, Daily Herald, Tribune, Planet, Courier. Defender, Freeman, World, Ledger, Dallas Express, 
News, Amsterdam News. Journal and Guide, Crisis. Age, Gazette, Argus, Clarion, Sun, Independent, Eagle, American Baptist, Nashville Globe, Bee, Texas Freeman and other periodicals, 
234 Men of the Month 
DOING THEIR BIT. 
BLANCHE ARMWOOD PERKINS, of 
New Orleans, has brains, initiative 
and executive ability. She conducts a 
cooking school in her city where the New 
Orleans Gas Company is spending $12,000 
for teaching war economy to 1,200 colored 
women. Since January 1, 1915, she has 
been on the pay-roll of some gas company 
every day. 
Mrs. Perkins is a product of Tampa, Fla. 
She is a graduate of Spelman and a member of the National Commercial Gas Association of New York City. 
Frances Reed Elliott is the first colored 
nurse to be enrolled under the American 
Red Cross service. 
Miss Elliott is a graduate of Knoxville 
College and Freedman's Hospital. She 
took a post-graduate course in nursing and 
public health at Columbia University and 
was appointed a nurse of the Bureau of 
Public Health, Jackson, Tenn. Later she accepted a position as head nurse at Tuskegee Institute. The United States Public 
Health Service Unit Number 16 appointed 
her to Chattanooga, Tenn., as public health 
nurse; later she was sent back to Jackson 
by the Red Cross. 
TW O BUSINESS MEN. 
I REMEMBER two homes of men who 
have recently gone over. One I entered in 1900, away down in Georgia. Its 
owner, Bartow F. Powell, was born in 1865. 
He was a strong, stocky, yellow man, wellbuilt and shrewd. For years he held the 
government contract for dredging certain 
muddy rivers of South Georgia, and he 
turned this money into land. He owned a 
barony—10,000 fertile acres. One hardly 
realized the extent of his domain from the 
simple one-storied white house, with its 
broad, pleasant porch. Then came the 
fields of purpling cotton, the villages of 
white and black tenants, the school houses 
for both colors—it was a matter for rubbing your eyes. The family was happy and 
wholesome, seven sturdy children and a 
busy wife. This year Powell died, leaving, 
they say, property worth a half million of 
dollars. 
Far to the North, in Ohio, on the shores 
of Lake Erie, I have been a frequent visitor 
in another home owned by a quiet brown 
man. It was a little home on a silent street 
in the sleepy town of Lorain. Yet some 
currents of the great world that rushed 
from Cleveland to Chicago swept through 
here, and David C. Fisher was one of the 
best of the business men who guided them 
Mrs. Perkins Mr, Fisher and his cottage 
235 
Miss Elliot 236 THE CRISIS 
Rev. G. F. Miller 
and built up the town. He was railway 
baggage master for the B. and O., a director of the Citizens' Savings Bank Company, 
a member of the Chamber of Commerce and 
the Board of Education, a charter member 
of the Lorain Real Estate Board and Constable. Through his influence the first 
brick pavement was laid in Lorain, on 
Ninth Street; and he was one of the builders of the first building of iron construction in Lorain. He carried on a railway 
land business, and his name is attached to 
two of the largest real estate ventures. 
Mr. Fisher was born at Romney, W. Va., 
in 1850, in a little log cabin that is still 
standing. He married Elizabeth Dorsey, 
of Elyria, Ohio, and died last year. One of 
his surviving children, Ruth Anna Fisher, 
is a graduate of Oberlin, and has continued 
his real estate business as well as being a 
widely-known social worker. 
TW O FIGHTERS. 
TWO of the strongest of colored fighting radicals are George Frazier Miller, of Brooklyn, N. Y., and John Robert 
Clifford, of Martinsburg, W. Va. Miller 
is the Episcopal rector of St. Augustine's, 
and was born in South Carolina, in 1864. 
He was educated in Charleston, at Howard 
and at the General Theological Seminary. 
Miller is a clean, frank fighter, a radical Socialist and a clear-speaker and writer.-
J. R. Clifford The late B. F. Powell 
And so was John Robert Clifford—an impetuous, honest, West Virginian editor and 
politician, who was the first colored man 
admitted to the Bar in West Virginia. He 
was born in Williamsport, Grant County, in 
1848, and spent his early life on a farm. He 
was graduated from Storer College in 1875, 
and served as principal of the Martinsburg 
City School for ten years. His exploits as a 
fighter for Negro rights read like romance. 
Once, for contending for the rights of a 
client before a U. S. Commissioner, he was 
arrested and put into jail. After 1.29 minutes, however, he was released, secured the 
release of his client, who had also been 
jailed during his absence; Clifford then 
went to Washington, filed charges against 
the Commissioner and Marshal, and had 
them both put out of office. He empaneled 
the first colored jury in West Virginia, and 
was incidentally knocked down three times 
during the process. The court-room was 
crowded, but at the time he was pulled off 
of his would-be-assassin even the judge had 
left. A year later, when his assailant was 
running for the Legislature, Mr. Clifford, 
after a speech in the Public Square, had 
him defeated by 1,335 votes. 
Mr. Glifford married Mary E. Franklin, 
a sister of Mrs. Coralie F. Cook, of Washington, D. C , and they have six living children. The Horizon 
THE WAR . 
AMONG 600 men attending the third officers' training camp in San Juan, 
Porto Rico, 150 are Negroes. 
The colored people of Washington, D. C., 
have 4,900 men in the Army ; they have 
purchased $64,800 worth of Wa r Savings 
Stamps and invested $1,020,000 in Liberty 
Bonds. 
A wa r community house for colored soldiers and sailors has been established in 
Boston, Mass., at a cost of $1,500, $1,000 
of which was contributed by the colored 
people. A free canteen is one of its features. 
Privates Henry Johnson and Robert Robinson, Negro soldiers from New York with 
the American Army in France, have been 
cited for bravery from the French command for putting to flight in "No Man's 
Land" a party of forty raiding Germans. 
Private Johnson was also mentioned in General Pershing's communique May 19, with 
Private Needham Roberts, for repulsing a 
raiding party of twenty Germans. 
Twenty-seven colored Second Lieutenants 
have been assigned to duty at Little Rock, 
Ark. They are graduates of the second 
series of training camps at Des Moines. 
Of forty-four Negroes of St. Paul, Minn., 
in the November draft, forty have been 
made non-commissioned officers and J. R. 
French, a dentist, is in the Dental Reserve 
Corps. 
The Camp Community Service of the 
Wa r Department has opened a clubroom at 
1636 Fourteenth Street, Northwest, Washington, D. C , for colored troops. 
Negroes of Columbia, S. C , subscribed 
$50,000 in Wa r Savings Stamps, this being 
the best effort in that State. 
A Hostess House for Negro soldiers has 
been opened at Camp Dix, N. J., and permission has been granted to the Knights 
of Columbus to erect a building for the use 
of Negro soldiers. 
Colored people in Hickory, N. C , who 
were taxed $4,000 for the last Wa r Savings 
Stamp campaign, pledged $500 over their 
quota. They gave $550 to the Red Cross. 
Dr. P. M. Smith headed the committee. 
Negroes in Sumter County, Ga., bought 
$18,000 of Wa r Savings Stamps and contributed $654 to the Red Cross; 87 Negro 
farmers produced 32,007 pounds of meat, 
4946 pounds of lard, 16,839 bushels of corn 
and 21,000 bushels of peanuts in addition 
in their usual cotton crops. They have 
forty-six acres devoted to corn demonstration work and sixty-six to wheat. There 
are ninety-nine voluntary demonstrators. In 
Jenkins County, Ga., Negroes raised $90,000 
in Wa r Savings Stamps. 
William Crane, a colored seaman of Wa ­
co, Texas, was wounded in a recent battle 
with a submarine and won a medal for 
bravery. He is soon to be examined for promotion to chief petty officer. 
The New York Journal reports that 
American colored troops are now participating in the heavy fighting that has been developing since the renewal of the German 
offensive. 
This is the first time the colored men 
have seen heavy action, and they are acquitting themselves well 
The German attack was completely broken 
up by artillery fire at the particular point 
where the Negroes were in the line. The 
Boches were held in their trenches at the 
very outset of their venture and the attack 
suffered heavy losses. 
The colored troops were occupying a quiet 
sector when word was received that the 
enemy was about to strike. The Negroes 
immediately requested that they be transferred to the scene of the expected fighting 
and their request was granted. 
Colored people of Chatham County, Ga., 
have bought $200,000 worth of Wa r Savings 
Stamps. A single church, the First Bryan 
Baptist, bought $20,000 worth of stamps. 
One group of 200 young colored women 
worked on the street corners and raised 
$25,000. The chairman of the movement is 
J. B. Lemon. 
It is said that a merchant marine training ship for Negroes is to be established 
at San Francisco. 
A colored civic league in New Iberia, 
La., raised $5,305 by the sale of Wa r Savings Stamps among 2709 persons. 
The Y. W. C. A. is erecting Hostess 
Houses for colored troops at Camp Jackson, South Carolina, and at Camp Gordon, 
Georgia. 
237 238 THE CRISIS 
John H. Downey, a colored man of Portsmouth, N. H., has been accepted in the 
Naval Reserve and rated as a second class 
machinist. He has been assigned to duty 
at the Naval Hospital. 
A program has been worked out involving the expenditure of $450,000 for the colored troops at Newport News, Va . 
The Colored Auxiliary No. 6, of the 
Philadelphia Red Cross, is composed of 
nearly 300 women and has done exceptional 
work for the troop trains passing through 
the city. 
The correspondent of the United Press 
writes: American Negro troops proved their 
value as fighters in line east of Verdun on 
June 12, it is now permissible to state. The 
Germans attempted a raid in that sector 
but were completely repulsed by the Negroes. The Boches began a terrific bombardment at one minute after midnight 
(throwing over between 3,000 and 4,000 
shells from guns ranging in size from 67 
to 340 millimeters. The bombardment was 
concentrated on small areas. Many of the 
shells made holes from ten to fifteen feet 
across. 
In the midst of this inferno the Negroes 
coolly stuck to their posts, operating machine guns and automatic rifles and keeping up such a steady barrage that the German infantry failed to penetrate the American lines. The Americans miraculously 
sustained only two wounded. 
"Dixie luck was a-working," explained 
one. "W e all got knocked down lots o' times, 
but every man got right up." 
Private Henry Gaillard, of New York 
City, under shell fire, took his automatic 
rifle from its place of concealment, placed 
it on the parapet and met the attacking 
Boches with a rain of bullets.. 
John Ward, a Negro of Goldsboro, S. C , 
has thirteen of his eighteen sons in the 
Ninth and Tenth United States Cavalry and 
seventeen daughters doing wa r work. 
C. W. Rice, a young colored volunteer 
of Austin, Texas, during the last six months 
has held among colored people seventeen 
one-day institutes, organized sixteen new 
institutes with a total membership of 784, 
and delivered fifty-nine additional addresses to an aggregate attendance of 19,-
341, under the direction of the State Department of Agriculture. 
In Memphis, Tenn., Negroes pledged 
$174,823 in Thrift Stamps; the colored city 
of Mound Bayou, Miss., subscribed, $1,105 
in Wa r Savings Stamps. 
A club for colored soldiers and sailors 
with accommodation for 200 has been opened in Baltimore, Md.; a recreation club 
for colored soldiers and sailors has been 
opened in New Yor k City a t the Music 
School Settlement for Colored People. 
INDUSTRY. 
COLORE D women elevator operators are 
being used in the Railway Exchange 
Building, St. Louis, Mo., and some department stores in this city are employing colored saleswomen. 
Colored waitresses have been installed 
in Baltimore, Md., at the Baltimore, Merchants', University, and Maryland Clubs. 
One thousand colored women in the vicinity of Birmingham, Ala., are engaged in 
manual labor formerly done b y men. 
The Midvale Steel Works, Philadelphia, 
Pa., employs fifty-six colored women in their 
ammunition works. Colored men are working day and night, making from $48 to $50 
per week, including overtime. 
Twenty-five colored women are being employed as freight handlers in Chicago, Ill., 
by the Wabash Railroad. They work nine 
and one-half hours a day and are paid 
thirty-two and one-half cents per hour. 
The Goodyear Rubber Tire Company at 
Akron, Ohio, has issued a call for three 
hundred colored laborers. 
It is reported that 4,400 Negro farmers 
in Virginia raised all their home supplies, 
969 opened new bank accounts, 1,233 increased their bank accounts and in one 
county 8 graded school buildings at an average cost of $1,500 have been erected. 
The steel corporation is building 1,000 
cottages to house Negroes and 400 to house 
whites in North Mobile, Ala., where there 
is a large shipbuilding plant. Bathing 
beaches for each race and social work of 
various kinds are being furnished. 
In Mobile, Ala., a labor union of seventyfive white and colored shoe workers has been 
organized. 
Forty colored men from the South, beyond draft age, have been placed as waiters 
at Murray's Restaurant, Broadway and 
Forty-second Street, New Yor k City. 
MUSIC AND ART. 
ROY WILKIN S has been elected president of the Mechanical Arts High 
School Literary Society at St. Paul, Minn., 
over two white candidates. 
Mme. E. A. Hackley has held a folk-THE HORIZON 239 
song festival in Louisville, Ky., with a 
chorus of 300 voices. 
Two thousand people witnessed an Independence Day pageant at Hampton Institute under the direction of Mrs. W . T. E. 
Williams. The music was under the direction of R. Nathaniel Dett. 
A series of portraits of "Our Master 
Minds " has been issued by C. M. Battey, of 
the Photographic Division of Tuskegee Institute. They include photographs of Douglass, Washington, DuBois, Langston, Bruce 
and Dunbar. 
Joseph H. Douglas, the violinist, has become head of the violin department of the 
Music School Settlement for Colored People, New York City. 
The Musical Observer for August publishes the conclusion of "The Drum in Africa—The Use of Music by a Primitive People in Time of War " by Maud Cuney Hare. 
Musical America notes the folk-song coterie of St. Paul, Minn., an association of 
nine colored women who are giving programs of folk-songs and plays. 
A n excellent exhibit of paintings by colored artists, manuscripts, music, books, etc., 
was held in the early part of August at 
the Carlton Avenue Y. M. C. A., Brooklyn, 
N. Y., b y the Negro Library Association. 
The catalog of twenty-four pages was by 
A . A . Schomberg and R. T. Browne. 
On August 2, the Soldier's Comfort Unit 
of Boston, Mass., gave an entertainment at 
the Houghton Estate, Cambridge, the program of which was given by the New Yor k 
Clef Club, with the added feature of a 
"Military Dance, " a solo number danced by 
a young dancer of Boston, Miss Imogene 
Roundtree. Special comment was made on 
the playing of the saxophonist of the Clef 
Club, Miss Mazie Mullins, whose numbers 
and pleasing stage deportment have caused 
favorable notice during her engagement with 
the Clef Club. This club has been appearing at Y e Wilbur Theatre in Boston. 
On July 4, at Passaic, N. J., Melville 
Charlton, a colored musician of Brooklyn, 
N. Y., was accompanist for Ernest Davis, 
leading tenor of the Boston Opera Company, and Richard Parks, bass, of the Manhattan Opera Company, under the auspices 
of the National Security League. Colonel 
Theodore Roosevelt was the speaker. 
Theodore Roosevelt Taylor, a lad twelve 
years old, who lives in Chase City, Va., 
has been found to possess unusual musical 
gifts. He has played the reed organ since 
he was four years old. 
EDUCATION. 
BECAUS E many of the students at 
Hampton Institute are within the 
draft age, the admission age has been 
changed from seventeen to sixteen years. 
Lauretta Holland graduated from the 
Mount Holly High School, N. J., as valedictorian of her class, and was awarded a prize 
for her work in English. 
A t the Southern University Summer 
School, Baton Rouge, La., 150 teachers received certificates of credit and twenty-six 
were awarded teachers' certificates. 
The John F. Slater Board reports that 54 
eounty training schools in the South during the last year taught 958 colored students 
above the seventh grade. The Slater Fund 
contributed $27,552 toward this work, the 
General Education Board $12,225, and the 
counties spent from public funds $122,050. 
The Jeanes Foundation reports that during the month of January, 1918, in 203 counties of the South 212 supervising teachers 
were employed for 2,395 schools with 162,-
882 pupils. 
Xavie r University, New Orleans, La., has 
been recently authorized to confer degrees 
by the Legislature of Louisiana. Eighteen 
high school graduates were sent out this 
year. 
In St. Louis, Mo., a modern school building with twenty-one rooms is to be devoted 
entirely to seventh, eighth and ninth grade 
colored pupils. The Sumner High School 
is accredited by the North Central Association of High Schools and recently has been 
recognized by the University of Chicago. 
M. W . Fort, a colored boy of twelve, 
ranked his class of ninety-nine in the Harvard Grammar School, Cambridge, Mass. 
Ev a Farrar, William J. Clark and Lillian M. Whiting were graduated from the 
Bridgeport, Conn., High School. Miss Whiting won the second Barnum prize for speaking and graduated with honor. The Barnum prizes were established by the late B. 
T. Barnum. There were twenty-four contestants. 240 THE CRISIS 
THE CHURCH. 
LAD Y MAR Y McGILL, a prominent 
Catholic, left a bequest of $19,500 for 
St. Anthony's Colored Mission in Mobile, 
Alabama. 
The Rt. Rev. Mgr. John E. Burke, who 
has headed the Negro Catholic Mission since 
1907, is asking for a fund of $40,000 to 
support his work. 
Union Baptist Church in New York City 
raised $6,340 in a recent rally. The Reverend Mr. George H. Smith is pastor. 
Olivet Baptist Church, Chicago, Ill., purchased a $5,000 cash Liberty Bond last 
November. It has also bought the First 
Baptist Church, white, at a cost of $85,000, 
white organizations and friends giving $25,-
000 toward it. In sixty days $11,199 was 
raised. The church, which has 7,240 members, will occupy its new home late in September. The Reverend Mr. L. K. Williams 
is pastor. 
Second Baptist Church, of Detroit, Mich., 
in a three-day drive raised $53,000. This 
was the third big effort the church has 
made since its building was burned in February. They have been phenomenally successful in raising funds to rebuild their 
structure without having to negotiate a loan. 
The Rev. Mr. R. L. Bradley is pastor. 
POLITICS. 
THE New York State convention of the 
Socialist Party adopted a resolution 
demanding the enactment and enforcement 
of federal legislation to put an end to violations of the Fifteenth Amendment. 
In Houston, Texas, 102 colored women 
registered so as to participate in the public caucuses July 27. 
Six colored women who applied to register at Fort Worth, Texas, were refused 
on the ground that the primaries were open 
"for white Democrats only." 
Two colored women were chosen as delegates to the New York Republican convention and two as alternates. The delegates 
were Dr. Gertrude E. Curtis, of the Nineteenth District and Mrs. Laura B. Fisher, 
of the Twentieth. 
MEETINGS. 
THREE thousand Negroes were assembled at a Red Cross rally in New 
York City, at which Mrs. August Belmont 
spoke, outlining the work being done in 
France. 
The fifteenth annual session of the National Association of Teachers in Colored 
Schools wa s held at Storer College, Harper's 
Ferry, W. Va . Amon g those who took 
part were John M. Gandy, Kelly Miller, 
W . S. Scarborough, George E. Haynes and 
the U. S. Commissioner of Education. 
The twentieth annual session of the National Medical Association was held in Richmond, Va., August 27 to 29. Clinics were 
held at the Richmond Hospital and scientific sessions at Virginia Union University. 
The National Committee on Churches 
and Moral Aims of the Wa r began a series 
of meetings at Talladega College. Other 
meetings will be held at Hampton and in 
New Orleans. 
ft Agricultural fairs have been held by colored people in seventeen counties in Virginia. 
Two hundred delegates attended the biennial meeting of the National Association 
of Colored Wome n held in Denver, Colo. 
Mrs. Mary B. Talbert was re-elected president, Miss Hallie Q. Brown, vice-president, 
and Mrs. Charlotte Hawkins Brown was 
made corresponding secretary. The Governor of the State attended the opening session. 
A splendid series of reports on social 
work was given. The president, Mrs. Mary 
B. Talbert, declared that colored women 
raised $5,000,000 in the Third Liberty Loan 
Drive and contributed $300,000 to the Red 
Cross Drive. They called for colored wa r 
nurses, the abolition of filthy "Jim-Crow" 
cars and the stopping of lynching. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS. 
GOVERNO R BICKETT , of North Carolina, presided over a conference 
at the State House with representative 
Negroes who discussed the problem of Negro labor. Dr. George E. Haynes, Director 
of Negro Economics for the U. S. Department of Labor, was present. Committees 
were appointed to carry out the plans. 
Colored elementary grade teachers in 
Washington, D. C , have formed Local Union 
27, of the American Federation of Teachers. 
Professor C. H. Thomas is president. 
In 1917, the National Association fo r the 
Advancement of Colored People protested TH E HORIZO N 241 
against the following statement in the Columbia University Bulletin of information: 
"Since no special arrangements are made 
for colored students, such students in case 
they are unable to make arrangements with 
friends, are advised to write for information 
regarding rooms and board to the Residence 
Bureau, Teachers College, Columbia University." In the 1918 Bulletin this statement is omitted. 
Mrs. J. H. McPherson, a colored woman, 
has been appointed quarantine officer in the 
City Health Department, Chicago, Ill. 
In a collision on the Nashville, Chattanooga and St. Louis Railroad 107 people 
were killed and 86 injured, nearly all being Negro laborers caught in the flimsy 
"Jim-Crow" car. 
The white Elks at their Atlantic City 
meeting were advised by the ruler to give 
up litigation against colored Elks. 
Because of protests by the N. A. A. C. 
P., the State Board of Control of Milwaukee, Wis., has decided that Negroes be admitted to sanitariums on the same terms as 
whites. 
A colored teacher, Miss Viola Va n Buren, 
has been appointed in Rochester, N. Y., 
at Public School Number 10. 
Colored soldiers of the Labor Battalion 
at Camp Gordon, Ga., are being used as 
laborers to save the peach crop. They are 
paid civilian wages and are transported to 
and from their work in motor trucks. 
Girl students at Hampton Institute are 
to have a new dormitory to cost $65,000, 
through the donation of Mrs. John S. Kennedy, of New York. It will bear her name 
and the building will be constructed by the 
Hampton Institute Trade School. 
A colored interne has been placed at 
Bellevue Hospital, New York City, in the 
person of Dr. U. C. Vincent, a graduate of 
the University of Pennsylvania Medical 
School. 
When Mrs. Elsie Bond, a colored probation officer in Philadelphia, Pa., took up her 
residence at 2936 Ellsworth Street, the white 
people stoned it. A race riot followed in 
which two policemen were killed and sixty 
persons injured. More than sixty Negroes 
have been arrested and charged for having 
weapons, and one is charged with murder. 
To make financial ends of the department meet, the Negro Welfare Bureau at 
Trenton, N. J., resulting from a law passed 
last winter, has been suspended by the State 
Commissioner of Labor. 
It has been decided that the Public Service Commission cannot segregate colored 
and white passengers on interstate street 
cars in Maryland. 
The report of the Special Congressional 
Investigating Committee on the East St. 
Louis riots has been laid before the House 
and printed. The conduct of the men of 
the National Guard is characterized as a 
"blot on the Illinois Militia organization." 
The "Birth of a Nation" has been ruled 
out of Lincoln, Neb. 
The colored Knights of Pythias of Georgia have held their annual session. They 
report an income of $177,656, expenditures 
of $64,037 and a balance on hand of $113,-
627. 
Mob violence in the United States has 
been denounced by the Indiana and Wisconsin Bar Associations. 
B. H. Fisher, of Toledo, has been appointed clerk in the street cleaning department. This is the first instance of such a 
colored appointment in the history of the 
city. 
An eleven-year-old colored boy, J. E. 
Reed, of Waterbury, Conn., won the Junior 
Four-Minute-Men speaking contest at the 
Russell School. 
The publishers of the San Antonio, Texas, 
Express, have established a fund of $100,-
000, to be maintained for five years for the 
purpose of combating and punishing lynching and mob violence in the United States. 
A reward of $500 will be paid to each person responsible for the arrest and conviction of any person instrumental in arousing a mob to commit lynching or to participate in lynching when the victim is white 
and $1,000 when the victim is colored. The 
offer applies both to officers of the law and 
to private citizens in any state. 
A park and community center for colored people has been purchased by the city 
of St. Louis, Mo. It is opposite the colored 
Sumner High School. 
Premier Botha, of the Union of South 
Africa, has issued a statement calling attention to great unrest in South Africa anion?; 
whites and natives. 
The Virginia State Legislature has 
passed a resolution commending the Virginia 242 THE CRISIS 
State Federation of Colored Women's Clubs 
for the work which it has done in establishing an industrial home school for wayward 
colored girls at Peak, Hanover County. 
Mrs. Janie Porter Barrett is secretary and 
superintendent and the board is composed 
of white and colored members. 
In Shreveport, La., two streets, formerly known as Bismarck and Berlin, have 
been changed to Christopher and Chester 
in honor of the first two Negro volunteers. 
Vivienne War d Stokes has been made 
Assistant Superintendent of the New York 
State Bureau of Labor by competitive examination at a salary of $1,200. 
The South Carolina Federation of Colored Women's Clubs held its eighth annual 
session in Orangeburg. The members have 
put up 20,790 cans of fruits and vegetables 
and have contributed $8,000 to the Red 
Cross, the Y . M. C. A. and camp activities. 
Mayor Preston, of Baltimore, Md., is suggesting a new segregation ordinance based 
on the fact that Negroes are more susceptible to tuberculosis than whites. 
Fifteen modern houses, six-stories high, 
containing 1,500 living rooms, have been 
opened for Negroes in New York City at 
202-230 West 140th Street, through a colored real estate operator. 
Protests have been made against the use 
of the word "darky" by the white press 
when referring to Negroes. The Providence, 
R . I. Journal "regrets" that the word appeared in its columns, and the New York 
World "has given orders that the word 
shall not be used again." 
The nurse training school at Los Angeles, 
Cal., which has heretofore discriminated 
against colored nurses is now through the 
efforts of the local branch of the N. A. A. 
C. P. open to all. 
PERSONAL. 
MISS GENEV A JACKSON, of Radcliffe 
College, Cambridge, Mass., has been 
awarded a $200 scholarship for next year. 
Dr. B. A. Crichlow, of Charleston, W. 
Va., has been appointed superintendent of 
the State Tuberculosis Sanitarium. 
The funeral of Uncle Billy Robertson, a 
former slave, was held in the County Courthouse at Oneonta, Ala., and the business of 
the town was suspended during the service. 
The Mayor and members of the City Council 
insisted that his widow permit the town to 
bear the expenses of the funeral. 
Mrs. Rebecca L. Furr, founder and principal of the Newport News Training School, 
Inc., is dead. She was a graduate of Fisk. 
Wilberforce University recently conferred the following honorary degrees: 
LL.D.. Hon. W . H. Lewis, Boston, Mass.; 
Hon. Emmett J. Scott, Tuskegee Institute, 
Ala.; Prof. J. R. E. Lee, Kansas City, Mo.; 
Hon. George Wellington Ellis, Chicago, 111.; 
Colonel Charles Young, Wilberforce, Ohio. 
Professor C. F. Parr, Palestine, Texas, and 
Mrs. Mary McLeod Bethune, Daytona, Fla., 
were given the degree of M.A. 
I. Collins, of Lakewood, N. J., is the first 
colored mail carrier in the town. He stood 
second on the examination list. 
C W. G. Cromwell, a colored teacher at 
Etobicoke, Ontario, was given a gold watch 
by his white pupils at the end of his four 
and one-half years' service. 
Amos Edwards, a colored detective on 
the Philadelphia police force, is dead. He 
was a popular athlete. 
Mrs. Edward W. Blyden, widow of the 
noted African, is dead at the age of eightythree years. 
The Newark Daily Ledger is giving a 
page to Negro news to be edited by R. A. 
Travis, of East Orange, formerly chief 
clerk in the testing department of the Croker 
Wheeler Company. 
The marriage of Miss Sallie Fisher, a 
teacher of Washington, D. C , to Dr. Harold G. Clark, is announced. 
Marie Dwyer, a colored nurse, saved an 
eight-year-old white girl from being accidentally burned to death in a bonfire in St. 
Louis, Mo. 
CRIME. 
THE following lynchings have taken 
place since our last record: 
Madill, Okla., June 29, L. McGill,. hanged 
for alleged attack upon a white woman. 
Ben Hur, Texas, July 27, Gene Brown, 
hanged for alleged assault on a white woman. 
Two other lynchings inadvertently omitted from CRISIS records are: G. W. Lyeh, 
February 10, Estill Springs, Tenn., for aiding an escaped murderer; Monroe, La., 
March 16, John Richards, for alleged attack 
upon a white woman. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 243 
THE HAMPTON NORMAL AND AGRICULTURAL INSTITUTE 
Hampton, Virginia 
OVER 300 HAMPTONIANS ARE IN NATIONAL SERVICE 
The young men are under military discipline, and are formed into a battalion of 
six companies with student officers. The 
military system results in an erect carriage, 
prompt obedience, and respect for authority. 
OBJECT—Founded in 1868 
by General Samuel C. Armstrong to train selected youth 
who should go out to teach 
and train their people. The 
Institute was designed to instruct Negro youth in morality, industry, and thrift, as 
well as in earnest and practical Christianity. 
HAMPTO N TODAY—A n 
industrial village with 900 
boardin g students; 1,100 
acres; 140 buildings; instruction farm of 835 acres; and 
200 teachers and workers. 
Hampton stands for a "sound 
body, a trained capacity, and 
an unselfish outlook on life." 
Hampton is on the State of 
Virginia list of approved 
four-year secondary schools. 
COURSES —Recently revised four-year courses in 
Teache r Training; Home 
Economics; Business; Agriculture; and 13 Trades. 
PRINCIPAL—James E. Gregg 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manual Training and Industrial School 
FOR COLORED YOUTH 
BORDENTOWN, N. J. 
A high institution for the training of colored youth, 
equipment, thorough instruction, wholesome surroundings, 
training for all students. 
Courses in carpentry, agriculture and trades for boys. 
Courses in domestic science and domestic art for girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly equipped. 
A new girls' dormitory will be completed October 1, 1918. 
Expenses reasonable. Term begins September 4, 1918. 
For information address 
Excellent 
Academic 
W. R. VALENTINE, Principal 
Mention The Crisis. 244 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE , N . C. 
Biddle University, operated under the auspices of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Departments—High School, Arts and Sciences Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course is the requirement for entrance to the first year 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the 
scientific, German is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely English. 
Greek and Hebrew are taught in the others. 
All students in the High School Dept. are required 
to take trades in the Industrial Dept. 
For further information, address 
President H. L. McCrorey, 
Charlotte, N. C. 
J. BRICK AGRICULTURAL, INDUSTRIAL 
AND NORMAL SCHOOL 
BRICKS, Edgecombe County, N. C. 
(On A. C. L. R. R.) 
This School offers a first-class High School 
Course, including Domestic Science, Domestic Art, 
Agriculture, Work in Wood, Iron and Mechanical 
Drawing. Piano and Vocal Music, Night School. 
A Two Tear Teacher-Training Course 
Is Open To High School Graduates. 
Teachers and officers, 22; enrollment, 315— 
boarders, 212. Cottages and buildings, 23. School 
farm, 1129 1/2 acres. Strong athletic, literary and 
Christian associations. School term 33 weeks. 
Environment fine. Telephone and telegraph Enfield, N. C. For further information write 
T. S. INBORDEN, Principal, BRICKS, N. C. 
Morgan College and Branches 
John O. Spencer, Ph.D., President. 
Wm, Pickens, LittD., LL.D., Vice President. 
MORGAN COLLEGE, Baltimore, Md. 
LOCATION: Central, in great college town between the 
North and South. 
POLICY: Co-educationaL 
COURSES: Four years with appropriate degrees. Electives to suit those preparing for professional study. 
Advanced courses in Education. Graduates receive 
certificates for elementary and high school teaching in 
the State. 
FACULTY: Composed of college and university trained 
men and women. 
NEW SITE: Forty acres of most beautiful scenery, stream, 
hill and forest. 
TERMS: Very reasonable. 
MORGAN ACADEMY, Baltimore, Md. 
LOCATION: In the suburbs of Baltimore on a beautiful 
campus. Healthful surroundings. 
COURSES: Preparatory, normal, agriculture, domestic 
science and art. Preparation for rural teaching. 
DORMITORIES: Well equipped and supervised. 
TERMS: Very moderate. 
PRINCIPAL: Lee M. McCoy, A. M. 
PRINCESS ANNE ACADEMY, 
Princess Anne, Md. 
(Eastern Branch Md. State College of Agr.) 
LOCATION: The famous Eastern Shore of Maryland. 
COURSES: Preparatory, normal, industrial, domestic science and art, music. 
DORMITORIES: Carefully supervised; furnished. • 
TERMS: Free tuition: other expenses moderate. 
SUMMER SCHOOL: Prepares teachers specially for rural 
schools. Wednesday, June ?.6th to Thursday, August 
1st. Courses prefessional and industrial. 
Thomas IT. Kiah, A.M., Principal. 
ALL SCHOOLS OPEN SEPTEMBER 23rd. 1918. 
Dormitories open Sept. 21, 1918. 
^mii ji!.:iM-:iiiir :n'' • i .:• iiii, Jiiii .11!.. .iir .1!:: iir.iiii!; inn. 
| The Tuskegee Normal I 
| and Industrial Institute ( 
| Founded by Booker T. Washington | 
| An institution devoted to the training | 
| of young men and women. Courses in | 
j Agriculture, Teacher Training and forty j 
| trades. Exceptional opportunities for | 
| earnest students of limited means. | 
| Address: i 
| ROBERT R. MOTON, Principal, 1 
| Tuskegee Institute, Alabama. 
ffijiiintiiiiiiiitMiiiiMUMiuiiiiiiiiiiiitiriiiiiuttiiiiiMJiiiiiiitriiiiiiiiijriiiiiiiiiciiiiiiiiijniiiiiir u Jiiiiiiir i tiiiiiiiuifiiiiiifrj^ 
TH E FOR T VALLE Y HIG H 
AN D INDUSTRIA L SCHOO L 
FOR T VALLEY , GA . 
A Christian institution for Negro youth of 
both sexes, Healthful location, beautiful 
campus and farm of 90 acres. Modern buildings and strong faculty. Expenses moderate. 
The following courses are offered: Grammar 
School, Academy, Normal, Music, Business 
and Industries for boys and girls. 
Fall Term begins October 2, 1918. 
For further information write 
H. A. HUNT, Principal 
The Alcorn A. & M. College 
Alcorn, Mississippi 
State A. & M. College for Negroes 
Departments: Academic , Agricultural 
and Mechanical; Strong Faculty, 
healthful location; terms reasonable. 
For catalog of information address, 
L. J. ROWAN , President, 
Alcorn, Mississippi. 
Th e New England Conservatory of Musi c Students' 
Club will give information to anyone coming to 
Boston to study music. 
Address the club Secretary 
Mrs . Estell e Ancru m Forste r 
74 W . Rutlan d Squar e Boston , Mass. 
Send stamp 
"JUS T TH E PLAC E FO R YOU R GIRL " 
Dayton a Norma l an d Industria l Institut e fo r Negr o Girls , Daytona , Fla . 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational. 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEOD BETHUNE, . - - Principal. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 245 
1888 1918 
St. Paul Normal and 
Industrial School 
LAWRENCEVILLE, VA. 
Thirty - First Session 
OPENS SEPTEMBER 24, 1918 
COURSE S 
Primary, Grammar School, Normal, Industrial 
Graduates receive State High 
School Certificate which will 
admit to Standard Normal 
Schools and Colleges 
SUMMER SCHOOL FOR TEACHERS 
EXTENSIVE TRADE COURSES 
ENROLLMENT 1917-1918, 496 
Athletic Training. Football, Baseball, Tennis, Etc. 
FULL COURSE IN MILITARY TRAINING 
For Catalog and Further information address 
Rev. James S. Russell, D. D., 
Principal 
LAWRENCEVILLE, VA. 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
Theological, College and Academy Courses 
A higher school of wide recognition for 
honest and thorough scholarships, for its successful debating teams, for its high cultural, 
moral and religious influence, for its fine 
library, equipment and buildings, fur the large 
number of leading preachers, teachers anil social workers among its graduates. Its premedical courses have recently been greatly 
strengthened. It lays special emphasis on its 
literary, social service and theological training. 
For further information address 
The President. 
HARTSHORN MEMORIAL COLLEGE 
RICHMOND , VIRGINI A 
A superior school for the separate, higher education of young women. Select Courses of study, 
Industrial, Music, Preparatory, Classical, Normal and 
College. Provides a pleasant home, careful culture 
and thorough training. 
Expense s ver y moderate . 
Send for Catalo g to the President. 
Hale Infirmary and Nurse 
Training School 
328 Lake Street, Montgomery, Alabama . 
Hale Infirmary School of Nursing offers to intelligent young women between the age of eighteen 
and thirty-five a three years' course in the profession of nursing. Students of this school are eligible 
to Alabama examinations for the degree of R. N. 
For farther information apply to the superintendent. 
A Training Cam p for Colored Wome n 
FOR ' HOME DEFENSE 
TEN WEEK S 
Of Intensive Instruction 
I N WAR WORK 
at the 
NATION'S CAPITAL 
Th e Best Plac e in Americ a t o Understan d the "Spirit " a s Wel l as the "Letter " o f 
This Figh t to Mak e Democrac y Saf e fo r the World . 
COURSES OFFERED 
Motor and Truck Driving- and Repairing-. 
First Aid and Home Service, 
Forewomen and Supervisors of Women's Work 
(Three Months) 
Welfare Superintendents (Three Months). 
Group Leaders Among Women Workers. 
Operation of Elevators. 
Bundle Wrapping. 
Operation of Power Machines. 
Printing-. 
Repairing and Remodling- Clothes, 
Best Methods of Preparing and Conserving 
Food. 
Practical Housekeeping. 
Waiting in Public and Private Places. 
Cleaning and Care of Public Buildings. 
Home Gardening-. 
Canning and Drying. 
Stenography and Typewriting. 
Place s Awai t the Qualified . 
Fo r furthe r information , address Mis s Nanni e H . Burroughs, President, the Nationa l 
Trainin g Schoo l fo r Wome n an d Girls, Lincol n Heights, Washington , D . C . 
Mention The CrisiS. 246 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
The War Department urges all Graduates of High Schools and Academies to 
Enlist and g o to 
College 
Lincoln University, 
Pennsylvania, 
offers full Courses in Arts, Sciences, 
and Theology. 
The Students' Army Training Corps 
provides opportunity for probable completion of College Course and at the 
same time for preparation to meet the 
needs of the Army for highly trained 
men as Officers. 
All Departments open Tuesday, September 17, 1918. 
Address: 
Rev. J. B. Kendall, D.D., President, 
Lincoln University, P. O. , 
Pennsylvania 
Bell Phone Spruce 1924 30-Day System Position 
Derrick 
Shorthand School 
Childs' Building 
1435 Chestnut Street 
PHILADELPHIA 
Enroll Immediately to Hold Place 
in Class 
Send JOT Enrollment Blank, and information. 
Day and Evening Classes 
SPECIAL SUMMER COURSE 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
1227 S. 17th ST., PHILA., PA. 
Shorthand Typewriting Bookkeeping 
Our students pass Civil Service Examinations asily— 
trained by ex-postal employees 
School open for Typewriting all summer. Fall term 
opens October 1, 1918. 
Edward T. Duncan, President 
THE GEORGIA STATE INDUSTRIAL COLLEGE 
is regarded for natural scenery as having the most attractive campus in Georgia. Its location is healthful; it 
lias a good moral environment; its religious and intellectual atmosphere is wholesome and uplifting. Boys sent to 
this institution will get the best physical, religious and 
literary training. 
During the summer it has conducted a special Military 
Training Camp for a detachment of two hundred young 
soldiers. 
THE COURSES OF STUDY 
Grammar School: Grades from sixth to eight grade. 
High School: Grades from ninth to twelfth grade. 
College Course: Freshman, Sophomore, Junior, and 
Senior. 
Subjects: Mechanical, agricultural and literary. A 
trade for every student; girls given domestic science: cooking, sewing, dress-making and laundering. 
Persons completing the College course receive the degree of A. B. Diplomas are signed by the Chancellor of 
the University of Georgia and the President of the 
Georgia State College. The expenses of the school are 
moderate; in fact, lower than at any other Slate school 
of its grade. 
For catalog or other information, 
Address, 
President R. R. WRIGHT 
Georgia State Industrial College, Savannah, Ga. 
BEREAN MANUAL TRAINING 
AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
South College Ave. and N. 19th Street 
Phila., Pa. 
Fall Term and Twentieth Year opens 
Tuesday, October 1, 1918. Domestic 
Art, Industrial Art, Mechanical Art, 
Commercial and English. 
Sessions both day and evening. 
Age, sex or previous training no bar 
if applicant has good character. 
Years of honorable records and 
worthy traditions our trade-mark. 
Helpfulness our object. 
Efficiency ou r aim . 
Write or visit the School now. 
MATTHEW ANDERSON, Principal 
1926 S. College Ave. Phila., Pa. 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTED 
All Races 
Prepare in the best school of it, kind In the State 
Subjects 
Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, English, Penmanship, Civil Service Training, and SPANISH. 
COMMERCIAL CLASS 
Lenox Community Center—at 
PUBLIC SCHOO L 89 
Lenox Avenue and 186th St., New York City. 
Open All Year—Four Evenings Weekly. 
Fitz W. Mottley, President, 
TEACHERS a live agency furnishes the 
connecting medium in a business way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware. District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia. Illinois. Indiana, Kansas. Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi. Missouri, New York. North Carolina. Ohio. Oklahoma, Pennsylvania. Rhode Island, 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West 
Virginia. 
THE MUTUA L TEACHERS' AGENCY 
1498 New York Arena* Washington, D. C 
Mention THE CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 247 
These Are Unusual Times 
These are unusual times! 
Every business and every household is obliged to adjust and readjust itself to the changed conditions brought on by the war. 
It is our duty to make such adjustments and such sacrifices as may 
be necessary that the war be won. 
Every atom of our strength should be placed back of the Government's program of raising the largest army in the shortest space of time. 
The Life Insurance business, along with all others, has found it 
necessary to place every resource of that business at the disposal of the 
Government. 
Standard Life Insurance Company has heeded the Country's Call to 
the limit of its ability and will continue to do so until the war is won and 
afterwards. 
There are 24 stars in our Service Flag. One of them is golden in 
memory of First Lieutenant Carter N. Brown, our former bookkeeper, 
the first colored officer to die in this war. 
Every department of the Home Office and every district in our Field 
Force has lost valuable men. W e gave them up cheerfully because our 
country needed them. 
Despite our losses of men, we wrote $2,730,972 paid-for business the 
first six months of the year. 
Our total insurance in force was $7,299,258 on June 30th. 
These are unusual times! 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Home Office ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
HEMAN E. PERRY, President HARRY H. PACE, Secretary-Treasurer 
Mention T H E CRISIS. 248 THE CRISIS 
Southern Aid Society 
of Virginia 
Incorporated 
HOM E OFFICE : 
527 NORTH SECOND STREET RICHMOND , VIRGINIA 
INSURE S AGAINS T 
SICKNESS, ACCIDENT AN D DEATH 
Full Protection 
Against the 
Emergencies of life. 
Perpetual Paying 
Benefits on Account 
of Sickness and 
Accidents. 
Full Death Claims 
Paid After Death, 
Regardless of 
Amount of Benefits 
Drawn During 
Life. 
Over $5,000,00 0 Insurance in force. 
Over $1,000,00 0 paid to policyholders. 
Over $300,00 0 assets owned by the Society. 
Over 1,00 0 people employed by the Society. 
Over one-half million dollars annual business. 
You arc not finished without a Southern Aid Policy 
A . D . PRICE , 
Presiden t 
THOS . M . CRUMP . 
Secretar y 
B . L . JORDAN , 
Assistan t Secretar y 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 249 
THE NORTH CAROLINA MUTUAL 
AND PROVIDENT ASSOCIATION 
Home Office, DURHAM, N. CAROLINA 
The Oldest, Largest and Strongest 
Old Line Legal Reserve Negro 
Life Insurance Company in the World 
Abstract from Financial Statement for 1917 Shows: 
Total Income—1917 $ 624,794.31 
Total Disbursements—1917 523,915.70 
INCOME OVE R DISBURSEMENTS $ 100,878.61 
Admitted Assets 358,363.97 
Liabilities (Including $258,918—Legal Reserve).. 270,801.51 
Unassigned Funds (Surplus) 87,562.46 
INSURANC E IN FORCE $11,157,472.00 
$i3o,oqo.oo DEPOSITED WIT H INSURANCE DEPARTMENTS 
For the Protection of the Policyholders 
Amount Paid in Claims Since Organization 
$1,736,504.50 
Your Chance to Buy Stable Life Insurance from $500 to $5,000. 
POLICIES WIT H AL L MODER N PROVISIONS, INCLUDING A PERMANEN T DISABILIT Y CLAUSE. 
John Merrick, President A. M. Moore, M. D., Sec'y and Treas. 
C. C. Spaulding, Vice-President and General Manager 
J. M. Avery, Assistant Gen'l Manager E. R. Merrick, Ass't Sec'y 
Mention The Crisis 250 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
WHY NEW YORK REAL ESTATE 
GROWS IN VALUE 
When it is realized that the permanent increase in population of New York in one year was 400,00 0 equaling the 
population of Cleveland, Ohio, some idea of the tremendous growth of the city is appreciated.— National 
Magazine. 
PUT YOUR DOLLARS IN IMPROVED NEW 
YORK CITY REAL ESTATE 
You have heard of the Payton Apartments, Nos. 117-127-13 5 West 
141st Street, and Nos. 130-140-148 West 142nd Street, New York City, 
the finest owned and controlled by colored people in the world, set aside 
for the tenantry of colored families. 
A proper idea of the magnitude of this proposition can be had only 
by taking into consideration that these houses cover a tract of over 
two and one-half acres, or thirty-three full city lots. These six large, 
modern, de luxe elevator apartment houses contain 306 apartments, 1466 
rooms, and will house more than 1500 people. They were constructed 
at a cost of one and a half million dollars. 
The Payton Apartments Corporation, incorporated under the laws 
of the State of New York, with a capitalization of $250,000.00, was 
organized to take title to these valuable properties. 
The Directorate of the Corporation is made up of the following 
well known men: 
E. C. Brown, President, is a Banker and Real Estate Operator of 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Andrew F. Stevens, Vice President, is a Banker and President of 
the Home Extension Insurance Association of Philadelphia. 
Emmett J. Scott, Secretary and Treasurer, is Secretary of Tuskegee, 
Alabama. He is also one of the Assistant Departmental Heads at 
Washington. 
W . H. C. Brown, Director, is an Investment Banker, Washington. 
D. C. 
Heman E. Perry, Director, is President of the Standard Life Insurance Co., Atlanta, Ga. 
W e have published a little booklet, illustrated, telling all about this 
remarkable proposition. It tells how for as small a sum as five dollars 
a month for a few months you can become a part owner in the largest 
real estate proposition in the world undertaken by Negroes. 
Send for Booklet today. It is free for the asking. 
E. C. BROWN COMPANY 
Investment Securities 
427 S. BROAD STREET PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
Mention T H E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 25l 
$2 0 to $3 0 Per Wee k 
being made selling our new book "Progress and 
Achievements of the Colored People" by Prof. 
Kelly Miller, showing the wonderful doings and 
new opportunities of our race; low prices, many 
pictures, lightning seller; Price, $1.96; ask for 
terms, write for outfit 25 cents. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO., 
523 Ninth Street Washington, D. C. 
PROF. KELLY MILLER. AUTHOR, HOWARD UNIVERSITY, WASHINGTON, D . C. 
Dean Miller's Picture 11x14 Given with the book, or Picture mailed for 25c 
Prof. G. A. Goodman, Treas., 
Mississippi M. & I, College. 
Writes: "I have sold 170 
Progress of Colored People, sold 
32 in one day, went out on a 
two day trip and sold 50." 
NEGRO SOLDIER 
IN OUR WAR 
(NEW BOOK) 
Tells all about the war; it is fair 
to Colored people; everyone buys: 
a tremendous seller. Price only 
$1.85; agents making $8 to $15 per 
day. Send 25 cents for agents' 
outfit. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO., 
The large publisher of Negro boohs 
523 Ninth St., Washington, D. C. 
Colored Man No Slacker 
Picture in bright colors 16 by 20 
inches or a big 14 by 11 inch picture of Kelly Miller mailed for 
twenty-five cents, or put in to each 
book buyer and agent for ten cents 
extra. 
GET IN WITH A LIVE COMPANY 
MAKE THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 252 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Inform yourself as to 
THE EXODUS OF THE NEGROES 
By Reading 
Dr. Carter G. Woodson's 
A CENTURY OF NEGRO MIGRATION 
220 Pages Price $1.10 
This book is unique in that it is the first and only scientific treatise in this field. It undertakes to explain why the Negroes have migrated, where they have gone and what they have done. 
Agents wanted everywhere Send all orders to the author 
1216 You Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 
THE NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY 
Contains 296 Pages, 15 Chapters, Historical 
and Biographical, 17 Full Page Illustrations 
Printed on Fine Antique Book, Bound in Full 
Green Extra Cloth, Gold Title on Front Cover 
and Shelf Back. Price, net $1.25. Postage 
Prepaid $1.40. Order through any bookseller 
or direct from the author. Address 
JOHN W. CROMWELL 
1439 Swann St. Washington, D. C. 
STEWARD'S 
"HAITIAN REVOLUTION" 
—Praised by distinguished Haitians 
"No more interesting book has been 
written."—Army and Navy Register. 
The book that every young colored man should read 
Price $1.25 net 
Address T. G. Steward, Wilberforce, Ohio 
or the 
CRISIS, 70-5th Ave., New York City 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
20 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY :: ATLANTA, GA . 
Th e Curse o f Rac e Prejudic e 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facta and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justic e 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
3ll West 138th Street New York, N. Y. 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 ne t 
Addrcss: E. A . JOHNSO N 
134 Nassau Street NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E Crisis. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 258 
ROLAN D w . HAYES . Tenor 
RECITALS CONCERTS ORATORIO OPERA 
His voice is rich, pure, free and gracefully lyric; lends 
itself easily to dramatic passages. Not only has he A 
voice that many might envy, he also has the gift of interpretation. He catches almost instinctly the mood of the 
poet and composer.— Phillip Hale, in Boston HERALD. 
He combines A pleasing and well trained voice, particularly well used, with notable ability to express the meaning of his songs, excellent enunciation and LOVE for HIS 
art.— Boston TRAVELER. 
ADDRESS: 130 BOYLSTON ST.. BOSTON. MASS. 
LULA ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
Available for Concerts 
Telephone 6393 Morningside 
126 W . 134th Street New Yor k City 
FLORENCE-COLE TABLERT 
Soprano 
"SH E HAS ONE OF THE BEST VOICES THAT GOD HAS 
GIVEN HER RACE."—LO S ANGELES Times. 
"SPECIAL PRAISE MUST BE GIVEN MRS. FLORENCE TALBERT WHO BESIDE HER NATURAL GIFT HAS ALREADY REACHED 
A HIGH PLANE OF professional accuracy."—HERMAN 
DEVRIES I N Chicago A merican. 
ENGAGEMENTS ACCEPTED FOR CONCERTS. RECITALS. ORATORIO 
65 9 28T H STREET, DETROIT, MICH . 
Wm. H. Richardson, Baritone 
CONCERTS RECITALS 
Mr. Richardson is blessed by nature, 
bis voice is resonant. Arm, commanding. 
He sings fluently and with marked authority.—Philip Hale. 
Mr. Richardson has a voice of power 
and richness. His articulation was faultless, and his work proved him to be a 
gifted and finished artist.— International 
Informer, Detroit, Mich. 
33 Humboldt Ave.. Boston. Mass. 
Clarence Cameron White 
VIOLINIST 
"Critics are one in their 
high estimate of the splendid 
attainments of Cla r enc e 
Cameron White and his Con 
cert appearance in your city 
means the musical event of 
the season." For terms and dates address 
616 COLUMBUS AVENUE BOSTON, MASS. 
COLUMBIA CONSERVATORY OF MUSIC 
A t a standard equa l to any of its kind 
Fall Term opens September 16, 1918 
Judge Robert H. Terrell, Municipal Court, District of 
Columbia, greatest living colored jurist, Bays: "Mr. Adams 
and his conservatory are doing a splendid work and deserves the support of the rare." 
Mr. R. W. Thompson, famous newspaper writer, says: 
The Columbia Conservatory has forged its way to the 
front, is doing a wonderful work and the people should 
and will stand by it." 
Strong Faculty 
Wellington A. Adams, Mrs. Norah M. Diuguid, 
President' Social Secretary. 
Mrs. Marie Jumper, Mrs. Lena if. Ware. 
Juvenile Department. Organist 10th St. Choir. 
W. G. Braxton, Edward Baker. 
Organist Met. A. M. E. Ch. of Kansas City, Violin. 
Department of Elocution 
Miss Henrietta Vinton Davis, Director. Internationally 
famous in the United Slates, West Indies, Central and 
South America as a reader. 
Mrs. Anna Lee Slade, Assistant Director, favorably 
known as a playwright. 
Departments—Juvenile, Elementary, Intermediate, Graduate. Artist, Teacher's Course and Elocution. 
Courses— Piano. Vocal Culture, Violin. Organ. Composition. String Instruments. Pub. Sch. Music, etc. 
Choral Club—Music, Literary and Social Activities. Recitals. Address: 1011 Ninth Street, Northwest, Washington, D. C. 
Roland W. Hayes 
Phonograph Records 
1. SWING LOW, SWEET 
CHARIOT ... . $1.50 
Negro Spiritual 
HARRY T. BURLEIGH 
2. VESTI LA GIUBBA (Put 
on your smock) . . 2.00 
From "Pagliacci " 
Orchestral Accompaniment 
LEONCAVALLO 
3. TWILIGHT ... . 1.00 
KATHERINE A. GLEN 
4. STEA L AWA Y TO 
JESUS 1.50 
Negro Spiritual 
Orchestral Accompaniment 
J. ROSAMOND JOHNSON 
5. UNA FURTIVA LAGRIMA 
(A Furtive Tear) . . 1.50 
From "Elisir d' Amore " 
Orchestral Accompaniment 
DONIZETTI 
6. I HEAR YOU CALLING 
ME 1.25 
MARSHALL 
7. BY AND BY 1.50 
HARRY T. BURLEIGH 
The records are manufactured by 
the Columbia Graphophone Co., 
and can be played on any disc 
talking machine. Make checks, 
money orders and drafts payable 
to Roland W. Hayes. 
Address : 
ROLAND W. HAYES 
130 Boylston Street 
Boston, Mass. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 254 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Mme C. J. Walker's 
PREPARATION S FOR THE 
HAI R 
Worth more than it costs 
The culmination of the genius 
r of Mme C. J. Walker is her wonderful 
Hair Grower and in itself is a wonderful 
creation for dandruff and falling hair. In fact, 
it invigorates dry and lifeless hair, stimulates 
circulation, thereby causing a new growth. 
Mme C.J. Walker's* 
Preparations 
are all now packed in SQUARE YELLOW BOXES 
with Mme. C. J. Walker's Seal and Signature 
on each outside package, which is YOUR GUARANTEE 
ALL Mme. C.J. WALKER'S 
Inventions are reliable because, they restore
 : and beautify the 
hair without injury to the 
scalp and are used and 
endorsed by thousands of 
Hair Dressers, Scalp Specialists, throughout the 
country, known as the 
Walker Hair Dressers, 
having a diploma from 
the Lelia College of Hair 
Culture which signifies 
Mme. C. J, ^Walker's system. 
THERE is nothing 
imaginary about the 
World-Wide Fame of 
Mme. C. J. Walker's 
Ultra-Quality Preparations. None genuine 
without Mme. C. J. Walker's seal and signature. 
We have
 ; gone to a great 
deal of expense to put these 
preparations up in new yellow 
cardboard boxes, sealed with 
the Walker trade-mark as a 
guarantee that you are getting 
the genuine Mme. C. J. Walker 
Preparations which are "worth 
more than they cost.. 
Leila College and 
Walker Hair Parlor 
110 W. l36th St.,New York 
For Mail Orders and Information Address 
Mme. C. J. Walker M'f'g Co., 
Main Office, 640 N. West Street, Indianapolis, Ind. 
Vegetable Shampoo. A 
splendid food and thorough cleanser for the scalp ^ 
and hair. Has a healing effect 
on a sore scalp, in fact Is 
excellent for removing 
dandruff . J^7I~. .. 
Teller Salve. One 
of the best 
known cures for 
dandruff, tetter 
and eczema 
makes a friend 
once used if 
afflicted with 
this skin disease. 
Scientific , 
Thorough, and 
Practical. 
Temple Grower. Recommended 
highly from those who have used it 
for growing hair on the temples or 
bald spots. Endorsed by thousands 
' of hair dressers throughout U.S.A 
Glossine. Only to be used in dressing I 
the hair and it will make short harsh \ 
hair behave and stay In place if 
used at directed at the same time imparts 
a beautiful gloss to the hair 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 255 
Special offer including 
KASHMIR AGENT'S DISPLAY CASE 
Write for it today. 
We want a representative in every town to teach Kashmir Health and Beauty Courses. We will show you how 
to earn a big salary. 
AGENTS 
MAKE BIG MONEY 
Kashmir Preparations for Hair 
and Skin are the fastest selling articles of their kind on 
the market 
Because: 
They've got the quality 
They are put up in handsome, attractive jars 
They win re-orders. Everyone who uses Kashmir 
buys again and tells 
other friends about it. 
We make our agents such a big 
liberal money making offer. 100% 
Kashmir Chemical Co. 
Dept. C. 312 S. Clark St. 
CHICAGO , ILL . 
Barnett Advertising Service. 
WE ARE NOW GIVING THE COURSE BY CORRESPONDENCE 
Special price for sixty days only $15.00, payable $10.00 with 
application and $5.00 when diploma is granted. Send $1.00 
for thirty days' trial treatment.. 
We teach only one person in a 
town, she teaches the rest. Our 
graduated agents are making 
money. 
DERM O COLLEG E CO . 
411 8 S . STAT E ST . CHICAGO , ILL 
// It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
We manufacture Lodge Regalia for every 
Fraternal Society. Cash or Installment 
Plan. Cheapest Badge House in the Country. Catalogue for your Society FREE . 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES. Pres. 
N. E. Cor. 8th & Plum 
Cincinnati Ohio 
Mention T H E CRISIS. 256 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Your Gold Tooth Polished 
Your White Teeth Bleached 
BY USING DR. WELTERS ' ANTISEPTIC 
-TOOT H POWDER -
Absolutely Free From Grit & Acid 
And Prevents Decay 
BRANCH OFFICES 
436 Lenox Ave.. New York City 1425 Penna. Ave.. Baltimore, Md 
M. L. Smith, Distributing Agent J H Bishop. Agent & Jobber 
Ask your druggist. If he hasn't got it, ask him to 
order it for you. Send 15 Cents in Stamps 
for a full size 30 Cent can. 
The E. A. Welters' Tooth Powder Co., Inc. 
ST. AUGUSTINE, FLA. 
The Largest and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation Owned and 
Controlled by Negroes in the United Slates 
A Rar e Hono r Fo r A Negr o Boo k 
Single 
Copy 
25c 
By authority of Congress, our book "A Tribute for the Negro 
Soldier," written by J. E. Bruce, (Bruce Grit) has been made 
one of the public records. We are pleased to announce its 
steady sale in all parts of the country and in foreign lands. 
There remains territory for several good agents however. 
Write for terms to 
BRUCE and FRANKLIN, Publishers 
1309 E. 18th Street Kansas City, Mo . 
PATRIOTI C NEGR O PICTURE S 
Tried and True Get the Kaiser Good Bye,. Dad. 
These are 3 of a series of 8 beautiful post cards showing the Negro in the War. Send 10c. for full set and send 
cheer to your Soldier. 
Beautiful Pictures for the Home, 
SPECIAL OFFER: We will send 1 picture "Tried and True." 11x14; 1 picture "True Blue." 10x12- both in colors 
and ready for framing and the full set of Patriotic post cards for 40c. 
Live, hustling agents make real money on these. Write Quick, 
JULIA N R . MILLER , Jr . 
1201 SPRUCE STREET. PHILADELPHIA. PA. 
Mention T H E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 257 
TH E BI G FOU R BO X TO N BOOK S 
For Cooks, Waiters and Waitresses are needed in every hotel where education, culture and 
refinement are appreciated and truly esteemed. 
THE BROADWAY CHEF—SALAD BOOK—$2,00. 
THE BON TON WAITER—$1,00—NOW ON SALE. 
As Paris became the center of the French culenaire and Athens the home of the Greek epicunes, so 
New York, the great American catering center, became the seat of an American cuisine which will in 
time finally equal, it not excel, the tame which Gourmets gave to Athens, Paris and other centers of 
high-class cooking, serving ami waiting. 
DALLAS GURLEY, Quarter of a century catered to New York's "400" exclusively 436 Lenox Avenue, New York City 
HOTEL WASHINGTON 
First-Class Service for First-Class People 
3427 South Park Avenue, Chicago, Ill. 
100 CALLING CARDS 50 CENTS 
Calling and Business cards are good sellers at all 
reasons of the year. Liberal commissions. Write 
for samples and agent's terms. 
The House of Chowning, Indianapolis, Ind. 
Open June 20th. Closed September 10th. 
TH E OCEA N HOUS E 
Sea Isle City, N. J. 
This hotel is right on the ocean front. It 
has wide porches. large conservatory dining 
room where one has a beautiful view of the 
ocean while dining. Every room opens on 
the ocean. Special rates for July. Mrs. 
Lucy Lee. proprietor, 5 Plain St., Elmhurst, 
L. I. Address after June 1st, Ocean House, 
Sea Isle City, N. J. Bell telephone connection. 
BUSTS OF 
Booker T. Washington, Fred Douglass, Paul Lawrence 
Dunbar, Bishop Richard Allen. $1.50 each. The 4 busts 
for $5.00. Agents wanted. Send at once. 
THE ISAAC HATHAWAY ART CO. 
718 S. HICKORY ST.. PINE BLUFF. ARK. 
HOTEL DALE 
CAPE MAY, N. J. 
Comfort and Elegance without Extravagance 
This Magnificent Hotel, Located in 
the Heart of the Most Beautiful 
Seashore Resort in the World, 
is replete with every modern improvement, 
superlative in construction, appointments, service and refined patronage. Orchestra daily, 
garage, bath houses, tennis, etc., on premises. 
Special attention given to ladies and children. 
Send for booklet. 
E . W . DALE , Owner 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
Beautiful Idlewild 
The most wonderfully Ideal spot where young and 
old cast aside for the time all the cares and worries 
of their strenuous, nerve racking routine lives and 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature in all her wondrous glory. The waters of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly 
teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
Do you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting! 
Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries ? 
Do you want a place to go where you can build up 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency ? 
Do you enjoy mingling with the active, thinking 
progressive people of the day—people who do things! < 
Do you believe In progress and do you want to / 
have a part In one of the most progressive move- * 
ments of the time? Surely! # 
Then you will be Interested In, and want to 
own a lot of your own In Beautiful Idlewild . 
Michigan. If you act at once you can se- . 
cure a beautiful lot for only $24 50 each • / 
$6.00 cash; $1.00 per week. When your' , 
payments are completed the lot will be / 
transferred to you by an absolute . 
warranty deed with abstract showing / 
clear title. / 
Good live energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Compan y / 
1110 Hartford Bldg., 
So. Dearborn St. 
Chicago, Ill. Ar- ^ 
Idlewild Resort Company, 1110 Hartford, B
Name 
Address 
State 
Write Plainly 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 258 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
T O WI N TH E WA R 
A n address sen t t o Presiden t 
Wilso n an d othe r notabl e me n by 
J . N . Samuels-Belbode r 
Vicar of St. Margaret's Episcopal Church, Dayton 
Ohio 
Price: Single copies 10c. To Agents 7c. 
Highl y recommended for Governors, 
Judges, Educators, Libraries, Schools 
an d kindre d institutions. 
Address: 
335 Norwood Av., Dayton, O. 
Mrs. M, Watson Kudd, 
47 West 42d Street 
New York City 
has placed 
upon the market her new 
ROSE NINON NT/FEET POWDER. 
It is especially recommended for soldiers, clerks, rail 
road and factory employees, dancers and all person 
who are required to stand or walk to any extent. 
Agents Wanted—Write for particulars. 
Luminous paint makes objects visible in the dark 
by applying same as ordinary paint. Lummating 
clock dials that tell time in the dark. Luminatmg 
match boxes find your matches in the dark. Send 
25c. for sample. Agents wanted. Write for terms. 
Manufactured by 
Bailey & Anderson 
2116 Oakford St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
WEST PHILADELPHIA BEAUTIFUL PORCH 
FRONT HOMES FOR SALE 
Respectable families who are particular and desire to live in a nice locality; every modern convenience. Very low terms arranged. Inspection 
invited, 
J. ADAMS, JR., 
5815 Market St., Philadelphia. 
AGENT S WANTE D 
Men, women and High School boys to sell the most beautiful 
patriotic picture ever made for colored people, "Colored Man is 
no Slacker," 16 x 20, live beautiful colors. You can coin 
money with this. Every home will want it Agents selling 50 
to COO each per day. Over 200% profit. Also to sell Memorial 
Edition of the "Life and Works of Booker T. Washington." 
Complete picture and outfit mailed for 25c. in stamps. 
HUSE SALES COMPANY, ATLANTA. GA. 
Telephone, Baring 7794 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Rea l Estat e an d Insuranc e 
Notary Publi c Mortgages 
6 Nort h 42n d Street , Philadelphia , Pa . 
SUNSHINE COTTAGE 
REST HOME FOR WOMEN 
Ideal place for a vacation. Sanitary, Homelike, Quiet. Terms reasonable. Address 
(Mrs.) Corrinna M. Phillips, R. N. 
171 King Street SPRINGFIELD, MASs. 
T .l„ v /Central 104-W 
Telephone.: { Mai n 61 
HARRY E. DAVIS 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW NOTAR Y Public 
160 7 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohio 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
818 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROWN S. SMITH 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
Offices: Suite 80 2 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn. 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
34 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W Ashbie Hawkins George W. P. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHEN 
ATTORNEYS-AT-LA W 
2 1 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
Patents secure d o n eas y term s 
Write for particulars. 
JOS. H. STEWART , Attorney-at-Law, 
494 Louisiana Ave., N.W., Washington, D. C. 
Telephone Greeley 421 4 Established 191 1 
BRANIC' S 
New York and Brooklyn Express 
Daily Trips to Harlem 
212 WES T 35t h STREE T 
ANDRE W J . BRAN1C Ne w Yor k Cit y 
$1.00 Pants 
Not $1.00. not even 50c, not one cent cost to you 
under our easy conditions. No extra 
charge for fancy, swell styles, no extra 
charge for extra big, extreme peg-top« 
pearl buttons, tunnel or fancy belt 
loops, no extra charge for anything, 
all FREE. Before you take another 
order, before you buy a suit or pants ^ 
get our samples and new offer. Agents 
of other tailoring houses please write, we 
have a new deal that will open your eyes. 
We ask every man to answer this, 
every boy in long pants, every man, 
everywhere. No matter where you live 
or what you do, write us a letter or postal 
and say "Send Me Your New Free 
Offer" the big, new different tailoring 
deal. Costs nothing and no extra charges. 
Write today, this minute. Address 
KNICKERBOCKE R TAILORIN G CO . 
Dept. 676 Chicago. ILL 
AGENTS $60 WEEKLY 
Robinson Folding Bath tub. big seller. Costs l
Mention TH E CRISIS. A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) $1.0 0 
THE AMERICAN CAVALRYMAN. (Henry F. Downing) 1.50 
NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY. (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
THE LIFE AND TIMES OF BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. (B. F. Riley) 1.50 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W. E. B. DU Bois) 1.25 
A CENTURY OF NEGRO MIGRATION. (Carter G. Woodson) 1.10 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
TH E NEGRO MIGRANT IN PITTSBURGH. (Abraham Epstein).. .5 0 
GRANNY MAUMEE AND OTHER PLAYS FOR A NEGRO THEATRE. 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.50 
HALF A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIFE AND WORK. (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 
FIFTY YEARS AND OTHER POEMS. (James Weldon Johnson).. 1.25 
JOHN BROWN. (W. E. B. DU Bois) 1.25 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINCE HALL AND HIS FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford).. 1.00 
THE HAITIAN REVOLUTION. (T. G. Steward) 1.25 
NEGRO CULTURE IN WEST AFRICA. (George W. Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO. (W. E. B. DU Bois) 6 0 
THE EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861 . (Carter G. Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R. Lynch) 1.50 
LIFE AND LETTERS OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR. (W. C. BerwickSayers) 2.2 5 
POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H. E. Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OUT OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address, THE CRISIS :: 70 Fifth Avenue, New York KASHMI R 
PREPARATION S 
FO R HAI R AN D SKI N 
" They Can't be Beat " 
Our new colored officers are as gallant and dashing and game a set as ever wore 
a puttee. They've a keen eye for beauty, too. Of course KASHMI R GIRLS arc 
the ones who attract them. 
There is something pleasing about the woman who has clear, smooth skin and 
soft, pretty hair which wins everybody's instant admiration. Learn the "KASHMIR 
WAY " to beautiful hair and skin. No matter what von have used before, you'll 
find KASHMI R better. 
Yo u can alway s tell a KASHMI R GIR L 
Learn bow to be beautiful. Send for new edition de-luxe beauty book—richly 
illustrated—tells all about the KASHMIR WAY . Write today for free copy. Agents 
Wanted. 
KASHMIR COMPANY, Dept. K, 312 S. Clark St., Chicago, Ill. 
Barnett Advertising Service. 