The Crisis 
Ju
EDUCATIO N NUMBE R 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y President 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y 
Vice-President 
ARCHIBAL D H. GRIMK E 
REV . JOH N HAYNE S HOLME S 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
JOH N E. MILHOLLAN D 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
Executive Officers 
DR. J. E. SPINGARN , Chairman of Board 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , Treasurer 
DR. W . E. B. D U BOIS , Director of Publications and Research 
RO Y NASH , Secretary 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSON , Field Secretary 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
Chicago 
JAN E ADDAM S 
DR. C. E, BENTLE Y 
Boston 
JOSEP H PRINC E LOU D 
BUTLE R R. WILSO N 
Baltimor e 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
DR. F. N. CARDOZ O 
Springfield, Mass. 
REV . G. R. WALLE R 
DIRECTOR S 
Washington 
PROF . GEO . WILLIA M COO K 
Brooklyn 
DR. V. MORTO N JONE S 
DR . O. M . WALLE R 
Ne w Haven 
GEORG E W . CRAWFOR D 
Philadelphia 
DR . WILLIA M A. SINCLAI R 
Ne w Yor k 
REV . HUTCHIN S C. BISHO P 
MRS . FLORENC E KELLE Y 
PAU L KENNADA Y 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
ARTHU R B. SPINGAR N 
CHARLE S H. STUDI N 
DR. JOH N G. UNDERHIL L 
LILLIA N D. WAL D 
WILLIA M ENGLIS H WALLIN G 
A time of National Crisis must be a time of redoubled 
effort and vigilance if the Negro is to advance his status during the war as the women of England and the oppressed 
masses of Russia have advanced theirs. The N. A. A. C. P. 
never needed your support more than now. 
Date , 1917. 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
The Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying two dollars or more. 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD, Treasurer, 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
SIR: 
I desire to become a member of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People and to receive The Crisis. 
In payment of my dues for one year, I enclose dollars. 
Name 
Street 
$ City and State 
Mention The Crisis WITH 4-PAGE MEMPHIS SUPPLEMENT 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D OF TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE. A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY , CONDUCTE D B Y W . E. 
BURGHARD T DU BOIS ; AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, BUSINES S MANAGE R 
Contents Copyrighted, 1917, by the National Association (or the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for July, 1917 
PICTURES 
COVER . Design by Lorenzo Harris. 
PHI BET A KAPP A 
RECIPIENTS OF HIGHE R DEGREES 
HARVAR D AN D RADCLIFFE 
RANKIN G SCHOLARS , NEGR O COLLEGES . . 
GRADUATES , NORTHER N COLLEGES 
ARTICLES 
OU R GRADUATE S 11 6 
"GRA Y EYES. " A Story. By "Jack Howard" 12 6 
DEBATIN G AN D ATHLETIC S IN COLORE D COLLEGES . By V . D. Johnston and E. B. Henderson 12 9 
ETHIOPIA N MAID . A Poem. By Walte r Everette Hawkins 13 0 
TH E PUBLIC SCHOOL S O F NE W YORK . By John Purroy Mitchel, Mayor 
of New York City 13 2 
DEPARTMENTS 
EDITORIA L 111 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D 
PEOPLE 131 
TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 13 3 
TH E HORIZO N 13 9 
THE CRISIS for August 
Will be VACATIO N NUMBE R with prize essays on "Th e Best Summe r I Ever Spent" (see page 111), 
and the gripping finish of "Jack Howard's" story. Don't forget to change your summer address. 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS ' The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York. N. Y. 
Page 
11 3 
11 5 
11 7 
11 9 
121 , 123 , 12 5 108 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to 
all who believe in the Negro race and in our obligation to 
help promote its intellectual, moral and religious uplift." 
REV. DR. CHARLES H. PARKHURST, New York City. 
IT IS MORE THAN A MERE SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNITY OF SERVICE AND UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, 
Y. M. C. A. and Y. W. C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced coworkers and actual every-day practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE 
DEPARTMENT. 
A HIGH STANDARD COLLEGE DEPARTMENT has now been established. 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
School term opens Octobe r 3, 1917 . 
I For catalog and detailed information, address: y 
1 PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPARD 1 
I NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL DURHAM, N. C. | 
JMINRNNRNMIMIMIMIMININIMIMIM^ 
The A. & T. Summer 
School 
Eighteenth Annual Session begins June 25, 1917, and continues 
five weeks. Tw o weeks' Institute also. 
Growing older, better and 
stronger. Last summer applications greatly exceeded capacity. 
Teachers, therefore, should send 
Registration Fee and secure 
lodging in advance 
For terms, catalog or other 
information, address 
President J. B. Dudley, 
Agricultural & Technical College, 
Greensboro, N. C. 
MENTION THE CRISIS 
THE CHEYNEY TRAINING 
SCHOOL FOR TEACHERS 
CHEYNEY , PENNA . 
For reasonably mature students who have 
a good secondary school preparation, and who 
desire to become teachers, courses are offered during the regular term in academic 
work, domestic science, domestic art, physical training, elementary school methods, 
wood and metal working, and agriculture. 
Board and laundry privileges lor the year 
$100. Fall term begins Wednesday , September 19, 1917. 
The Summe r School for Teachers from 
July 5 to August 2 inclusive, will this year 
offer primary methods, English mathematics, 
history civics and geography, plain sewing 
and dressmaking, raffia work and basketry, 
art, needle work cookery, wood and metal 
working physical training, and gardening. 
"Dormitory space is limited, and applications 
should be made early. Cost for the four 
weeks $15.00. 
For further Information writ e to 
LESLIE PINCKNE Y HILL , 
Principal. 
^mimiuniuiiiiiniiiiNmiiiimmiiiiiiiHiiiimim 
The NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 109 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-seven years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates arc almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWARD T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, CA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High School, 
Grammar School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term Begins September 19, 1917. 
For information address 
President R. W. Mc GRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
STRAIGHT COLLEGE 
New Orleans, La . 
Situated on the main thoroughfare of the 
largest city of the South. 
Thorough training in High School, Teachers' Course and College, with special wor k 
in Music and Manual Training. 
Teachers represent some of the best universities and music conservatories of the 
country. 
For full Information, address 
J. T. Cater, Registrar . 
TOUGALOO COLLEGE 
MISSISSIPPI 
"The best school for Negroes In the State"— 
Bl"hop Theodore D. Bratton, 
COLLEG E 
Regular Four Yea r A. B. Course 
Two Yea r Teache r Training- Course 
ACADEM Y 
Choice of Seven Courses—College Preparatory. 
Agricultural, Mechanical, Hom e Economics, 
Commercial, Pedagogical, Musical. 
Out in the country. Expenses low. 
Four Prize Scholarships of $25.00 Each Offered Boys 
for Best Entrance Examinations to ninth Grade, 
Fo r Particulars 
Write President W. T. HOLMES 
Tougaloo, Hinds County, Mississippi. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANT A G A 
College, Academy, Divinity- School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
• High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE, President 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training, Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester begins September 27, 1917. 
For further information address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN, President 
BISHOP J. s. FLIPPER , Chairman Trustee Board, 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 110 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
ARE YOU PLANNING 
To teach, preach, prepare for professional 
study, to manage a business or a 
farm, to he efficient? 
TALLADEGA COLLEGE 
will give the fundamental preparation. 
STANDAR D COURSES 
Leading to B.D, in Theology, and to 
B.A. in Education, Science or Classics. 
All usual departments and courses, including High School and Nurse Training. 
Modern Equipment, 40 teachers and workers, library of 16,000 volumes, 4 laboratories, 800 acres of land. 
W e cannot tell you all the good things 
here—send for information to 
THE DEAN, Room 21 
Talladega College, 
Talladega, Alabama, 
THE FLORIDA A. & M. COLLEGE 
Tallahassee, Florida 
Offers long and short courses in I 
Mechanic Arts, in Home Economics, 1 
in Agriculture, in Education and in I 
Science., j 
For Catalog Address \ 
NATHAN B. YOUNG, President 
P. O . DRAWE R 524 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of the Sisters of St. Mary. 
Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
609 N. 43d St W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
CLARK UNIVERSITY 
ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Fou r years Academ y or Hig h School . 
Fiv e years Norma l Course . 
Tw o years Pre-Medica l Course . 
Fou r years Colleg e (A . B.) Course . 
$75 t o $125 pays necessar y expense s fo r a year. 
Harr y Andrew s King , President . 
HARTSHORN MEMORIAL COLLEGE 
RICHMOND, VIRGINIA 
A superio r schoo l for the separate, highe r educa ­
tion o f youn g women . Select Course s o f study. 
Industrial. Music , Preparatory , Classical, Norma l and 
College . Provide s a pleasant home , careful cultur e and thoroug Sen d fo h training Expense r Catalo s.ver g ty moderate o th e President . , 
1867 HOWARD
 1917 
UNIVERSITY 
Stephen M. Newman, A. M., D. D., 
President. 
COLLEG E OF ARTS AN D 
SCIENCES 
A. B. and B. S. COURSES 
TEACHERS ' COLLEG E 
A. B. and B. S. Courses in Education 
SCHOOL OF MANUA L ARTS AN D 
APPLIED SCIENCES 
B. S. Courses in 
Engineering, 
Home Economics, 
Manual Arts. 
CONSERVATOR Y OF MUSIC 
Mus. B. Courses 
ACADEM Y 
Two Preparatory Courses: 
Classical, 
Scientific. 
COMMERCIA L COLLEG E 
Secretarial Course, 
Accounting Course, 
General Course. 
LIBRAR Y TRAININ G CLASS 
PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOG Y 
B. D. Courses, 
Diploma Course. 
SCHOOL OF MEDICIN E 
M. D. Courses in Medicine, 
D. D. S. Courses in Dentistry, 
Phar. D. Courses in Pharmacy. 
SCHOOL OF LA W 
LL. B. Courses 
For catalog, address: 
HOWAR D UNIVERSITY , 
Washington, D. C. 
Educational Institutions continued on page 147. 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS 
Vol. 14-No. 3 JULY , 1917 Whole No. 81 
EDITORIAL 
THE WORLD LAST MONTH. 
DEMOCRACY cannot keep up 
appearances. It is frank 
and ragged and human just 
as Russia is to-day, just as 
Ireland will be to-morrow when by 
constitutional convention representing all classes, even the Sinn-Feiners, 
she achieves in travail of soul some 
measure of self-government. Let us 
rejoice with Russia and Ireland and 
even more with 6,000,000 English 
women about to be enfranchised, 
while 8,000,000 American Negroes 
remain disfranchised. We must help 
in the war and how can we better do 
our bit than by subscribing to the 
"Colored American Society for the 
Relief of French War Orphans." 
Over a half million of our fellows are 
fighting for France. We may help 
their families by forwarding subscriptions to Dr. F. E. May, the 
French consul at Atlanta, Ga. We 
may help the families of our own soldiers who will soon go to war by promoting the "Emergency Circle for 
Negro War Relief." This has been 
founded by Mrs. Emilie Hapgood, 
who produced the remarkable cycle 
of Negro plays on Broadway recently. 
Information may be had at 12 West 
Twelfth Street, New York City. Let 
us not be slackers. 
THE BEST SUMMER. 
THE CRISIS would like to knowhow its readers have spent 
their best summers. We, 
therefore, offer four cash 
prizes of five, three, two dollars and 
one dollar for essays on the "Best 
Summer I Ever Spent." 
These essays must be written by 
colored persons, must not exceed two 
hundred words in length, and must be 
a record of actual experience. They 
must reach this office on or before 
July 8, 1917. 
FORWARD. 
HAVE you seen the castles of 
Cincinnati, terraced in light 
to the sky across the dull 
gold of the Ohio ? I watched 
them as I flew through Kentucky to 
see Fisk again after many years and 
to hear there the story of how, after 
the fire burned, the white and black 
city came together and actually 
worked in the same office to the astonishment of all mankind and to the 
establishment of Bethany Social 
Center. 
Fisk was Fisk as it ever is, old 
and quiet behind its walls and rising 
trees and with its mass of students 
filled with enthusiasm and the vision 
of high emprise. 
Then I rode back to Louisville to 
see the beautiful Pythian Hall and to 
hear Cotter's little folks telling of 
stories and the teachers gathered 
from all the state. 
Back now to the terraced light of 
Cincinnati where Hotel Gordon 
speaks of the marvelous housing experiment of Schmidlap and where the 
first successful Negro co-operative 
store is blossoming under his hand. 
Then away to the North to the city 
of furniture, Grand Rapids, where 
the press was a bit alarmed at having the audience told "how misused 
the black man is in this country and 
how the white races have messed up 
the world." 
Yet all through this journeying the 
thing that stood out was the forward 11 2 THE CRISIS 
march of the colored people—homes 
like Meyzeek's, Porter's, and 
Vaughn's; businesses like Johnson's 
and Bryant's; schools like Fisk and 
Meharry; librarians like Blue; and 
musicians : Helen Hagan, Osiris-eyed ; 
the busy little hands of Mildred Bryant; and the beautiful winding paths 
of Schmidlapville— all this was a 
striking story of our forward march. 
JUSTICE. 
A GENTLEMAN, unnamed, but 
with a card that assured us 
that he represented the Department of Justice at Washington, has called upon Th e Crisis. 
He said he was looking for "two German girls" said to be employed here, 
and he incidentally read us a lecture 
on loyalty and told us that the visit 
was "confidential." 
We do not know what this gentleman really represents and we do not 
particularly care, but we do remember with some misgivings that it was 
the U. S. Department of Justice which 
discovered that Negroes were migrating from the South in order to vote 
against Woodrow Wilson in the late 
election. It was this same Department of Justice which discovered 
German plots among Negroes of the 
South, raising a furor which was 
promptly drowned out by loud reassurances from the white South itself. 
We also remember with still graver 
misapprehension that it is this same 
Department of "Justice" that is unable to find upon the map of the 
United States certain places called 
Waco and Memphis, and that it is 
presumably more interested in Home 
Rule in Ireland than it is in lynching 
and disfranchisement in the United 
States. 
PROMOTING RACE PREJUDICE. 
RACE prejudice is not so much 
a matter of startling deeds 
as of petty insinuations. 
The New York Community 
Chorus, for instance, has sent broadcast a statement which says that "the 
chorus has sung every week since its 
organization, June 9, 1916, and has 
invited everybody freely to sing with 
it,"—to which the editor of Th e 
Crisis was forced to reply that the 
colored people of New York had not 
been invited nor, indeed, allowed to 
sing with this chorus. 
Mr. Theodore Roosevelt showed his 
trophies to the Oyster Bay Home 
Guard recently. Among them were 
some gifts from the Kaiser. Said Mr.' 
Roosevelt: "I got them when he was 
a white man." To which Mrs. H. M. 
Godfrey replies in the New York 
Times that none of the rough-riders 
"would have ever lived to tell the tale 
but for the colored 9th and 10th cavalry regiments," who were not 
"white men." 
The Official Bulletin, published by 
George Creel for the government, 
cannot forget the usual slur when it 
suggests as a commencement day 
subject: "The Character of the Negro as a Soldier When Well Led." 
Finally, note this from the New 
York Evening Post, speaking of the 
questions in the Draft circular: "As 
to your race state whether 'Caucasian,' 'Mongolian,' 'negro,' 'Malayan,' 
or 'Indian.' " Even the Literary Digest cannot quite stomach this illogic 
and prints it this way: "Caucasian, 
Mongolian, Negro, Malay or Indian." 
MEMPHIS OR EAST ST. LOUIS? 
WE seem to hear four voices 
screaming above the mobs 
of Memphis and East St. 
Louis—Why will Negroes 
be Scabs, Why will Negroes Stay in 
the South, How Can We Stop Negro 
Migration, Where Can Negroes Be 
Treated Justly? 
We believe we can answer all these 
questions and for the first we quote a 
letter of Charles Augustono, a colored 
bricklayer of Camden, N. J.: 
"I am a member of the Bricklayer, 
Mason and Plasterers' International PH I BET A KAPPA . 
Four Winner s of the Highest Honor in the Undergraduate College World . 
MISS FRANCE S O. GRANT , Radcliffe. MISS A. L. PENDLETON , Oberlin. 
RAYF0R D LOGAN , Williams. DAVI D A, LANE , JR., Bowdoin. 
113 114 TH E CRISIS 
Union of America. On May 10, 1917, 
I was at Glassboro, N. J., to a job contracted by James Steward Company 
of New York City and secured a position there. I started work at 12:30 
P. M. The steward on the job demanded my working card. He looked 
it over and O. K.'d it, notifying me to 
pay privilege dues of thirty-five cents 
as my card was from another local 
farm, 37 Easton, Pa., Transfer No. 9 
of Trenton, N. J. This job is controlled by Union No. 7 of Camden, 
N. J., B. M. and P. I. U. of America. 
"When I started to work the rest 
of the members of the job stopped 
and refused to work with me. Then 
the boss handed me my discharge, telling me the men would not work with 
me, after I had showed the steward 
a good finance card. The trouble is 
that I have paid for my rights and am 
not getting them on account of my 
color. As you know, color always 
keeps us from making the living we 
ought to make." 
It is this attitude of many labor 
unions and Northern working men 
who make the mobs of East St. Louis, 
that keeps many Negroes living 
among Memphis lynchers. But it 
cannot keep them all. The stream of 
migration is large. It is going to be 
larger. The hand of the government 
can be depended on in East St. Louis 
to put down mobs; it cannot be depended on in Memphis. If, then, the 
South wants Negro workingmen, as 
the Savannah Morning News says: 
"The one sure way to keep them in 
the South is to accord them better 
treatment." If it wants food raised 
in the South it must support agricultural education among Negroes. Yet, 
as the Colored Workers' Conference 
at Fort Valley recently said to the 
state officials: 
"It must be known to you, gentlemen, that if the white people need an 
agricultural school in each of the 
Congressional districts of Georgia. 
Negroes who operate half the farms 
in Georgia, who live in a greater per 
cent of the population in the country, 
and who furnish 85 per cent of the 
farm labor in Georgia, must need 
such agricultural training a great 
deal more. Still, regardless of this 
greater need and regardless of the 
fact that the support of these eleven 
white schools comes out of the general coffers of the state to which Negroes contribute in taxes, not one dollar does the state give to such agricultural education for Negroes." 
It is characteristic of Georgia to 
call on the Federal Government to 
stop migration and for other Southerners to suggest that Negroes drafted for military service be put to farm 
work. 
We warn the South that any attempt to draft the Negroes into the 
employ of private persons will be disastrous and we call the attention of 
the U. S. Government to the monstrous discrimination which it is permitting in Charleston, S. C. 
Charleston is a city noted for the 
efficiency of its colored seamstresses. 
Yet, recently, when the Navy Yard 
called for 1,000 seamstresses it 
sought and still seeks to discriminate 
against colored women. 
It is lynching, forced labor, and 
discrimination that is sending the 
Negro North. When he comes North 
he may find mobs and hostile labor 
unions, but he will also find the law 
and the law will be enforced. 
DEMOCRACY . 
THE Allies in this great war are 
fighting for Democracy 
against Autocracy and Militarism. 
What is Democracy? 
Is it to treat a part of the population as not entitled to advancement? 
Is it to fail to provide it with an 
education? Is it to deny it the right 
to vote or to have representation in 
Parliament or Congress? Is it to set RECIPIENTS OF HIGHER DEGREES. 
MISS H. E. WILSON, KELLY MILLER, JR., 
M. A., University of Michigan. M. A., Clark. 
L. D. TURNER, E. W. DANIEL, 
M. A., Harvard. M. A., N. Y. University. 
E. E. TYLER, E. M. A. CHANDLER, 
M. A., Columbia. Ph. D., Illinois. 
115 116 THE CRISIS 
it apart in a ghetto, there to be herded and neglected ? Is it to prevent its 
entrance into the higher branches of 
government service? Is it to deny it 
the right of trial, visiting upon its 
members torture and death? 
No, this is despotism. It is the despotism that Russia has thrown off. 
Let the United States Government, 
then, the champion of democracy, at 
once enforce the Fifteenth Amendment, that its men of color may stand 
before the world as citizens. Else 
this Republic will be a laughing stock 
to its enemies. 
Mar y Whit e Ovington . 
WE need not leave our own 
land in order to do the 
things that shall prove beyond peradventure that it 
is true that we mean to be just within 
and without our national borders. 
We have been startled by the rumors 
of Negro disaffection and revolt, 
rumors cruelly unjust to the Negro 
race. The Negro race is as loyal 
to the Republic as the white race. 
Would not this be the happiest of 
hours, not merely for a gesture of 
generosity to the Negro, but for such 
revision of our attitude toward him 
as shall make it possible for him to 
bear his part of the burdens of war 
with eagerness and even with rejoicing? Time and occasion are alike 
favoring. Dare we as a nation be 
greatly just, and in our passion for 
the nobleness of justice rather than 
the beauty of generousness, deal 
wisely and healingly with a great 
wrong in our American life?" 
Stephe n S. Wise . 
(In a recent sermon). 
Ou r Graduate s 
DURIN G the current year there have 
been graduated from the great universities nineteen colored Bachelors of Arts, 
and five Masters of Arts. From the state 
universities, which rank for the most part 
equally as high, there have come thirty-seven 
Bachelors of Arts, one Master and one Doctor of Philosophy. Other Northern institutions have sent out twenty-one Bachelors of 
Arts, making seventy-seven Bachelors in all 
from Northern institutions. There have come 
from leading colored colleges two hundred 
twenty-two Bachelors and from other colored colleges one hundred fifty-six, or three 
hundred seventy-eight in all. This makes a 
grand total of four hundred fifty-five 
Bachelors of Arts, as compared with 338 in 
1916, 281 in 1915 and 250 in 1914. Omissions would probably bring the actual number of graduates up to at least 475. The 
record in detail is as follows: 
TH E GREA T UNIVERSITIES . 
HARVAR D sends forth ten colored 
Bachelors of Arts: E. L. C. Davidson, U. W. Holly, H. W. Porter, H. W. 
Brown, B. R. Wilson, Jr., W. T. Gibbs, C. 
E. Arnold, B. W. H. Davis, all four-year 
men; L. V. Alexis and H. P. Payne, threeyear men. In addition to these L. D. Turner 
and J. S. Forrester, Jr., receive the degree 
of Master of Arts. Mr. Davidson has been 
a member of the wrestling team, 125 pound 
class, for three years in which time only 
one man defeated him. During the past 
season he won every bout and the Harvard 
and New England intercollegiate championship. He is the only son of Shelby Davidson of Washington, D. C. Mr. Alexis was 
a member of the 1916 track squad. 
There is one graduate from Yale, 
J. F. Williams, who takes his Bachelor of 
Science from the Sheffield Scientific School. 
Columbia sends out one Master of Arts, E. 
E. Tyler. From the University of Chicago 
come two Masters of Arts, G. R. Wilson and 
L. L. McGee, and two Bachelors of Philosophy, J. C. Carroll and C. S. Johnson. 
Mr. Carroll held a scholarship from the 
white Baptist convention of the State of 
New Jersey. The University of Pennsylvania graduates two Bachelors of Arts, P. 
C. Johnson and H. S. Blackiston; the latter 
won the Schleicher prize in German. From FRO M HARVAR D AN D RADCLIFFE . 
L, V. ALEXIS . B. W . H. DAVIS . H. W . BROWN . 
MIS S E. B. DYKES . E. L. C. DAVIDSON . MISS N. F. WRIGH T 
C. E. ARNOLD . W . T. GIBBS . H. P. PAYNE . 
117 118 TH E CRISIS 
Clark, Kelly Miller, Jr., receives the degree 
of Master of Arts. 
Three girls graduate from Radcliffe: Miss 
E. B. Dykes receives her degree "Magna 
Cum Laude" ; Miss F. 0 . Grant was elected 
to the Phi Beta Kappa in her junior year 
and took second year and final honors in 
classics; Miss N. F. Wright finishes the 
course in three and one-half years and has 
already been appointed to work for the 
Health Survey of Cape Cod. Miss A. E. 
Sears receives the Bachelor of Arts degree from Wellesley. She has been active 
in sports and received three scholarships. 
From Smith, Miss C. E. S. Lee receives the 
Bachelor of Arts degree. 
TH E STAT E UNIVERSITIES . 
THE University of Michigan sends out 
five Bachelors of Arts: J. R. Crossland, J. S. Price, W. S. Wickliffe, and the 
Misses P. W. Waters and H. E. Wilson. 
Mr. Wickliffe has been a member of the 
track team. Mr. G. A. Ferguson receives 
his Bachelor of Science degree in agriculture from the University of Illinois and M. 
A. Chandler takes the degree OF Doctor of 
Philosophy in chemistry. Mr. Chandler is a 
member of the Phi Lambda Upsilon and of 
the Sigma Chi. He HAS held a fellowship in 
chemistry for two years. The University of 
Wisconsin graduates V. C. Turner from the 
two-year course in agriculture. Indiana University graduates the following Bachelors 
of Arts: G. H. Brown, E. F. Cox, T. C. 
JOHNSON, A. E. Meyzeek and Robert Skelton. 
Mr. Johnson is married and has supported 
his family during his college work. Mr. 
Cox belonged to many of the departmental 
clubs and was secretary and treasurer OF THE 
Physics Club. There are two graduates 
from Ohio State University: S. M. Taylor, 
Bachelor of Arts, and Miss J. Brassfield 
from the College of Agriculture. The 
University of Kansas graduates A. 
Hawkins and Miss M. L. Jones as 
Bachelors of Arts, E. S. Perry in Fine Arts 
and T. G. Marton in engineering. Mr. 
Marton would like to get in touch with every 
Negro engineer in America and plan a 
suitable organization. The Misses P. 
Jackson and E. Anderson graduate in Home 
Economics from Kansas State Agricultural 
College with the degree of Bachelor of 
Science. 
The following receive the degree of 
Bachelor of Arts from the State University 
of Iowa: A. A. Keene and the Misses V. 
London, I. J. McClain, M. Graves, R. Southall, and M. Morgan. Mr. Keene did "superior" work in German and had "unusual" 
ability in Spanish. Iowa State College 
graduates three Bachelors of Science: R. 
A . Hamilton, W. M. Cain, and E. Moore. 
Mr. Cain won three prizes in a landscape 
designing competition, was a member of the 
college fruit judging team, and won three 
prizes in a speaking contest. He is secretary of the Horticultural Club and a member of the "Da Luk." The Rev. E. W . 
Daniel, assistant rector of St. Philips Parish, 
receives his Master of Arts degree from 
New York University and the Misses S. L. 
Jones and A. C. Stewart receive the degree of Bachelor of Science. The University of Nebraska graduates Miss F. F. 
Cooley as a Bachelor of Arts and D. M. 
Prillerman, son of the president of West 
Virginia Collegiate Institute, receives his 
Bachelor of Science degree from Michigan 
Agricultural College. 
TH E LEADIN G COLORE D COLLEGES . 
HOWARD University graduates 56 Bachelors of Arts and Sciences, 21 being 
from the Teachers' College, and 35 from the 
College of Arts and Sciences. The ranking 
scholar in the College of Arts and Sciences is 
John L. Berry. Miss J. E. Baer ranks the 
Teachers' College. 
Fisk sends out 32 college graduates with 
C. W. Wesley, "Magna Cum Laude," 
as ranking scholar. Hereafter no student 
will be admitted to college rank at Fisk 
"with less than fourteen units." Atlanta has 
9 college graduates with B. F. Sherard as 
ranking scholar. Gifts and pledges amounting to $65,000 have been made to Atlanta 
during the year and courses in organic 
chemistry and biology have been added to the 
curriculum. Wilberforce sends out 16 college graduates with Miss Margaret Watkins as ranking scholar. A hospital 1
 has 
been completed during the year and a recitation hall and gymnasium are being 
erected. Lincoln graduates 32 students, 
29 of whom receive the degree of 
Bachelor of Arts and the others the degree 
of Bachelor of Science. Willis G. Price 
is ranking scholar. Morehouse has 10 college graduates ranked by J. P. Barbour. 
The college has just celebrated her fiftieth 
anniversary and dedicated a new $30,000 
dormitory. Biddle is also celebrating her MIS S T. WILLIAMS , MISS C. V. MOSLEY , MISS A. M. K. JOHNSON, MISS M. WATKINS , 
Knoxville . Shaw. Philander Smith. Wilberforce . 
C. W . WESLEY , I. D. Wood , E. BAILEY , J. R. FERGUSON , 
Fisk. Biddle. Wylie . Ark. Baptist. 
F. R. LAMPKIN , W . A. DANIEL , J. P. BARBOUR , E. B. TROTMAN , 
Ga. State. Va . Union, Morehouse. Morgan. 
N. S. ROBERTS , L, A. MAHONE , W . G. PRICE, B. F. SHERARD , 
Fla. A. & M. Talladega. Lincoln. Atlanta. 
119 120 THE CRISIS 
fiftieth anniversary and sends out 34 college 
graduates ranked by P. W. Russell, Jr., and 
I. D. Wood, who were tied for first place. 
The college has received during the year 
$22,000 in gifts. Talladega graduates 11 
Bachelors of Arts ranked by L. A Mahone. 
From Wylie come 9 Bachelors of Arts, 
headed by W. E. Bailey. Virginia Union 
graduates 7 Bachelors of Arts with W. A. 
Daniel as ranking scholar. Mr. Daniel has 
also been active in athletics and director of 
the university orchestra. Knoxville has 6 
college graduates ranked by Miss Thelma 
Williams. 
SMALLE R NORTHER N COLLEGES . 
THERE are five colored graduates from 
Oberlin this year: C. T. Fortson and 
the Misses A. L. Pendleton and H. H. Tuck 
receive the degree of Bachelor of Arts; C. 
C. Cohen and T. A. DeBose receive the degree of Bachelor of Music. Miss Pendleton 
was elected to the Phi BETA KAPP_A. F."M. 
Dent graduates from Amherst. He is the 
only colored officer at the Fort Meyer, Va., 
Training Camp. Western Reserve graduates A. G. Evans and Miss L. E. Canneville with the degree of Bachelor of Arts. 
R. W. Logan and J. K. Rector graduate 
from Williams. Mr. Logan is a Phi Beta 
Kappa man and commencement orator. He 
has won several prizes while in college. A. 
Krigger graduates from Civil Engineering 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Miss R. Wood graduates from the 
department of Household Economics at the 
Carnegie Institute of Technology. 
OTHE R NORTHER N INSTITUTIONS . 
DAVID A. LANE , who graduates from 
Bowdoin, has won two prizes for public debating and the Phi Beta Kappa key. 
He represented Bowdoin in intercollegiate 
debating contests. A. A. Dyer graduates 
from Bates where he has won several prize; 
for debating and represented his college in 
intercollegiate contests. He is president of 
the "Cercle Francais " and graduates with 
honors in language and literature. He is 
one of the class-day speakers. Colby sends 
out G. L. Holley with the Bachelor of Arts 
degree. Coe graduates E. Collins. "He is 
a fine young fellow and has taken unusually 
high standing in chemistry. . . . Mr. 
Collins has not only done good work in his 
class but has been a leader in athletics and 
other activities of the college." Hillsdale 
graduates Mrs. L. L. Cable, "a superior 
student," and A. H. Camper. Two colored 
students graduate from Antioch and three 
from Ohio University: two in the twoyear elementary education course, the Misses 
S. Finnell and E. C. Bishop; W. E. Hunnicutt graduates with the degree of Bachelor 
of Arts. Ohio Wesleyan graduates Miss 
M. Male and A. O. Bustamante. The 
University of Pittsburgh graduates the 
Misses M. Nicholas and Z. Turfley with the 
degree of Bachelor of Arts. Simmons graduates Miss M. F. Parker in Household Economics. From Syracuse come J. Trig g 
with the degree of Bachelor of Arts, J. V. 
Herring and W. P. Johnson with the degree of Bachelor of Pedagogy, and W . W . 
Lawson in agriculture. Mr. Herring receives first prize in the university art exhibition and Mr. Johnson has been choir 
director at St. Philips Episcopal Church. 
The College of the City of New York gives 
the degree of Bachelor of Arts to N. Whiteman, D. Maynard, and A. Sewell. The 
Rhode Island State College sends out C. E. 
Harry, Jr., as Bachelor of Science and Agriculture. Oskaloosa College graduates F. J. 
Myles as Bachelor of Arts. 
OTHE R COLORE D COLLEGES . 
OTHE R colored institutions have college 
graduates as follows: Bishop, 11; 
Alcorn, 26; Florida A. & M., 10; George R. 
Smith, 6; Tougaloo, 2; Rust, 1; New Orleans, 3; Straight, 1; A. & M., Langston, 
Okla., 12; A. & M., Normal, Ala., 1; Morgan, 11; Roger Williams, 1; Lane, 7; 
Shorter, 2; Arkansas Baptist, 5; Philander 
Smith, 9; A. & T., Greensboro, N. C , 7; 
Bennett, 1; Shaiv, 7; Clark, 1; Georgia 
State, 6; Spelman, 1; Morris Brown, 5; 
Benedict, 10; .4. & M., Orangeburg, S. O , 
10. 
Knoxville has received a bequest of 
$18,000 during the past year. Tougaloo 
has a new brick recitation building and a 
new water system. One of the college 
graduates of George R. Smith is sixty years 
of age. New Orleans University has a new 
six-year normal course. Lane has received 
an estate worth $3,000 from James Ritchey, 
a colored man. Arkansas Baptist has a 
bequest of $3,000. Clark has been cleared 
of debt during the year and has $35,000 
toward an endowment fund. Georgia 
State, Philander Smith, Shorter, and Rust 
report large enrollments. The Legislature MIS
S A. E, SEARS , 
Welleslev , 
T. C. JOHNSON , 
Indiana, 
S. WICKLIFFE , 
Michigan. 
P. C. JOHNSON , 
Pennsylvania. 
MISS P. W. WALTERS , 
Michigan. 
S, M. TAYLOR , 
O. State. 
J. K. RECTOR , 
Indiana. 
R. E. SKELTON , 
Indiana. 
121 
MISS O. E. S. LEE , 
Smith. 
F. M. DENT, 
Amherst. 
J. C. CARROLL , 
Pennsylvania. 
H. S. BLACKISTON , 
Pennsylvania. 122 THE CRISIS 
of South Carolina will give Orangeburg 
$50,000 a year for buildings and equipment 
for the next three years. During the last 
year it has received three new dormitories 
valued at $35,000 each. The enrollment is 
801, the largest among the colored schools 
of the state. 
PROFESSIONAL GRADUATES. 
Howard University sends out 13 graduates in medicine, 36 in dentistry, 14 in 
pharmacy, 26 in law, and 12 in theology. 
Other professional graduates are reported as follows: Meharry had 97 graduates in Medicine, 21 in Dentistry, 24 
in Pharmacy and 8 in Nurse-Training. National Training School, theology, 2; Talladega, theology, 1; Virginia Union, theology, 
2. Gammon graduated 18 students in theology. 
From the Northern institutions there are 
the following professional graduates; in 
medicine: W. R. R. Granger, Jr., Columbia 
College of Physicians and Surgeons; A. R. 
Burton, University of Pennsylvania; Frank 
P. Rayford, University of Michigan; B. L. 
Duke, State University of Iowa; in dentistry: P. W. Sawyer, Creighton; C. E. Cheeks, 
Western Reserve; J. N. Burwell, University 
of Pittsburgh, E. M. Gould, Tufts, E. J. 
Cobb and W. H. Beshears, State University of Iowa, C. L. Evans, W. M. Howard 
and B. C. Styles, University of Michigan; in 
pharmacy: J. F. Berry, Purdue; A. J. Pope, 
University of Michigan; Miss A. P. Bell, 
University of Kansas, G. D. Strawn, State 
University of Iowa; L. Williams and C. 
Strowtherd, University of Pittsburg; in 
veterinary medicine: B. L. Colbert and J. 
H. Stephens, Ohio State; in law: Henry A. 
Rucker, Jr., Northwestern; I. F. Bradley, 
University of Kansas, and Norris, Yale; in 
the ministry: A. T. Peters, Yale. 
From Boston University, medicine, 1; 
Creighton, dentistry, 1; University of Pittsburg, dentistry, 1; pharmacy, 2; Western 
Reserve, dentistry, 1; Temple, medicine, 3; 
dentistry, 1; pharmacy, 3; teachers' college, 
3. 
Colored students in Medicine at McGill 
University, Canada, make these records: 
Drs. O. V. Marsh, R. S. Hall, S. D. Bernard 
and A. Bissember received the degrees of 
M. F., C. M., at the graduation exercises 
of the university. Dr. Marsh received the 
final prize for highest aggregate honors in 
the fifth year subjects. 
In the fourth year J. R. Warren was 
fourth in honors in Medicine and ninth in 
Mental Diseases, while A. M. Francis made 
high honors in Ophthalmology. 
In the third year J. R. Williams headed 
the honor list in Medicine, while P. M. H. 
Savory was fourth in aggregate honors of all 
subjects of the third year, having made 
first place in honors in Clinical Surgery; 
second in Clinical Medicine; third in Bacteriology and other places in honors in Physiology and Pathology. 
In the first year E. E. Thompson was 
eleventh in aggregate honors of all subjects. 
Despite this record and simular records in 
previous years, the colored students have 
sent out this message: 
"The leading University of Canada, Mc ­
Gill, admitted by all her sister Universities 
and the general public to be the main centre 
of thought and culture in Canada, has decided to debar coloured students from her 
Medical School on the excuse that their 
presence is objected to by the Maternity 
Hospital solely on account of their colour. 
This is what we are made to feel, what we 
did not expect from a part of the British 
Empire that prides itself in British rights 
and freedom. 
"The authorities at McGill have acknowledged that the coloured students have always borne a good character both in behaviour and in scholarship in the University, and that the present move is IN NO 
WA Y DU E TO AN Y MISCONDUCT ON 
TH E PAR T OF TH E STUDENTS , PAS T 
OR PRESENT. " 
NORTHERN HIGH SCHOOLS. 
THIRTEEN colored students graduated 
from the high schools of New York 
City. Those distinguished for scholarship 
are A. F. Redding and I. C. Daly. From 
Boston at least four, and probably others; 
Chicago, 20, including H. R. Lewis, prominent in athletics and one of the "most popular boys in his class," M. Gibbs, also an 
athlete, and Miss M. A. Smith who stands 
high in scholarship, especially in French and 
art; Cleveland, 13; one, Miss V. Washington, "is very bright. She should be helped 
to go on to college; " Indianapolis, 15; Miss 
Mildred Best was one of the twenty-nine O. BUSTAMENTE , 
O. Wesleyan. 
T. A. MORTON , 
Kansas. 
E. R. MOORE , 
Iowa State. 
A. H. CAMPER , 
Hillsdale. 
T. DE BOSE, 
Oberlin, 
A. A. KEENE , 
Iowa. 
G. L. HOLLEY , 
Colby. 
W . CAIN , 
Iowa State. 
C. C. COHEN , 
Oberlin. 
W. C. HUNNICUTT , 
Ohio Univ. 
E. F. COX , 
Indiana. 
R. CAIN , 
Kansas. 
A. A. DYER , 
Bates. 
E. COLLINS , 
Coe. 
J, S. PRICE, 
Michigan. 
D. M. PRILLERMAN , 
Michigan Ag . 
123 124 THE CRISIS 
pupils on the honor roll of her class, with 
an average of not less than 90 per cent for 
the four years' course; Detroit, 8; Pittsburg, 
21 ; Minneapolis, Central High, 3. A notable academic record has been achieved at 
the Phillips Exeter. Academy, Exeter, New 
Hampshire, by Emmett J. Scott, Jr., of Tuskegee Institute, who graduates there June 
26th. During his Senior year, 1916-1917, 
he has won the Bancroft ($140) and the 
Phillips ($150) Scholarships; has ranked 
second in his studies; is one of the nine 
First Honor Men of the Senior Class; and 
one of the ten men chosen for the Beta 
Chapter of the Cum Laude Society. He 
enters the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, next Fall. 
Through the courtesy of Superintendent 
Joiner, of Wilberforce University, we have 
a record of 108 colored pupils graduating 
from the various high schools of the State 
of Ohio, including 10 in Columbus, 9 in 
Dayton, 13 in Cincinnati, and 5 in Springfield. Some omissions may bring this number up to 125. 
Miss V. Douglass of Columbus, Ohio, 
was among twelve selected out of two hundred for the high school society by unanimous vote of the faculty. Stephen Sheats 
won a prize in Des Moines, Iowa, for a 
bird house "perfectly made according to 
Government dimensions" and "a model of 
neatness." Clinton Freeman and Granville Adge r graduate from the Philadelphia 
School of Pedagogy. Three colored graduates finish at Parsons, Kansas. Miss L. R. 
Young graduates from the Sargeant School 
of Physical Education. 
COLORE D HIG H SCHOOLS . 
There have been the following graduates 
from leading colored high schools: 
Kno x Institute 1 
Shorter • 6 
Virginia Normal and Industrial 7 
Chandler Normal School. Lexington, Ky 8 
George R. Smith 9 
Rust 9 
State College, Dover, Del 11 
Fort Valley 11 
Morris Brown 11 
National Training School 12 
Christiansburg 12 
Wile y 12 
Princess Anne 13 
State Agricultural and Mechanical. Normal, Ala. 13 
Bennett 13 
Clark 13 
Brick 14 
Avery Institute 15 
Agricultural and Mechanical, Langston 15 
Agricultural and Technical, Greensboro 15 
Western, Quindaro 15 
Ballard 16 
Morehouse 17 
Howard High. Chattanooga. Tenn 18 
Evansville, Ind 18 
Florida Baptist 18 
Snow Hill 18 
Wilmington, Del 19 
Miles Memorial 19 
Biddle • • 22 
Florida Agricultural and Mechanical 23 
Lane 23 
Storer 24 
Tougaloo 25 
Hartshorn 26 
Xavie r 28 
Louisville Colored High 29 
Virginia Union 30 
Knoxville 30 
Morgan 30 
Roger Williams 30 
Arkansas Baptist 31 
Shaw 31 
Alcorn 31 
Talladega 32 
Philander Smith 32 
Straight 35 
New Orleans 39 
Sumner, St. Louis 41 
Kentucky Normal and Industrial 42 
Fisk 44 
Atlanta 44 
Georgia State 46 
Benedict 48 
Lincoln High, Kansas City, Mo 51 
Spelman t 54 
Agricultural and Mechanical. Orangeburg, S. C . 56 
West Virginia Collegiate 57 
Myrtilla Miner Normal 62 
Colored High, Baltimore. Md 71 
Wilberforce 76 
Hampton 94 
Tuskegee 120 
Dunbar High. Washington, D. C 146 
Eleven of the Howard High School graduates will go to college; only 4 of Lincoln 
have decided not to attend college; about 
15 per cent of the Baltimore high school 
graduates will go to college; of the graduates of Dunbar 59 will go to college and 57 
to the normal school; 10 of the 18 graduates 
of Evansville will enter the State. Normal 
School and three will go to college; 11 of the 
29 from Louisville will go to college. 
Prairie View has three new brick build-' 
ings. Virginia N. & I. has purchased four 
acres of land and built a new athletic field. 
Christiansburg has succeeded in raising an 
endowment fund of $50,000 and is erecting 
a hospital. Hampton has added $163,361 
to her endowment during the last year. The 
work on the Ogden Memorial Auditorium, 
which will seat 2,500 persons, is well on the 
way. A boys' trades plant, costing $10,000, 
has been added to the A. & M. Normal, Ala. 
Ballard has moved to her new $50,000 
plant just outside of Macon. Xaxier University is soon to establish a college department and has enrolled 450 students. Hartshorn has lengthened her normal course and 
introduced a practice school. Miles Memorial College is erecting a four-story building. Spelman Seminary is erecting two 
new buildings. Storer College has received 
a bequest of $5,000, and West Virginia Collegiate Institute has the largest enrollment 
in the history of the school. MISS A. D. HAWKINS , MIS S M. N. MALE , MISS F. COOLEY , MIS S S. L. JONES 
Kansas. O. Wesleyan Univ. Nebraska. N. Y . Univ. 
MISS I. J. McCLAIN , MISS L. JONES, MISS P. M. JACKSON , MISS A. C. STEWART , 
Iowa. Kansas. Kansas. N. Y . Univ. 
MIS S M. J. GRAVES , MISS R. SOUTHALL , MISS E. J. ANDERSON , MISS J. BRASSFIELD , 
Iowa. Iowa. State Ag. , Kansas, Ohio State. 
MIS S V. LONDON , MISS M. S. NICHOLAS , MISS M. L. MORGAN , C. T. FORTSON , 
Iowa. Pittsburgh. Iowa. Oberlin. 
125 "Gray Eyes" 
A Story by "Jack Howard" of the Baltimore Colored High Scho
THAN K God, the 
child has closed 
his eyes again and 
I can write. And 
yet, what is there to 
write? A cloudy 
maze of whirling, 
sombre dreams; a 
picture of black 
nigh t displacing 
day; a story of failure, wretched black, 
despairing, that must 
be broken through 
because of a promise 
made in an hour 
when a weak mortal 
dreamed. 
I knew her in the 
old days and loved 
her. I say the old 
days because they 
seem so far back in 
the ages. Yet, only 
a few years have 
passed since I was just a school boy, 
dreaming of college and a brilliant future 
and dreaming, too, of love, as most folks 
are wont to dream. I used to sit and look 
at her for whole periods in school, my work, 
my ambition, all forgotten in the ecstacy of 
a greater longing. 
Her face ; I see it now as it was then, 
her delicate, olive skin; her perfect lips; 
her glossy frame of raven curls; and the 
crowning wonder of all, her eyes, those great 
gray, shadow-eyes that held a world of 
mystery in their depths. Above all else 
on God's green earth, I loved her, for her 
beauty; for her gentle grace; and the Angel's soul that I felt sure must lurk behind those fathomless eyes. 
I was just eighteen then and a peculiar 
fellow, I admit; moody by nature, an unhappy idealist by training. In my childhood 
I had been sick a great deal and had spent 
long hours pouring 
over old romances, 
stories of knights 
who righted wrongs 
and legend s of 
women whose hearts 
wer e gold . I 
looked for romance 
behind life's sordid 
tragedies, for truth 
behind life's falsehoods, for Heaven 
itself behind this 
girl's gray eyes. 
T o me , Mar y 
Arden was the personification of all 
human virtues. She 
was gentle, kind, 
lovable. The whole 
school loved her and 
praised her openly 
until at last she began to see and believe that she was 
more beautiful than the rest. We had 
been friends before this time. She had tried 
to understand me and to care for me as I desired, but now there came a change. Afte r 
all, she was just a girl: "Clay longing to 
become mire," as Hugo says. Her mind 
became the prey to one three-fold idea: to 
grow to be admired of all men, to play with 
human hearts, to live and move out in the 
great world of society and be its queen. 
In this, her dream of life, I had no place. 
My gloomy face could never grace a ball. 
I hated crowds and formal throngs. I 
wanted to be alone with Mary. I could 
not but be selfish in my love, so she drifted 
from me and from her former self into the 
life that calls to every girl. 
And then, he came ; a lie upon his lips 
and the fires of Hell in his brilliant black 
eyes. Prom the very first, Mary Arden 
cared for Alton Brice, as many older and 
wiser woman had done. Wherever that tall 
126 "GRA Y EYES " 127 
form went with its easy, graceful carriage; 
wherever that handsome, reckless face came 
under woman's eyes; wherever that subtle, 
practiced tongue spoke words of love, a 
woman loved him. Mary was just a girl. 
He came to her out of the glamour of her 
dream-world, with the hir of emotion and 
the sound of music. A girl's gray eyes 
gazed into those that did not flinch in admiration or glow in worship, and she fell. 
She who had planned to conquer other 
hearts found her own conquered before she 
was eighteen. She became his, to love; to 
scorn; to dishonor. To be with him, she 
broke all home restraint. No warnings 
could avail. Her widowed mother, already 
weak and sickly, scolded and begged and 
threatened; but the girl who had once been 
so docile and respectful would not obey. 
She declared that Alton Brice was not 
the man the world thought him to be and 
that he loved her and had put aside all of 
his vices for her. Wa s she to give him up 
because he had once been bad? The idea 
was preposterous! He was the man she 
loved. He had promised to marry her. 
Poor little girl! A t first he was good 
to her. The girlish perfection of her 
beauty awed him; the wonder of her great 
love held him. But at length he tired 
of her, as he had tired of many women before. He sought for pleasure elsewhere. 
He stayed away from her until she sought 
him in desperation, reminding him of his 
promises; humbling herself before him; 
trying to believe his rough assurances. 
Then, as the weeks passed on, the brutal 
truth slowly dawned upon her. He was 
deserting her, to shame; to disgrace; to the 
the world's crushing scorn. He did not 
love her! Under her gray eyes great 
dark circles formed; the bright smile 
faded; and then, her broken-hearted mother 
died. 
A t school we saw her no more, but often 
I met her on the street walking slowly 
along, her eyes fixed and staring off into 
space. And always the old, mad longing 
to try to comfort her came rushing over me. 
I wanted to tell her that I still cared, no 
matter what the world said, but I fought 
my feelings back. She was no longer the 
girl whom I had loved and placed above all 
others. It was the same face, the same 
form; but the soul I had sought was no 
longer there. It was the shell of Mary 
Arden, that was all. But fight as I might 
the old love still remained. Many a night 
I walked the dreary streets, in rain; or 
sleet, or starlight, trying to forget and in 
the very act suffering more. I could not 
but adore her and hate him. My throbbing 
heart seemed ever to repeat: "She is not 
to blame. Blame him; blame him; blame 
him! " 
Then came one clear, cold winter night, 
with a million stars twinkling in the 
heavens and a full moon shedding its pale 
light on gaunt, bare trees and dull gray 
pavements. I had been working that night 
and had started home, a whole week's wages 
in my pocket and the old dull weight of 
sorrow in my heart. The money was to 
be added to the funds that were to carry 
me through college. It was my father's 
dream now, not mine. Somehow I did not 
care, but I knew that he loved me, as he 
loved the memory of my mother, and I 
could not think of letting him believe that 
my ambition to go to school had lagged because of Mary. 
My way lay past Bernard's dancing class. 
You know the type. We have them in 
every city. God only knows the harm they 
do. He alone knows how many girls start 
wrong from them, not because jo y is sin or 
pleasure crime, as preachers say, but because men are brutes whose souls are foul 
with lies. 
I paused in the shadow of the tall maple 
tree, which grew in front of the hall and 
listened to the music of the last dance. I 
wondered if Alton Brice was in there behind those yellow curtains. It was his 
favorite place for feminine conquest. 
Suddenly I became aware of someone else, 
standing in ghost-like stillness against the 
wall in the dark shadows just beyond the 
glow of the arc-lamps which hung over the 
dance hall door. It was the figure of a 
girl. Her features were partly concealed by 
a thin black shawl, but I knew her in an instant. It was Mary and she was waiting 
for Alton Brice. I wanted to speak to her 
but I dared not. She had not even seen 
me, so intently were her eyes fastened upon 
the door through which the crowd would 
soon be passing. 
Within the hall the music stopped with 
a jerk. Voices arose in laughter and 
loud jest and the dancers began to come out. 
It was the usual throng, young girls, 128 TH E CRISIS 
flushed and timid; bold, painted women; 
well-dressed men; and a number of school 
fellows. Amon g these last I caught sight 
of Jimmy Scott, a classmate and friend of 
mine. He was a good scholar and a goodhearted fellow as a rule. Tonight he was 
drunk and staggering. 
Mary watched the crowd in breathless interest. The shawl fell away from her 
tense, pale face as she advanced into the 
circle of light. She had not long to wait, 
for soon the tall form of Alton Brice appeared beneath the arc-light in the doorway and to his arm an adoring woman 
clung and smiled into his face with eyes of 
love. They came swiftly down the steps and 
started away among the crowd. Then Mary 
stepped forward timidly and touched his 
arm. He turned in surprise and, seeing that 
it was she, flushed angrily. 
"Alton, " she said softly, "Oh, Alton! " 
He drew away from her, brutally forcing her hand from his arm. "Come on 
Kate," he said to his companion, "Let's 
get out of this." 
But Mary's gray eyes flashed and her 
slender fingers fastened on to his sleeve. 
"Alton, " she cried aloud, "Yo u know your 
promise; you can't leave me; you must—" 
He turned savagely upon her. His arm 
shot out. There was a sound, a thud, and 
Mary lay across the white marble steps 
beneath the arc-light. 
In that moment I seemed to go mad, my 
mind became a whirl, red streaks danced 
before my eyes, obscuring everything but 
him. He saw me breaking through the 
crowd and stepped back, too late! I 
struck him full upon his clean-shaven jaw, 
with all the force I could command; with 
all the strength of my body; with all the 
pent-up wrath of many days behind the 
blow. He staggered, back, back, back, and 
fell full-length upon the frosty pavement. 
I was at his throat in an instant but the 
fellows pulled me off. I heard Jimmy's 
voice crying in my ear, "Let him get up, 
Clark. He can't fight you." 
But Alton Brice did not move. He lay 
there, still, inert, lifeless. The moonlight, 
breaking through the maple branches, intensified the pallor of his face. Then a 
man bent over him and felt his heart, 
lifted his drooping head and then stood 
up, his eyes wild with terror. 
"He's dead," the man said in a voice of 
awe. An d then a woman's voice broke out 
upon the quiet night, "Oh God, he's killed 
him! " 
Jimmy's grasp on my arm relaxed. "Get 
away, Clark," he urged excitedly. "Fo r 
God's sake go. You've killed him! " 
I saw the wild faces of the crowd. I 
saw Mary rising slowly to her feet, her long 
hair disheveled and hanging about her 
shoulders. I saw her eyes, wild, accusing, 
searching my face and then I turned and 
fled. 
On into the night I ran, the mad thoughts 
rushing through my brain in lightninglike swiftness. I thought of home and 
Dad. It would kill him to learn that I 
had murdered a man. The fear of the 
gallows and the fear of God loomed up 
before me in gigantic proportions. The 
pain in my bruised knuckles made me feel 
faint and dizzy but I ran on unheeding, for 
the face of Alton Brice grinned frightfully 
before me and Mary's eyes gazed into mine 
from out of the darkness, searching deepdown into my terror-stricken soul. 
I do not know how long I ran through 
the deserted streets, past stores and offices 
and darkened homes, but at length I found 
myself down by the wharves, the black 
waters barring all possibility of further 
flight. I stopped, gasping for breath, and 
looked around. About me the hulls of 
giant ships loomed up, dark bulks against 
the sky. The night wind whistled ominously in loosened rigging; black smoke 
stacks belched forth rolling clouds of 
smoke; and men's voices aboard the ship 
sounded muffled and far away. From behind a pile of grain bags on the pier a big 
man stepped forth, cursing loudly and with 
great emphasis. He almost ran against me 
then stepped back, laughing at my frightened face. 
"Wha t ya doin' about here, sar? " he 
asked. 
"Nothing, " I answered. 
His smile vanished quickly. "Well you 
bettah be goin' about yer own d— business then." 
I started off quickly enough, but he called 
me back. 
"Wait! " he said sharply. "Yo u don't 
happen to be lookin' for work, do you? 
Want 'a ship on this steamer here? W e 
need a hand and the captin sent me out DEBATIN G AN D ATHLETIC S 129 
here after one, jes' lak men growed on this 
here pier." 
"Wher e are you going? " I asked, suddenly interested in what seemed to my mind 
a hope of temporary safety at least. 
"Cattle ship," he said, "bound for England. Easy work too, sonny. A baby 
could do it. Jes' lak feedin and wat'rin 
the little chickens in yer own back yard at 
home an scrubbin' 'round a little bit for 
your ma. Bettah come on." 
His change of tone was entirely unnecessary. I would have embarked on any boat 
just so I got away. "I'll go, " I told him, 
and we went on board. Ten minutes later I 
had signed myself a member of the crew of 
the Jeffery cattle ship bound for London. 
(To be concluded in August.) 
DEBATING AND ATHLETICS IN COLORED 
COLLEGES 
By V. D. JOHNSTON, Virginia Union University, and E. B. HENDERSON, 
Manual Training School, District of Columbia 
THE school year just past has been 
marked by debates of rather unusual 
importance. 
In the eleventh annual triangular debate 
between Fisk, Howard, and Atlanta Universities, April 13, on "Compulsory Arbitration of Labor Disputes," the home team 
won the decision on the affirmative side in 
each instance. At Fisk the affirmative 
team was composed of H. H. Proctor and 
C. N. King, while the negative side was 
upheld by M. A. Jackson and J. C. Heslip, 
of Howard. The decision was two to one 
in Fisk's favor. A t Atlanta, Rush and 
Maxwell defeated Burwell and Wesley of 
Fisk; and at Howard, Dyett and Nelson defeated Moore and Thomas of Atlanta unanimously. In eleven years this is the first 
time Fisk has had the opportunity to celebrate a victory over Howard. 
In the Morehouse-Knoxville-Talladega 
debate, Morehouse won the decision over 
Knoxville on the affirmative side at Morehouse, with Barbour and Fisher on the 
affirmative and Myers and H. Bond representing Knoxville. McMahon and C. W. 
Bond, at Knoxville, successfully defended 
the affirmative against Pritchett and Dixon 
of Talladega, two to one. Talladega defeated Morehouse at Talladega. This debate took place April 13. The question was 
"State Pensions for Needy Mothers." 
In the second annual Wilberforce-Lincoln-Union Triangular Debate on March 
23, each team, likewise, won the decision at 
home. The affirmative at Wilberforce defeated Creditt and Doyle of Lincoln two to 
one. McMorries and Hill, at Lincoln, defeated Brown and Johnston, of Union, two 
to one. Thompson and Smith at Virginia 
Union won unanimously against Williams 
and Hunter of Wilberforce. The question 
was "Government Ownership of Railroads." 
Among three secondary schools of Virginia a triangular debate was held April 
13 over the question of a "Minimum Wage. " 
The V. N. & I. I. won by defeating Hampton, at Petersburg, and St. Paul, at Lawrenceville. Hampton defeated St. Paul at 
Hampton. 
From the above record some general 
principles may be drawn: 
I. Debating is fast assuming a place of 
primary importance in the student activities of the colored schools. More than any 
physical exercise, it is an activity directly 
in line with the training of the class room. 
The development of the "debating mind" is 
the result of a discipline severer and more 
concentrated than any class room exercise. 
Debating activities are, therefore, encouraged and should be extended in these schools 
and in others. 
II. It is significant and particularly noticeable that in the three major triangles 
the home team consistently won, though 
that was the affirmative and the harder 
side to prove. In one or two instances the 
affirmative undoubtedly won, but in many 
of these cases the decision was gotten only 
by a narrow margin. If these debating 
leagues can arrange a board of judges of 
some permanency to serve from year to 
year, just as officials are appointed in the 
interscholastic athletic associations, there 
will be, undoubtedly, less probability of find-130 TH E CRISIS 
ing at the last moment that an appointed 
judge has misunderstood the date for the 
debate or that while no "official" connection 
exists, one or more of the judges are intimate friends of the school faculty. 
III. Those schools which are having the 
greatest success from a disciplinary standpoint have their debating activities directly 
under faculty supervision. Just as the 
coach has become a necessity in football and 
baseball, the coach has become a necessity 
in debating. When under student direction 
the details are in most cases inefficiently 
managed, subjected to trickery and to favoritism. Under the direction of a permanent coach, the drill is made the important 
feature, a large number are trained through 
inter-class debating, and a permanent system is developed. 
THE school athletic year of 1916-17 has 
been a poor one from the standpoint 
of competitive athletics. Football and basketball were the two sports that suffered 
least as a result of the perturbed state of 
national affairs. Although competitive 
sport has met with upsets, yet athletic 
training has received an impetus that has 
placed it in the front rank of educational 
activities. Schools and colleges have been 
persuaded to give definite credit for such 
work towards promotion and the equipment, 
facilities, and time for gymnastic and athletic work have been greatly increased. 
Coaches and physical directors who have 
received training in accredited professional schools and colleges are displacing 
the old time trainers and coaches who were 
I MINGLE my goblet with oil of the vine, 
And drink to the health of a maid 
most benign; 
No less do I drink to her beauty and youth 
Than to her meek innocence, virtue, and 
truth; 
And meekly arrayed in thy modest brocade, 
I drink to thy health, Ethiopian maid. 
'Mid noon-tide and moon-tide whatever my 
themes, 
Thy vision creeps in the enchantments of 
dreams; 
The pipings of skylark and trills of the wren 
employed to turn out winners at any sacrifice of health or character. 
Morehouse and Hampton Institutions 
were victors in collegiate football in their 
localities. Morehouse eleven established an 
enviable reputation by decisively winning a 
championship in Southern football. Hampton as cleanly demonstrated superiority 
over big Eastern rivals. Howard University took a long trip around the country and 
wound up by defeating Fisk University. 
Lincoln University was runner-up in basketball, with Hampton as top man. 
In secondary school circles, the football 
and basketball games have been played unmindful of war, but all succeeding sports 
have been in chaotic state. ArmstrongManual Training School proved to be the 
best athletic school in the District of 
Columbia, with football and basketball 
honors gracing her efforts. The Baltimore 
High School not alone won the city Public 
Athletic League championship, but in postseason basketball defeated Armstrong 
Manual Training School team in two or 
three games played. Mott School landed 
basketball honors in the Washington Public 
Schools Athletic League. 
Swimming bids to become a feature of 
the competitive athletic world shortly, since 
one large school in the East, Dunbar, has a 
modern tank. 
It is devoutly wished that the behind-thetimes executive heads of so many of our 
schools in the South bestir themselves and 
place athletics in right proportions in their 
school courses. 
Ar e mixed in the midst of the melody when 
Thy laughter rings out in the vine-scented 
glade, 
As I drink to thy health, Ethiopian maid. 
When Sun of the Tropics turns westward 
and dies, 
The magic still lingers in light of thine eyes; 
I mingle my goblet with oil of the palm 
Where spices hang over and Summer smiles 
warm, 
And there 'mid the magic of forest and 
shade, 
I drink thy sweet health, Ethiopian maid. 
ETHIOPIAN MAID 
By WALTE R EVERETT E HAWKIN S National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
TH E SPINGAR N MEDALISTS . 
THRE E men have received the Spingarn 
Medal: a biologist, Dr. Ernest. Everett 
Just; a soldier, Lieutenant-Colonel Charles 
Young ; and a musician, Henry Thacker 
Burleigh. These men have much in common. They are all modest and retiring, 
they are hard workers, and they are men 
of excellent training in their lines of work. 
They represent the higher education and 
not a training merely vocational. In these 
three recipients the institution of the Spingarn Medal justifies itself. 
TH E WASHINGTO N CONFERENCE. 
THE bestowing of the Spingarn Medal on 
Mr. Burleigh was the chief interest 
of the annual conference of the N. A. A. 
C. P. held at Washington, May 16 and 17. 
The medal was bestowed by Senator Wesley 
L. Jones of Washington after two excellent 
speeches by our National President, Moorfield Storey, and Mr. William Pickens. 
There were seven hundred persons present. 
On the next afternoon a conference of some 
three hundred visitors and delegates from 
out of town was held at the Colored Y. M. 
C. A . Perhaps fifteen or sixteen persons 
spoke, representing many states and many 
shades of opinion. Without exception, the 
speeches were short, pithy, to the point, and 
pervaded with evident earnestness. It was 
unfortunate that the conference could not 
have been prolonged one or two more days. 
Resolutions drawn up beforehand and sent 
to prominent Negroes all over the country 
have been to date signed by about two hundred persons, including William H. Lewis, 
E. M. Hewlett, Dr. Francis H. Grimke, 
Archibald H. Grimke, James A. Cobb, John 
R. Lynch, William Pickens, Miss Nannie H. 
Burroughs, Ralph W. Tyler, Bishop J. Albert Johnson, Victor P. Thomas, Walter H. 
Loving, and Bishop John Hurst. 
One of the most interesting matters 
brought before the conference was the situation at Charleston, S. C. Immediately 
after the declaration of war, the government arranged to double the capacity of its 
plant for making clothing at Charleston. 
Another building was started, to be opened 
in June, and the navy yard advertised for 
one thousand workers. Charleston has an 
unusual number of good colored seamstresses because few other avenues of work 
are open to colored women. When, however, colored women attempted to register 
for the new factory they were at first put 
off by subterfuges and finally told that no 
colored women would be employed. Our 
local branch immediately took up the matter and, led by the Secretary, Mr. Richard 
H. Mickey, an appeal was made to Washington. Mr. Mickey came in person and with 
Mr. Grimke interviewed officials of the Navy 
Department. They have been unable as yet 
to get any satisfactory answer. We trust 
that all interested persons will appeal to the 
Navy Department and stop this discrimination. 
TH E GREA T LAKE S DISTRIC T 
CONFERENCE. 
A CONFERENCE of the Great Lakes 
District was held at Detroit, May 30 
and 31. The following branches took part: 
Pittsburgh, Cleveland, Columbus, Dayton, 
Springfield, O., Toledo, Buffalo, and Detroit. The National Office was represented 
by Mr. James W. Johnson, the Field Secretary. The Conference was successful and 
well attended. 
OU R NATIONA L OFFICERS. 
DR. J. E. SPINGAR N has entered the 
training camp at Madison Barracks, 
N. Y., and will probably enter active service 
in the United States Army. Mr. Roy Nash, 
our Secretary, is on leave of absence to attend the training camp at Fort Sheridan, Ill. 
Mr. James W. Johnson, the Field Secretary, has been visiting branches and holding meetings in St. Louis, Louisville, Cincinnati, Indianapolis, Chicago, Detroit, and 
Cleveland. He is at present investigating 
conditions in Memphis, Tenn. 
TH E OFFICERS' TRAININ G CAMP . 
AFTE R much hesitation and incited by 
the enthusiastic activity of the students of Howard University and other 
places, the United States Wa r Department 
finally granted the training camp. Twelve 
hundred and fifty men, including colored 
appointees from the Fifteenth Regiment, 
N. Y., and from the Harvard University 
regiment and other bodies were sent to this 
camp, which is located at Fort Des Moines, 
Iowa. The camp opened June 18. This has 
been a great triumph for sound thinking 
and persistent agitation. 
131 THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS OF NEW YORK 
By JOHN PURRO Y MITCHEL, Mayor of New Yor k City 
able for school health work, and his deep 
interest in the social problems of the city 
makes his advice on matters pertaining to 
the Negro population specially desirable. 
Dr. Roberts is not the first representative 
of his race to take active part in the educational work of our city. In 1882 Mayor 
Low appointed a colored man, Philip A. 
White, to serve on the Board of Education 
of the old City of Brooklyn. In 1891 he 
was succeeded by T. McCants Stewart, who, 
in 1894, was succeeded by Samuel R. Scottron. Mr. Scottron continued as a member 
of the Brooklyn Board of Education until 
1S98, and as a member of the Brooklyn 
School Board until 1902. Thus, for twenty 
years, the colored people of Brooklyn had a 
representative in school matters. 
I am glad that it has been my privilege 
to recognize the needs of the race by again 
giving them an official voice in educational 
matters. 
No. 89, HARLEM ; MOST OF TH E PUPILS AR E 
COLORED. 
I A M very glad to respond to your request for a statement for THE CRISIS 
on the general subject of the education of 
the Negroes in New York City. 
The latest available figures indicate that 
there are more than 110,000 Negroes living 
in the City of New York, and that of this 
number 21,000 are children of school age, 
attending the public schools of the city. It 
seemed to me that so large a proportion of 
the population of the city should not be 
without direct representation on the Board 
of Education. The educational problem of 
a section like that of Harlem, for example, 
where so many of our colored citizens live, 
can best be understood and met by the sympathetic consideration and devotion of a 
man of the colored race. Although there 
are many prominent Negroes in the city, 
any one of whom would have honorably 
represented these people, I feel that in obtaining for the city the services of Dr. E. 
P. Roberts I was most fortunate. He is a 
quiet and forceful citizen, and is known and 
respected by all classes of the community. 
His professional training makes him valu- No. 79, EAS T SIDE ; TH E PRINCIPA L IS COLORED, TEACHER S AN D PUPILS AR E WHITE . 
132 The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE. 
FROM Ralph Waldo Emerson: 
The spiritual stars rise nightly, shedding down 
A private beam into each several heart. 
Suns haste to set, that so remoter lights 
Beckon the wanderer to his vaster home. 
We have received the following pamphlets: "Christianity and Culture Versus the 
Negro, " by Charles Randall Graggs; 
"Reaching to Heaven," by W. L. Edwards; 
"Our Peculiar Work, " by S. E. Shepard; 
"Sermons and Melodies," by H. H. Proctor; 
and "Songs and Sermons," by C. A. Whitfield. 
The following books have been received: 
"From Super-man to Man, " a novel by J. 
A. Rogers, published in Chicago, and "The 
Colored Girl Beautiful," by Mrs. E. A. 
Hackley, published in Kansas City, Mo. 
The death of Joseph Benson Foraker, late 
Senator from Ohio, not only reminds the 
Negro race of his great service but calls attention to his autobiography, "Notes of a 
Busy Life, " in two large volumes. There 
is much to interest colored readers in these 
volumes—Mr. Foraker's service in the war, 
his political career, but particularly the two 
chapters devoted to the "Brownsville Affray." This record is Mr. Foraker's finest 
monument. 
The African World of London, England, 
has a special article on "Is the Negro Coming? " by Hilda M. Ridley. She says among 
other things: 
To the south of the states lie the great 
twenty republics with which America is now 
so anxious to enter into closer relationship. 
"Pan-Americanism" is the slogan of capitalists who look eagerly towards this vast 
country of such immense commercial possibilities. "We would be friends with you," 
say they—and all unwittingly they scarce 
acquired even the elements of what would 
constitute such a friendship. Great difficulties stand in the way of the much-to-be-desired acquaintance. On the economic ones 
I will not dwell. 
Scarcely less important are the social 
ones. Differences of religion, race and language intervene; and perhaps the most insuperable of all is race. South Americans 
are usually "half-breeds." Few of them are 
of pure Spanish descent. Negro and Indian 
strains predominate. 
The treatment by the United States of the 
"half-breed" is, therefore, watched by them 
with peculiar interest. They do not discover in it any justification for faith in the 
assurance of Americans that they are conscious of no sense of superiority to themselves. They see that even a tincture of 
Negro blood is sufficient to ostracize a man 
or woman socially and that he or she is 
placed on a plane with the Negro who is 
lynched, segregated, and disfranchised. 
"If I went into one of those restaurants 
along Broadway," asked the son of a Portuguese from the Azores, who held a position 
of trust and responsibility as an officer in 
the navy of his colored mother's country, 
"would they serve me as they would in 
Paris, or Ncwcastle-on-Tyne, or Rio de 
Janeiro?" 
His question could be answered in part 
by relating the treatment accorded the officers of the Brazilian dreadnought which visited America a short time ago. The waiters 
in the hotels where these men were being 
entertained refused to serve some of those 
who were black. Cultured Latin-Americans 
visiting parts of the states have been separated from their white companions on the 
street cars on account of color. 
The South American is proud of his race. 
Often highly cultivated, and turning to 
France, Germany, and England for his 
standards rather than to the states, he refuses to admit that American civilization is 
superior to his own. In literary, artistic, 
and musical appreciation he lays claims to 
points of superiority; indeed, he denies that 
America has any literature or art worthy 
of the name. In spite of internal difficulties—difficulties which, it is to be feared, 
have been stimulated by the greed of American and European investors—he resents 
any imputation that his government is inferior to that of the United States. 
"The burning of Negroes, the lynchings 
of thieves, the work of vigilance committees in the Far West," says the American 
writer, Roland Usher, "the failure to apprehend and punish murderers—all these the 
South Americans evidence as a lack of civilization in the United States quite as serious as their own particular difficulties." 
MEMPHIS. 
D. F. PETERS in the Encyclopedia 
Americana, vol. 10, on the city of Memphis. The city is well laid out and well-built. 
The wide, well-shaded and well-paved 
streets, the fine public and private buildings, 
the parks with numerous large trees, all 
make the city most attractive. The combined park area is about 1,000 acres, besides two fine race tracks. The streets are 
paved with asphalt, vitrified brick, macadam, 
and gravel. About 250 miles of turnpike 
radiate from Memphis. . . 
Among the prominent buildings are 123 
churches, 65 schools and colleges, three 
public libraries, three first-class theatres, 
the customhouse, cotton exchange, Odd Fellows, building, Porter, Scimitar, and Equitable buildings, Masonic Temple, Gayoso 
Hotel, Women's building, Randolf building 
Goodwyn Institute, Memphis Trust building,' 
133 134 TH E CRISIS 
Tennessee Trust building, a number of fine 
hotels, three large hospitals, and two orphan 
asylums. Memphis has a number of educational institutions, good public and parish 
and many private schools, the Memphis Hospital Medical College, the Maddox school 
for young women, the College of the Christian Brothers (R. C) , founded in 1871; 
Saint Agnes' Academy (R. C) , Sacred 
Heart Institute (R. C) , Saint Mary's 
School (P. E.), University School, and two 
public high schools. The Hannibal Medical 
College and the Le Moyne Normal Institute 
are for colored pupils. 
The Harvard Crimson says: 
Yesterday at ten of the morning, near 
Memphis, Tennessee, a mob of five thousand 
white men burned with fire a Negro to the 
death. The Negro had been accused of the 
commission of a capital crime. Under the 
law he deserved death according to the law. 
But those five thousand white men did 
not administer death according to the law. 
They seized the Negro from a willing sheriff's posse, which was sworn by all honor to 
uphold the law. They held him awaiting 
the final torture, while excursion trains ran 
from the city, while business houses shut 
down as for a holiday, while pleasure-seekers came by motor from the whole countryside to witness this festival. This festival 
of debauchery! 
And then the throng having collected, 
representative of the South's chivalry and 
the South's courage, the mob thrust their 
victim into a small steel cage from which 
there was no escape. They bound him by 
chains at the hands and feet. Lest he, no 
doubt, should, although a member of the 
despised race and one against thousands, 
put to rout these courageous Southern gentlemen. When they had bound him, the 
chains being hard and the steel bars strong, 
they tortured him; the mob, with the fiendish 
tortures which from time immemorial have 
been the pastime of savages. And when he 
was near to oblivion from pain, they applied 
the torch to the oil-soaked fagots and 
aroused his spirit to a terrible death in the 
fire. It is noted that a few urged that he 
be shot. They should be honored, for they 
were merciful. 
The crowd clamored at his tortured 
shrieks, rejoicing around the pyre till that 
which was once a man had become but bones 
and ashes. There were women in that mob 
in great numbers, singing at the gala day. 
Women! Those chivalric and holy women 
of the South to keep whom pure the last 
Southern gentleman would shed his romantic blood. The flower of chivalry! Did 
womanly pity, did womanly sorrow, which 
is the greatest compassion our race may 
know, move their hearts then? Did they 
weep at this bestiality? 
The victim was seen to pray as the fires 
rolled over his flesh. To what God did hepray? The South is reputed religious, far 
more so than this Unitarian and materialistic North. Did the white man's God hear 
those agonizing prayers? Or does the 
Negro worship an impotent Diety? 
One Negro in the throng tore down the 
flag of his nation and raised a cry for Germany. He was threatened with the death. 
There are millions of his race in the South 
who might well be moved with the same 
passion. Germany, in all her brutality, 
never did the like in Belgium. 
It was not Memphis' sin alone. It was 
not Tennessee's sin alone. It was the sin 
of this nation, which allows such things to 
come to pass. It was the sin of our lawlessness, of our mad disregard of all that makes 
existence bearable to men. 
Young men, you young men of the South, 
do not attempt from a barren sectional pride 
to defend a crime so horrrible. Fo r such 
lust of death in a whole city, a whole country-side, there is no shadow of defence, not 
now, nor in eternity. It is for those men 
who in time hope to lead the South to arouse 
such horror in their hearts of this mob 
blindness that they will do away with it forever; that our whole people, without sectional exception, will honor that law and 
justice upon which our nation rests. 
Vachel Lindsay writes in the Illinois State 
Register from Spring-field, Ill.: 
I do not believe that victim guilty of the 
crime of which he was accused. I take no 
stock in his alleged confession. In 1908, 
after our week of race riots, the alleged assaulter was vindicated. The citizens of 
Memphis have made it forever impossible to 
prove this man guilty of anything except 
the color of his skin. The world is not safe 
for Democracy as long as there are Americans like these of Memphis. 
The San Francisco Bulletin says: 
It is particularly unfortunate that the 
more civilized people in the South, who TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 135 
probably form a majority, do not put a stop 
to this degrading communal sport, at least 
during the period of a war which is being 
fought in the interests of higher civilization. 
This Tennessee community should be exempted from conscription. Men who burn 
human beings alive cannot be trusted to go 
abroad as representatives of the American 
cause. 
The New Republic says: 
If there was any charitable doubt as to 
the atrocities connected with the Ell Person 
lynching at Memphis, they are negated by 
eye-witness reports in the Memphis Press. 
It is not only true that Person's ears were 
hacked off while he was being burned to 
death and that his severed head was thrown 
from a speeding automobile in the Memphis 
streets some hours later, and his severed 
foot similarly flung about as a trophy, but 
it is also true that the mob which collected 
to witness Person's lynching was estimated 
at 15,000. "'The y burned him too quick; 
they burned him too quick,' was the complaint on all sides. The universal sentiment seemed to be that too much gasoline 
had been used"—this quotation from Mr. E. 
T. Leech's report gives the clue to the spirit 
of the debauch. To say that this lynching 
indicts Tennessee is gratuitous. Its filthy 
degeneracy would stain any community, but 
what it really exposes is not so much a barbarous cruelty in Tennessee as a barbarous 
communal failure to undertake the mere preliminaries of justice. There is no proof 
whatever that Ell Person was guilty. There 
is only the fact that 15,000 Americans have 
combined to annul their institutions and degrade their name. 
The Independent says: 
Last week a large and enthusiastic throng 
of the "best citizens" of Memphis, Tennessee, 
burned a Negro at the stake after soaking 
him in oil and cutting off his ears. 
The world must be made safe for democracy. 
A BLACK KING 
TH E recent death of King Lewanika re~ 
calls the prolonged alliance existing 
between himself and England. His kingdom 
was that of Barotseland (a vast area north 
of Rhodesia), and here he ruled for fortyfive years. In the early days of his reign 
he was forced to flee because of a revolution, 
but in time he overthrew the usurper, regained his throne and began to institute 
British reforms. In 1890 through a treaty 
effected by Mr. Cecil Rhoades, Barotseland 
became an appanage of the British empire 
and from that time on Lewanika's loyalty 
to the British remained unshaken. He was 
a born progressive the Montreal Weekly 
Star assures us: 
"The dangerous Ethiopian movement obtained some foothold some few years ago, 
but Lewanika himself removed the menace. 
The Government is now establishing large 
technical schools at Lialui at the King's desire. He has rendered great assistance by 
compiling a census as a basis for the collection of the hut tax in the Barotse Valley. 
He has recently, by public proclamation, 
given the final death-blow to the ancient 
system of serfdom or domestic slavery. 
He has freed every slave in his dominion, 
between 25,000 and 30,000 natives being 
thus liberated. 
"His very dusky majesty—he was one of 
the blackest of black men—has had a place 
in the affections of the British ever since he 
came to London in 1902 to attend the Coronation of King Edward. He was in fact the 
only other King at that ceremony and he 
was immensely proud of the distinction. 
Also the visit, sore trial as it was to his 
majesty, allowed him to achieve the ambition of his life. 
"He had always wanted to meet 'the great 
white chief,' and the day before he left England on his return home he was presented to 
King Edward. Speaking with considerable 
emotion after the ceremony, he said: T am 
now happy.' 
"Incidentally, Lewanika had made the 
lowest obeisance ever made at the palace, 
and he also presented King Edward with an 
ivory tusk which required the full strength 
of two brawny Barotses to carry. 
"His journey to England in the Dunottar 
Castle had given him his first glimpse of 
the sea. He was vastly impressed, but he 
was none the less glad to leave the ship— 
'a fine ship,' he said, 'but I don't like her 
when she moves,' and he added that he 
would rather walk back even if it took him 
twelve years. He hardly did that, but 
months after his departure—with liberty silk 
costumes for his twelve royal wives—he was 
heard of making a leisurely journey back to 
Barotseland. 
"He was not a Christian himself, but he 
ruled his country on very Christian lines. 
He was a generous man, too. Sometimes, as 
when he presented Lord Selborne with a hippopotamus, his gifts were embarrassing. 
The last heard of Lewanika in this country 
was his offer, a month after the war broke 
out, of his services to England." 136 TH E CRISIS 
THE FLIGHT INTO EGYPT. 
THE reason of the flight, says the Rev. 
J. P. Johnson, is low wages, whatever 
may be said of lynch law and the political 
and civil disabilities of the Negro as contributing causes. 
The Negro farm hand gets for his compensation hardly more than the mule he 
plows; that is his board and shelter. Some 
mules fare better than Negroes. This, too, 
in spite of the fact that the money received 
for farm products has advanced more than 
100 per cent. The laborer has not shared 
correspondingly in this advance. 
A colored paper, the Nashville Globe, 
adds: 
Negroes are leaving Nashville to escape 
the oppression that is so prevalent in official 
circles. The black man knows he has no 
redress and it is better for him to leave than 
to be subjected to the indignities that arc 
his portion daily. 
A correspondent writes to the New Orleans States: 
Why, then, should there be any organized 
attempt made to prevent the Negro from 
leaving the South? So far as our state is 
concerned, it is simply this: The sugar 
planters now see an opportunity of reaping 
large profits by keeping a surplus of labor 
here to rob the poor white man and the poor 
black man of their rightful share in the 
production of their labor. If the Negro, 
in compliance with the law of supply and 
demand, would seek better remuneration 
for his labor in the North, men of both 
races would have to be paid more, as both 
would be in a better position to demand 
more wages. 
Here is what one sugar planter proposes. 
In order that the sugar planter can have 
cheap Negro labor three months in the year 
for the harvesting of their crops, Negroes 
in the cities should not be permitted to go 
North. In other words, he would have 
thousands of Negroes remain idle in the 
cities nine months in the year, depressing 
wages of whites and blacks alike, in order 
that a few sugar planters might be able to 
reap larger profits from their operations. 
A writer in the Philadelphia Bulletin 
thinks that: 
Just so long as a Negro will submit to 
being worked on the farm with all kinds of 
hardship and with almost no pay for his 
labor: and just so long as a Negro is satisfied with anything that the white man thinks 
is best for him—he is a "Good Negro. " 
But, on the other hand, if a Negro resents, 
and seeks better positions and higher wages, 
the Negro at once ceases to be a "Good 
Negro"—he is seeking undue honors, and is 
high-minded and bad. 
The Sumter, S. C , Item, a white paper, 
says: 
Rev. J. W. Moultrie, colored, pastor of 
Emanuel Methodist Church, one of the oldest and probably the largest Negro congregations of Sumter, was arrested at the Atlantic Coast Line station yesterday afternoon 
by Rural Policeman Sam Newman on the 
charge of being a labor agent engaged in enticing labor to leave the state. The arrest 
created considerable excitement and not a 
little resentment on the part of the Negroes, 
and for a little while there was a hint of 
trouble. The excitement subsided, however, 
when Rev. Moultrie was released on bond 
and, subsequently, the charge against him 
was dismissed, as it was established that the 
arrest was a mistake. 
A correspondent tells THE CRISIS that the 
mistake was not one of identity, but that 
when the whites saw the furor which the 
arrest caused and that the colored people 
were arming themselves, the "rural" officer 
found out that it was somebody else he 
wanted and not Mr. Moultrie! 
The Danville, Va., Battle Ax, a white 
paper, says: 
Yes sir-ee Bob, "Danville Does Things, " 
and does 'em often. The latest act is the 
stopping of three car loads of colored men 
who were departing for the North to work 
in brick yards, arresting the vice-president 
of the company who was here looking up 
help and fining him $500. Now if the gentlemen who got so interested in stopping 
these men from going where they could get 
good pay for their work had a good job to 
offer them, it wouldn't look quite so bad. 
But I'll venture if that three car loads of 
colored men could possibly get jobs in this 
section that the average wage wouldn't 
amount to enough to buy a gallon of white 
beans per day. Now the people who are so 
interested in keeping the laborers in these 
parts should know that even a colored 
working man can't live on air and a little 
Dan River water. But the idea seems to be 
that plenty of cheap labor must be kept 
on hand ready for service whenever they 
are wanted, and when they are no longer 
needed they are turned out to graze, in a 
land where the grazing-land is all posted, 
the black berry patches wired in, and even 
fishing for tadpoles is not allowed. 
From the St. Louis Globe Democrat: 
The Negroes who have been driven from 
East St. Louis ate their bread in the sweat 
of their faces. They did not even stop at 
bread. Whatever fault may have been found 
with the Negro, he has never been accused of 
parsimony. Too often his expenditures exactly equal his income. The Negroes are good 
spenders and they pay cash. The merchants 
and the landlords estimate that loss of these 
1,000 Negroes means a weekly shrinking of 
about $18,000 in business receipts. None 
of the mob have shown any disposition to 
make this shrinkage good. None of them 
have offered to fill the enforced vacancies. 
THE REAL FOOD PROBLEM. 
THE Durham, N. C , Morning Herald, a 
white paper, tells us: 
Land owners in many sections of the 
South will not permit their tenants to plant TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 137 
food and feed-stuffs. They insist on cotton 
being- planted. . . . 
The land owners claim they cannot keep 
a check on the amount of feed and foodstuffs raised, but they can check the tenant 
up on cotton. Cotton must be ginned before it is sold. Each ginner can keep a record of the amount of cotton ginned for each 
Negro tenant and the landlord has no trouble in collecting his tolls. 
One owner of several thousand acres of 
land told all his Negro tenants that if one 
of them planted a row of corn he would be 
"run off the place." Investigation has 
shown that even in the boll weevil districts, 
where the insects have made the raising of 
cotton unprofitable, the land owners are still 
insisting that this one crop be planted. 
Many Negro farmers last season were unable to produce enough cotton to buy feed 
for their live stock and food for themselves. 
It is suggested that the government or the 
state, or the two working together, assume 
control of certain plantations and insist the 
tenants be given the right to plant food and 
feed-crops if thev so desire, regardless of 
the views of the land owners. 
THE WAR FOR DEMOCRACY. 
PRESIDEN T W. S. SCARBOROUGH, of 
Wilberforce University, has received 
the following telegram from Colonel F. L. 
Wynn at Columbus, New Mexico: 
Account of sending eighty-four non-commissioned officers to Des Moines Training 
Camp, and consequent probable promotion 
with commissioned rank in National Army, 
24th Infantry will have places for educated, 
forceful young men, competent to become 
non-commissioned officers. Clerks badly 
needed. Request your assistance in securing such who will fulfill the required requirements. Have applicants apply in person to nearest recruiting office, presenting 
copy of this telegram, and by letter enclosing recommendations to me if passed. 
During the debate on the Draft Bill, Congressman Nichols of South Carolina cavorted in this way : 
If you put a boy from Mississippi in a 
Negro regiment from Massachusetts, you 
won't have to go to Germany to have war. 
You will have it right here. 
The familiar rebel yell of the Southerners greeted this declaration. 
To this the Danville, Va., Torchlight, a 
colored paper, replies: 
It can hardly be expected that an administration dominated by this spirit of lawlessness and sectional strife, could prosecute very successfully a war against a 
foreign foe. In fact, there are many people in this country who believe a war "right 
here" that would shoot to death the spirit 
of rebelism and lawlessness and anarchy 
which make every decent Southerner 
ashamed that he was born in the South, 
would be the greatest blessing that could 
come to the South. The Negro did not fight 
in the regiment with the sensitive white 
"boy from Mississippi" at San Juan; but it 
was he that saved the white boy's skin on 
that memorable occasion, and brought backin glory the flag the white boy had permitted to drag in defeat and humiliation. 
In fact, there are signs that the colored 
people are getting restive under their treatment in regard to the "right to fight." The 
Boston Journal reports a colored man, 
James G. Wolff, as saying in a recent public 
speech: 
"Last month, through the Department of 
Justice, an attempt was made to persuade 
the people of this country that we were disloyal and were plotting to align ourselves 
with an alien enemy. How wicked such men 
must be who would seek to injure a class 
who have always so faithfully supported 
the institutions of this country—whose patriotism is surpassed by no body of citizens, 
in spite of fewer reasons for such sentiment. 
"There must be an immediate change in 
the attitude of Washington on these grave 
questions," he proceeded. "We are American citizens now and forever. We are entitled to equal opportunities in air avenues 
of life." 
To this the Pioneer Press, a colored paper 
of Martinsburg, W. Va., adds in a comment 
on the colored man's easy temper: 
Kick him. All right boss. Deny him a 
meal in an eating house, off goes his hat and 
he into the kitchen. Deny him a bed, he'll 
sleep on the floor or in the mow. Jimcrow 
him in the movies and he crowds the galleries. In the cars and on boats he is happy 
with his banjo, song, and jig. Disfranchise 
him, he crosses his leg and waits for God to 
do everything to bring right around. To 
climax it, he wants to fight for his country, 
in the very face of the fact that he is told 
he is not wanted. 
The Baltimore Afro-American says: 
We are wondering what were the feelings 
of former Premier Viviani as he sat in the 
Supreme Court of the United States and 
listened to the pleading of prominent lawyers for the segregation of a portion of 
America's population because of the color of 
their skins. It must have opened up a new 
phase of the American character with which 
he had not been made acquainted. 
The New York Evening Post says: 
General Smuts, his eyes opened in the 
East African campaign to the possibilities 
in the huge native population "for the creation of the most powerful army the world 
has ever seen," calls for a clause in the 
treaty of peace forbidding the future military training of African natives. There 138 THE CRISIS 
speaks South African sensitiveness over the 
racial question, with knowledge of the prowess of natives in arms under European officers since 1914. At the beginning of 1915, 
German black troops forced the surrender 
of British infantry at Jasin in German East 
Africa, and in Kamerun 3,000 black soldiers 
fought for a year against more than double 
their number of Belgian, British, and 
French troops, and escaped into Spanish 
territory when their ammunition was gone 
All the European nations have native sol 
diers in Africa, holding them primarily to 
suppress rebellions, but secondarily as defensive or offensive forces against the colonies of other nations; Belgium alone is said 
to have trained 30,000 blacks 
The Rev. A. Clayton Powell, a colored 
minister of New York City, thinks that: 
This is the psychological moment to say 
to the American white government from 
every pulpit and platform and through 
every newspaper, "Yes, we are loyal and 
patriotic. Boston Commons, Bunker Hill, 
Gettysburg, Fort Pillow, Appomattox, San 
Juan Hill, and Carrizal will testify to our 
loyalty. While we love our flag and country, 
we do not believe in fighting for the protection of commerce on the high seas until the 
powers that be give us at least some verbal 
assurance that the property and lives of the 
members of our race are going to be protected on land from Maine to Mississippi." 
Let us have the courage to say to the white 
American people, "Give us the same rights 
which you enjoy, and then we will fight by 
your side with all of our might for every 
international right on land and sea." 
If this kind of talk is not loyalty, then I 
am disloyal; if this is not patriotism, then 
I am unpatriotic; if this is treason, then I 
am a traitor. It is not that I love Caesar 
less but these black Romans more, who have 
been true to the flag for two hundred and 
fifty years. It is infinitely more disgraceful and outrageous to hang and burn colored men, boys, and women without a trial 
in the times of peace than it is for Germans 
in time of war to blow up ships loaded with 
mules and molasses. 
MANASSAS, 1917. 
ELIZABET H MINER KIN G in the New 
Yor k Evening Post writes: 
Then each graduate arose and carefully 
walked the prescribed chalk line in front of 
the platform, back of the sewing-machine 
table, to receive his diploma. As each received his roll, tears welled in his eyes. The 
carpenters came forward for their diplomas; the shoemaker came for his; the 
capped girl in domestic science came for 
hers, and the teachers for theirs. A bent 
old minister in tail coat and wrinkled face 
brought his charges bouquets of backyard 
roses and grass stalks. One girl bowed low 
over a huge white peony from some one's 
fence bush. One girl got none. She held 
her hands between her skirts to make less 
noticeable their emptiness. Search as I 
could there was nothing I could improvise 
for her. 
It is over. Everybody rise and sing the 
"Star-Spangled Banner." The tall oaks are 
up first, and the key in which the song is 
pitched goes as high as their utmost tops. 
Only the smallest lads can squeal through 
the song. Those who cannot reach the top 
notes of "the rockets' red glare" wave their 
arms and sway their bodies, ready to come 
down strong when "the flag was still there." 
Then the mules are harnessed, the young 
folks packed away, and those who live 
twenty miles back in Virginy and 'low to get, 
home by sunset jo g on. Others go to see 
the exhibits of trades, the bread, the dressmaking, the horseshoeing, and other shoeing. 
The young men hang around, treating 
the girls to ice cream, and the "undergrade" 
get together, talking over the year's events. 
The matrons gather their broods, or sit 
under the trees for a chat. The "white 
folks " go in single file across the ploughed 
field from the grove to the "campus. " And 
the graduating class in the front seats have 
just begun to amble back up the hill through 
the oaks, crooning with many an obligato, 
like a medley of violins: 
Keep me from sinking down, 
Oh, keep me from sinking down. 
Amen. 
It was sunset. 
MISS L. R. YOUNG , 
Sargeant School. 
J. L. BERRY , 
Howard. 
E. J. SCOTT, JR., 
Phillips Exeter . 
F. P. SMITH , 
Indiana. The Horizon 
EDUCATION . 
SUMMER schools will be held as follows: 
At Greensboro, N. C , the A. and T. 
School, beginning June 25, and continuing 
5 weeks, J. B. Dudley, president; Norfolk, 
Va., the Booker T. Washington High School, 
beginning June 20, Prof. T. C. Erwin, conductor; Shreveport, La., beginning June 6 
and continuing 6 weeks, T. H. Kane, Box 
722; Natchez, Miss., June 4 to June 29, G. 
W. Brumfield, director; Cambria, Va., E. A. 
Long, conductor; Tuskegee Institute, June 
11 to July 20, R. R. Moton, principal; New 
Orleans, La., June 11 to July 20, Prof. Alfred Lawless, Jr., conductor; Virginia N. 
and I. Institute, Petersburg, June 20 to Au ­
gust 1, J. M. Gandy, conductor; Florida A. 
and M., Tallahassee, June 11 to August 20; 
Howe Institute, Memphis, Tenn., June 11, 
continuing 6 weeks; Ft. Valley, Ga., H. and 
I., June 4 to June 30, H. A. Hunt, principal 
Prof. M. S. Davage has been elected by 
the Freedmen's Aid Society to succeed the 
late Dr. R. S. Lovinggood as president of 
Samuel Huston College, Austin, Tex. 
In Meridian, Miss., superintendents, principals and white teachers receive $69,907.10, 
colored principals and teachers $9,746.25, 
janitors for white schools $4,860, janitors 
for colored schools $612. 
C. W. Florence of the School of Education, University of Pittsburg, has led the 
university's debating team during the last 
three years, his team defeating several of 
the Eastern colleges and the larger universities of the Middle West. 
The General Education Board announces 
among its recent disbursements $50,974 for 
rural education among Negroes and $102,200 
for Negro colleges and industrial schools. 
Miss M. O. Bonner of the Brookline, 
Mass., High School composed the class song 
of the graduating class of which she was a 
member. 
Two colored boys are on the basketball 
team which won the school championship 
for the cities of Duluth and Superior. 
A colored high school is to be erected in 
Shreveport, La., at a cost of $26,911. 
Dr. S. M. Newman, president of Howard 
University, informs us that he has not resigned but merely stated his intention to 
resign after accomplishing several matters 
which he has in hand. His reason for resigning is not age or health, but family bereavement and desire to engage in literary 
work. 
A site consisting of 257 acres in the suburbs of Alexandria, La., has been located 
for Leland University at a cost of $18,000. 
The building to be erected will cost between 
$75,000 and $100,000. Agriculture will be 
one of the leading features of the school. 
E. E. Smith has been leader of Virginia 
Union University's debating team for four 
years without a single defeat. He has won 
two victories over Howard and one each over 
Lincoln and Wilberforce. 
At the first annual outdoor athletic meet 
under the auspices of the Y. M. C. A., at 
Carroll Park, Baltimore, Md., Howard University won the loving cup. School No. 110 
was victorious in the school boys' events and 
there were three men tied for the individual 
trophy offered by the Afro-American. Two 
thousand people attended. 
The Executive Committee of Shaw 
Alumni Association is offering a gold prize 
for the best "alma mater" song written by 
a graduate or former student. 
Six colored nurses were graduated from 
the Grady Hospital, Atlanta, Ga. This is 
the first colored class from this city hospital. The Mayor presided. 
Miss Vivian Carter is one of six graduates to qualify for place on the honor roll 
of the Auburn, N. Y., High School. 
In an oratorical contest between the students of the Chicago Law School, Starling 
D. W. Carr, a freshman, took first prize, a 
gold medal. There were sixteen white competitors. 
Blyden Jackson, age six, of the Western 
Colored Branch Library, Louisville, Ky., 
won the first primary prize, and Virginia 
Allen, age ten, of the Eastern Colored 
Branch won the first intermediate prize in 
the final Story Telling Contest conducted by 
the Louisville colored branch libraries. 
Their names will be engraved on the Cotter 
Story Telling Contest Cup given by the 
Louisville Free Public Library, and named 
in honor of Prof. Joseph S. Cotter, who 
originated the Story Telling Contest. 
Resolutions condemning the location of 
Fisk School, an institution for Negro pupils 
139 140 TH E CRISIS 
in New Orleans, La., which is in the vice 
district, were unanimously adopted at a 
Negro mass meeting and will be forwarded 
to Superintendent Gwinn. 
Prof. C. G. O'Kelly has resigned the presidency of Kittrell College to become dean of 
the National Training School at Durham, 
N. C , of which Dr. James E. Shepard is 
president. 
TH E WAR . 
WE regret to learn that Lieut.-Col. 
Charles Young is confined to the Letterman Hospital in San Francisco. 
One hundred colored women met in New 
York City and formed the Women's Auxiliary to the Fifteenth Infantry, N. Y. N. G. 
Miss Susan E. Frazier was elected president. 
A training camp for 1,250 Negro officers 
was opened at Fort Des Moines, Iowa, June 
15. Commanders from six army departments selected Negro applicants as follows: 
Northeastern, 40; Eastern, 240; Southeastern, 430; Central, 195; Southern, 75; Western, 20. This provided for 1,000 colored 
men selected from college graduates and 
members of Negro regiments of the National Guard, and was exclusive of 250 noncommissioned officers and enlisted men assigned for training as prospective officers 
from the Negro regiments of the regular 
army. 
A Negro battalion, numbering 600 Denver 
citizens, has been given authority for organization by Adjt.-Gen. Baldwin. Capt 
Thomas Campbell was commissioned major. 
The First Separate Battalion I). C. N. G , 
probably will be expanded into a regiment 
as the result of the decision of the Wa r 
Department to permit the National Guard 
of the country to organize new units- An 
additional battery of field artillery may be 
organized. 
Colored cavalrymen of the 9th and 10th 
Regiments acted as an escort to Marshal 
Joffre at West Point. 
Mayor Mitchel, of New York City, appointed the Hon. Charles W. Anderson a 
member of the committee for the entertainment of the visiting Wa r Commissioners 
Joffre, Balfour, and Viviani. 
The Frederick Douglass Guards has been 
organized by colored men in Des Moines, 
Iowa. Atty. Geo. H. Woodson, formerly 
first sergeant in the 25th U. S. Infantry, 
donated the use of 100 repeating rifles. 
The City Council, Chicago, Ill., appointed 
Dr. Allen A. Wesley, formerly major in the 
8th Regiment, and Col. Franklin A. Denison, 
head of the regiment and now assistant attorney general of the state, as two representative citizens on the committee of one 
hundred selected to entertain Gen. Joffre of 
France and his staff. 
The Red Cross Unit of the National Red 
Cross Association at Howard University 
remained over after the close of that institution to sew for the soldiers, and a request 
came to them from the National organization for two women and a man to be sent 
to Atlanta to aid in relieving the victims 
of the recent fire in that city. 
The entire student body of Sumner Colored High School, in St. Louis, Mo., numbering 1,000 boys and girls, at a mass meeting voted unanimously to give up all athletics this spring and summer and devote 
their spare time to gardening. 
Major John H. Anderson, who has been 
detailed at Monrovia, Liberia, for two years 
as a U. S. Army officer, succeeding Lieut.-
Col. Charles Young, has arrived in San 
Juan, Porto Rico, on his way to take up his 
duties. 
Dr. Ernest Lyon, consul general of the 
Liberian Republic in the United States, has 
received word that the Republic of Liberia 
has severed diplomatic relations with the 
imperial German government and will cooperate with the United States and her allies 
in the prosecution of the war. 
MUSI C AN D ART . 
H. T. BURLEIGH' S "Southland Sketches" 
for violin and piano were included 
in the numbers given by Doris Baker, violinist, who was the assisting artist at a 
Southern concert given by the Richmond 
Male Choral Society, Richmond, Va . 
On May 15 Mr. William H. Richardson, 
baritone of Boston, Mass., and Mrs. Maud 
Cuney Hare, pianist, appeared on the program of the "A t Home " Musicale given by 
the Boston composer, Mrs. Edith Noyes 
Greene, at her studio in Huntington Chambers. Mrs. Hare gave music talks prefacing Mr. Richardson's offering of songgroups. 
Miss Yula T. Hardin, a pupil of Straight 
University, gave her graduating piano recital on May 18 at the college chapel. She 
is an exceptionally talented young musician 
and is a student of both the harp and piano. 
Miss Revella Hughes, who is the second TH E HORIZO N 141 
graduate in piano from Howard University 
School of Music, gave her graduating recital at the close of the session. She is a 
pupil of Mr. Roy W. Tibbs and has unusual 
possibilities. Miss Hughes will teach next 
year at the Washington Conservatory of 
Music. 
Coleridge-Taylor's "Atonement" was 
given May 20 by the Metropolitan A. M. E. 
Church Choir, Washington, D. C. 
The Hampton chorus, composed of 700 
voices, has given a tine rendition of Part 1 
of Mendelssohn's "Elijah" under the direction of Mr. R. Nathaniel Dett. Dr. A. T. 
Davison, chorister of Harvard College, sang 
the baritone solo. Dr. Davison was sent to 
Hampton Institute to study the music situation there at the request of the General 
Education Board. 
The Mendelssohn Club at Albany, N. Y., 
featured the Foote setting of ColeridgeTaylor's "The Farewell of Hiawatha," with 
Louis Shenk as baritone soloist at their 
closing concert of the season. 
The West Indian Progressive Association 
gave a very successful concert at Massey 
Hall, Toronto, Canada, with Daisy Tapley, 
contralto, and Roland Hayes, tenor, as the 
visiting artists. 
"Rachel," the race-play written by Miss 
Angelina W. Grimke, was presented at 
Brattle Hall, Cambridge, Mass., on May 24, 
under the auspices of the Sunday School of 
St. Bartholomew's Church. The principals, 
although amateur actors, deserve mention 
for the splendid performance of their roles. 
The part of Rachel was taken by Mrs. Harriet Keelan Johnson. During the intermission, Coleridge-Taylor numbers were played 
by a selected trio, consisting of Maud Cuney 
Hare, pianist; Clarence Cameron White, violinist, and J. Harrell, 'cellist. 
At the twenty-fourth annual exhibition 
of the Art Students' League of Chicago, held 
at the Art Institute May 4 to June 11, 
works of two Negro artists, Charles Clarence Dawson and W. M. Farrow, were 
shown. Mr. Dawson's "Cotton Pickers," 
"The Bathers " and "A Spot on the Boul. 
Mich.," and Mr. Farrow's "From Under the 
Bridge " were exhibited. The latter's "Mo ­
ment of Rest" is on exhibition at the Independent Artists' display in the Fine Arts 
Building, Chicago. 
The Phyllis Wheatley Home Association 
of Detroit, Mich., recently presented Mr. 
Roland W. Hayes, tenor, in a song recital 
at the Second Baptist Church of that city. 
Mr. Sinclair White Tyler, violinist, and Mr. 
Harry P. Guy, organist, were the assisting 
artists. The Cleveland, Ohio, Branch of the 
N. A. A. C. P. has presented Mr. Hayes in 
recital at (he Cory M. E. Church, at which 
two of Mr Henry T. Burleigh's songs were 
used, with the composer accompanying 
The closing exercises of Haines Institute 
of Augusta, Ga., included the rendition of 
Cowen's "Rose Maiden" with Mr. Roland 
Hayes as the assisting artist. Of his singing, 
Mr. T. J. Hickman, a member of the Board 
of Education of Augusta, and president of 
the Augusta Choral Societ". wrote: "A s for 
the Boston tenor, he was delightful. I do not 
know when I have heard a more pleasing 
voice, so well modulated and colorful. He 
would do credit to any organization." 
"Just On the Other Side," the music of 
which is composed by a colored girl, Miss 
Mary M. Gibson, won the competition for 
the class of 1918 at Radcliff's annual interclass song competition. It will be included 
in the authorized college song book. 
Miss Beatrice Perry, a colored girl, has 
been revealed as "Neave Perry," whose short 
stories in magazines have won praise for 
the past two years. 
The sixteenth annual recital of pupils of 
Mrs. Estelle Ancrum Forster was held June 
15 in Boston, Mass. The 1916-17 class included students in harmony, 3 in organ, 
4 in solfeggio, and 42 in piano. 
Mrs. Mcta Z. W. Fuller, of Framingham, 
was awarded second sculpture prize of twenty-five dollars offered by the Masachusetts 
Branch of the Woman's Peace Party. Her 
work was titled: "Peace Halting the Ruthlessness of War."C Six thousand people attended the 
held in Indianapolis between Bethel Choir of 
Chicago and Allen Chapel of Indianapolis. 
The Chicago Choir, led by Prof J. A. Munday, defeated the home choir. 
In Winchester, Va., "Jake Among the 
Indians," written by Principal P. W. Gibson of the Douglass School, was successfully 
presented by the pupils of the school. 
Pupils of the senior classes of the Industrial High School in Birmingham, Ala., presented a patriotic pageant, "The Negro in 
American History." 
The Norfolk Colored Dramatic Club gave 
a successful presentation of Charles Klein's 
"The Lion and the Mouse" at the Colonial 
Theatre under the direction of J. C. Stith, 142 TH E CRISIS 
for the benefit of St. Joseph's Catholic 
Church. 
Mrs. Emilie Hapgood will continue the 
Colored Players as an organization and 
next season they will be seen in a Broadway, 
New York, theatre in a new program of 
plays. Mrs. Hapgood will also present the 
players on tour. 
The Martin-Smith Music School in New 
York City has held its tenth annual recital. 
The symphony orchestra of 130 members 
was assisted by the choir of St. Marks 
Church and gave the "Magic Flute" Overture and the "G Minor Symphony" of Mozart, among other numbers. 
In New York City Miss Nora Bayes is 
appearing at the 39th Street Theatre with 
a company of forty, three-fourths of whom 
are Negroes. 
Albert Sammons and William Murdock, 
both in khaki, gave the first performance 
of a violin sonata in D-Minor (ms.) by 
Coleridge-Taylor, April 14, in London. "All 
our efforts to identify this work with the 
help of the 'official' biography of the composer have proved unavailing." The Daily 
Telegraph adds: "But from internal evidence it would seem to be an early work. 
It is brimful of a delightful kind of melodiousness. The workmanship is for so 
gifted a composer simplicty itself. Is it possible that the sonata should fill one of the 
lacunae in the composer's published list of 
works—op. 25, 27, 28, 32 all seem to be 
missing." The Times spoke of "passages 
of serene, almost feminine, beauty, expressed 
in rapturous and rather breathless sentences." 
A patriotic kermis, representing United 
States possessions, was given by the pupils 
and alumni of School No. 17, Indianapolis, 
Ind., under the auspices of the Woman's 
Council. Mrs. W. E. Brown was the director. Two thousand people saw the performance. 
SOCIA L PROGRESS . 
MISS ESSIE GOODE, a graduate of 
Columbia University, has been appointed pathological chemist at the Presbyterian Hospital connected with the Physicians and Surgeons Hospital of Columbia 
University. 
Philadelphia, Pa., has a force of 287 colored policemen. 
In Chicago, Ill., a tag day has brought 
$800 to the Old Folks Home and $600 to the 
Phyllis Wheatley Home. 
State officials of Tennessee, after investigating the restaurants of Chattanooga for 
two weeks, declared that the cleanest one 
was conducted by a Negro. 
Colored taxpayers in Elizabeth, N. J., 
have started a movement to form a taxpayers' association in order to unite their 
efforts in the matter of public improvements. 
They own about $300,000 worth of property. 
In Hobson City, Ala., an exclusive colored 
town, there are 4 churches with a combined 
membership of 700, a public school with 250 
pupils, 12 progressive stores, waterworks, 
electric lights, police and sanitary departments, a jail and a governing board, elected 
every two years, which consists of seven municipal officers, including a chief of police. 
Three white men, with their faces blackened so as to disguise themselves as Negroes, held up the cashier of the First National Bank at Kittyville, Md., getting 
$10,000. 
Douglass Memorial Hospital in Philadelphia has been appropriated $24,000 by the 
State, an increase of $4,000; Mercy Hospital, 
$14,000, an increase of $4,000; and the 
Downington School $25,000, an increase of 
$5,000. 
Cherry Street Branch of the Evansville, 
Indiana, Public Library is for colored people, and had during 1916 a circulation of 
15,077 volumes. 
Large numbers of well-to-do colored people lost their property in the Atlanta, Ga., 
fire. The colored Odd Fellows building was 
used for relief purposes and a committee of 
eight prominent citizens, including three 
colored men, H. H. Pace, E. A. Oliver and 
A. F. Herndon, was appointed for rehabilitation. 
Two California men have received Carnegie Hero Medals: Julius Malone, who lost 
his life in saving guests of a Los Angeles 
fire, 1912, and Victor Milton, who was 
permanently crippled in rescuing a woman 
from a fire. 
The West Virginia Legislature has made 
the following appropriations to colored institutions for the fiscal period beginning 
July 1, 1917, and ending July 1, 1919: 
West Virginia Collegiate Institute. .$103,700 
Bluefield Colored Institute 40,000 
Storer College 5,400 
Colored Tuberculosis Sanitarium.. 40,000 
Colored Orphans' Home 35,000 
Barnett Hospital 2,500 
Through Mr. Claude Clark the colored 
people of South Texas are to have a bathing TH E HORIZO N 143 
pavilion in Galveston, accommodating 300 
bathers at a time. 
Girard Miller has been appointed to the 
police force in Buffalo, N. Y. 
The Brooklyn, N. Y., Branch of the Y. M. 
C. A. has closed a contract for the erection 
of a new $200,000 building. 
The fourth annual flower market of the 
Women's Co-operative Civic League has 
been held in Baltimore, Md. 
INDUSTRY . 
W. H. WEST , formerly a janitor in the 
Federal Building at Trinidad, has 
invented a window transom. It can be adjusted in any size window and prevents 
dust, rain, snow and all kinds of insects 
from coming in and at the same time gives 
plenty of fresh air. Mr. West is said to 
have been offered $50,000 for his invention. 
The glass works in Spring City, Pa., are 
substituting colored girls for white boys. 
They are paying the girls as high as two 
dollars per day where the boys formerly 
employed received seventy-five cents per day. 
In Harlem, New York City, Mrs. Emma 
J. Murray has opened a department store. 
In conjunction with it she will also operate 
a hairdressing and beauty department. 
George M. Johnson, in Pittsburgh, Pa., 
has invented a car caging device for all 
kinds of mine shafts. 
Pueblo, Colo., has over 100 manufacturing plants representing thirty different lines 
of industry, giving employment to several 
thousand colored men. 
One hundred and nineteen Portuguese 
Negroes from the Cape Verde Islands are 
held at the Immigration Station in New 
Bedford, Mass., under the literacy clause in 
the immigration law. They probably will 
be deported. 
Fifteen colored women have been employed at the Ivorydale roundhouse of the 
Cincinnati, Hamilton and Dayton Railroad 
as wipers of engines. 
Colored women in Cleveland, Ohio, have 
been employed as car cleaners on the Big 
Four Railroad in place of colored men who 
struck for higher wages. 
The J. B. Key Oil, Gas and Mining Company has been organized by Negroes in 
Okmulgee, Okla., with a capital stock of 
$1,000,000, and J. B. Key, a wealthy Negro 
business man, as president and general manager. It is planned to consolidate all the 
colored oil companies in Oklahoma into this 
firm. 
0 June 30, 1012, there were 4,463 Negro 
Postal Savings depositors in the United 
States with $189,432 deposited. Following 
are geographic division statistics: 
New England 161 $3,640 
Middle Atlantic 881 30,027 
East North Central... . 580 28,992 
West North Central 392 19,906 
South Atlantic 1,124 43,263 
597 23,571 
West South Central 481 19,850 
130 12,528 
117 7,655 
MEETINGS . 
THE 10th annual session of the Negro 
State Medical and Pharmaceutical 
Association met in Guthrie, Okla., for a 
three-day session. The Mayor of the city, 
John R. Hogan, welcomed the delegates. 
Dr. Mary F. Waring represented the National Association of Colored Women at the 
meeting of the National Council of Women 
held in Chicago, May 10 and 11, at Hotel 
Congress. 
More than 100 Negro delegates representing 15 states were present at the initial 
session in Fort Worth, Tex., of the Tenth 
National Sunday School Convention of the 
Colored Cumberland Presbyterian Church. 
A centennial meeting of the Frederick 
Douglass Campaign Committee was held 
May 17 in Brooklyn, N. Y. Many prominent 
colored citizens lent their names as patrons. 
The Rev. Geo. Frazier Miller delivered the 
address. 
The 4th annual convention of the National 
Alliance of Postal Employees will be held 
in Atlanta, Ga., July 11. 
The National Association of Teachers in 
Colored Schools will assemble in New Orleans, July 25, for its thirteenth annual 
session. 
The 19th annual session of the Medical 
Society of Negro Physicians, Pharmacists 
and Dentists of Kentucky met in Winchester May 9 and 10. Dr. P. M. Flack, of 
Louisville, presided. 
The Southern Sociological Congress will 
be held at Blue Ridge, N. C , July 30 to 
August 3. 
The golden jubilee of the Independent 
Order of St. Luke will be celebrated August 
21-23 in Richmond, Va. 
The West Virginia State Federation of 
Colored Women's Clubs met in its tenth annual session with the Woman's Improvement League at Charleston, May 25 and 26. 
A measure providing for defective children 
was discussed; a telegram co-operating with 144 TH E CRISIS 
Nation-wide Prohibition was sent to President Wilson; and Mrs. B. J. Tyler was elected to represent the federation at the meeting 
of the National Defense Council. 
The 50th annual session of the Iowa State 
Federation was held in Ottumwa, May 21-23. 
A portrait of the late Booker T. Washington, 
painted by H. 0 . Tanner, was unveiled. The 
picture will be placed in the historical building of the State at Ottumwa. 
The Delaware State Federation has held 
its first annual session. In Indianapolis a 
four days' session was held during May, representing GO clubs and 800 women, with one 
hundred delegates. 
The 61st annual conference of the British 
Methodist Episcopal Church of Canada will 
assemble at the local church, St. Catherines, 
Ontario, June 26. 
The first annual meeting of the Volunteer 
State Funeral Directors and Embalmers' 
Association conducted a two days' session 
in Nashville, Tenn., and re-elected E. P. 
Taylor as president. 
TH E CHURCH . 
TH E first Negro suffragan bishop in the 
United States was elected by the 
Episcopal Council of the Diocese of Arkansas, May 11. He is Archdeacon J. A. Russell, of Lawrenceville, Va. 
The vestry of All Saints Church, St. 
Louis, Mo., has extended " unanimous call to 
Rev. Shelton H. Bishop, of St. Philip's, 
Pittsburg, Pa., to become rector, succeeding 
the late Rev. C. M. C. Mason. Rev. Bishop 
is a son of Rev. Hutchins C. Bishop, rector 
of St. Philip's Church, New York City, and 
a nephew of the late Rev. Mason. 
John McCormick, the Irish tenor, donated 
a victrola to the St. Benedict Colored 
Church fair in New York City. The net 
receipts of the fair amounted to over $600. 
The Baptist Jubilee will be held at 
Lynchburg, Va., July 10-15, in celebration 
of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Virginia 
Baptist State Convention. 
The Laymen's Missionary Movement of 
the United States and Canada recently 
closed its first convention for colored men 
in Norfolk, Va. Six hundred and forty-eight 
men were registered and twenty-six 
churches represented. 
PERSONAL. 
Ex-Queen Ranavalova of Madagascar is 
dead. . 
Henry T. Burleigh and J. Rosamond 
Johnson received honorary degrees of Master of Arts at the Atlanta University commencement. 
The will of Frank H. Keys, carriage 
manufacturer of Council Bluffs, Iowa, bequeaths $50,000 to Tuskegee Institute and 
$400,000 to the improvement of industrial 
conditions of colored people of the South. 
James R. Harris, Sr., has completed forty 
years' service in the mailing division of the 
local post office in Louisville, Ky. 
The marriage of Miss Emma Ethlynde 
Bibb to Harry H. Pace took place June 20 
in Atlanta, Ga. 
A complimentary reception and luncheon 
was given in Odd Fellows' Hall, Washington, D. C , June 2, in honor of the eightieth 
birthday of former Governor P. B. S. Pinchback of Louisiana. A silver loving cup 
was presented from New Orleans. 
The Hon. Herbert F. Wright, American 
Consul at Porto Cabello, Venezuela, has returned to his home at Marshalltown, Iowa. 
The Rev. John Albert Williams, colored 
priest of the Church of St. Philip the Deacon 
in Omaha, was re-elected secretary of the 
Diocese of Nebraska at the recent annual 
church council. 
The necrology for the month includes 
Abel P. Caldwell, editor of the Courant, 
Philadelphia; Mrs. Jessie Taylor Johnson 
at Chicago, Ill., mother of Fenton Johnson, 
the poet; William P. Hall, in Philadelphia, 
Pa., who was a poultry dealer in the Reading Terminal Market for many years; William H. Hearn, a former employee in the 
Treasury Department at Washington, D. C ; 
Will H. Dixon, the noted song writer, at 
Chicago, Ill.; Ruth McEnery Stuart, of 
Louisiana, author of dialect tales of the 
Negro; Joseph B. Foraker, former U. S. 
Senator from Ohio, who saved the reputaton and standing of the five companies of the 
25th Infantry, discharged without trial by 
President Roosevelt; Mrs. Helen Letitia 
Fields, in San Francisco, mother of Dr. 
William H. Fields, and known as "Grandma 
Fields." At New Orleans, La., a squad of 
soldiers from the United States barracks, 
near Chalmette, attended the funeral of 
Colonel F. C. Antoine, who at his death 
was assistant adjutant and quartermaster 
general of the Department of Louisiana 
and Mississippi, G. A. R.; Col. Simon C. 
Collins, a Civil Wa r veteran, who enlisted 
in the 6th Regiment of Colored Volunteers 
in Philadelphia is dead; the funeral of the TH E HORIZO N 145 
Rev. Thomas Henry Shorts, for thirty years 
pastor of Queen Street Baptist Church, 
Hampton, Va., was attended by thousands 
of men and women from all sections of the 
State; Dr. W. F. Montgomery, a practising 
physician at Sophia, W. Va., and a graduate of Atlanta University is dead. 
Dr. H. L. Morehouse, for many years 
secretary of the American Baptist Home 
Mission Society of New York, is dead. He 
was one of the foremost Baptists of the 
country and will be especially missed among 
the colored people of the South. 
POLITICS. 
PROF. A. L. BRITWELL, former principal of Greendale School, has announced his candidacy for Magistrate for 
the Fourth District, Lexington, Ky. 
Dr. John Hopkins has been re-elected 
alderman of the Sixth Ward at Wilmington, 
Del. 
Dr. Alfred P. Russell, a colored man, ran 
well for the Massachusetts Constitutional 
Convention, though he lost, as did Moorfield Storey. Hon. A. S. Pillsbury was 
elected. 
GHETTO . 
MISS BESSIE EASLE Y has been 
awarded $100 for discrimination in 
the Automat lunchrooms in New York City. 
Frank R. Stewart, a colored attorney of 
Pittsburg, has succeeded in having all of the 
colored men discharged who were arrested 
wholesale sometime ago for killing a grocer. 
The police at the time arrested 200 colored 
men and sent 70 of them to the workhouse. 
A foreman of a chain gang in Chattanooga, Tenn., has been exonerated for the 
killing of a 15-year-old colored boy in cold 
blood. The boy was shot through the back. 
The Lube Martin case has been re-opened 
by the Kentucky Court of Appeals. Gen. 
B. H. Young, an ex-Confederate soldier, is 
defending the prisoner. 
The Superior Court of Fulton County, 
Ga., after two years, has declared that colored Shriners have no legal right to exist. 
They are enjoined from using rituals and 
wearing pins of the same design as those 
used by the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine 
throughout the United States. The colored 
Shriners are determined to fight the case 
to the U. S. Supreme Court. 
R. C. Rogers, a Negro in Angola, Ind., 
has been given a judgment o f one dollar 
against the proprietor of the Angola Theatre, who ejected him from a main floorseat he was occupying in the theatre. 
Residents of Lauraville, near Baltimore, 
Md., protested against the location of Morgan College on the old Ivy Mills property 
on the Hillen Road. Morgan College is now 
located in a strictly white neighborhood and 
has been since 1880. Not only has no friction been in evidence on account of its location, but property values have not depreciated. Arrangements for the new location 
have been completed. 
Refusal of Southern students at the Lake 
Forest Academy to compete against a colored athlete, Kelly, led to the calling off of 
the track meet between that institution and 
the New Trier Township High School in 
Cook County, Ill. 
In Savannah, Ga., a colored woman has, 
after three years, gained $1,800 from the 
estate of her white father. 
Five Negroes have been arrested in Georgia for publishing doggerel poetry about 
leaving the South. 
Sam Conley, who last year killed a man 
who beat his mother and whose mother was 
afterward lynched, has been tried in Georgia and sentenced to 12 years in the penitentiary for voluntary manslaughter. A 
new trial has been asked. 
A Cleveland auto company refused to 
carry Mrs. Josephine H. Miner. She sued 
the company through her attorney, C. S. 
Sutton, and recovered a verdict of $125. 
A riot between white and Negro workingmen has taken place in East St. Louis. It 
is said that the Negroes were brought in as 
strike breakers in the packing plants and 
other industrial establishments. The militia 
was called out and order assured after 1,500 
or more colored men had been driven from 
the city. 
Difficulties which had something of the 
aspect of the racial riot have taken place 
in San Juan Hill District, New York, and 
in Harlem. 
The following lynchings have taken place 
since our last record : 
May 7, Phoenix, Ariz., Starr Daley, 
lynched for murder. 
May 11, Shreveport, La., Henry Brooks, 
shot for intimacy with a white woman. 
May 20, Fulton, Ky., Lawrence Dempsey, 
hanged for wounding a railroad watchman. 
May 22, Memphis, Tenn., Ell Persons, 
burned for alleged rape and murder. 146 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Completes Your Life-Line 
No Matter Where You Live 
So many times in our advertisement you have seen this phrase "No Matter 
Where You Live W e Can Protect You. " That is literally and actually true. 
Our policies arc so broad and devoid of technicalities that they comply with the 
most rigid requirements for life insurance companies. Therefore, if you went 
North or if you went East or West, no matter where you went or where you 
live, Standard Life can protect yon. 
Every mail brings us changes of addresses of our policyholders who moved 
from the South to Pennsylvania or New Jersey or Illinois or Michigan or Ohio 
or other northern points, and who are sending their premiums back to us keeping their policies in force. 
The protection of Standard Life Insurance Company is the most valuable 
thing you left behind. Your houses may become vacant, your farms remain 
untilled, your investments may dwindle away, but the one things that is on the 
job day and night and never lets go its watchful care over you for even one 
moment as long as the premiums are paid and that protects you no matter where 
you live is your Standard Life Policy. We want you to realize that fact and 
we w
:
ant you to realize how important it is that when your premium falls due 
that you send it in on time, together with your new address, so that this protection which you have may not cease even for one moment. 
These are times for unusual prosperity for some of us and some of our 
incomes arc far more now than they have ever been before. At the same time 
there is another larger element who have not fared so well, and the cost of even 
a bare existence is greater now than it has ever been before. No one can tell 
just how long such a condition is going to last. The thing to do is to make 
definite careful provision for the future. 
Whenever a life insurance policy lapses, it is not the person whose life is 
insured who takes the risk, but the risk is carried by the beneficiary under your 
policy. In times like these you do not want to add to the risk which must be 
carried by your wife or daughter or your mother or your sister. Hold on to 
your life insurance no matter whatever else you may let go. 
Send us your new address and proper notices will come to you on time. It 
is essential that we have your address after you have changed it or you might 
not receive notice and you might overlook paying your premium. Fill out the 
attached coupon and send it to us today if you have changed your address and 
we will make proper changes on our records. 
Name 
Old Address: No Street City State 
New Address: No Street City State 
Policy No 
STANDAR D LIFE INSURANC E CO . 
Home Office: 200 Auburn Ave., Atlanta, Georgia 
OVER FOUR MILLIONS INSURANCE IN FORCE 
HEMAN E. PERRY, President HARRY H. PACE, Sec-Treasurer 
Mention The Crisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 147 
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 
(.Continued from page 110) 
Lincoln Institute 
Founded by Negro soldiers. Supported by the State of Missouri. For 
both men and women. Faculty of 34 
from the best schools and colleges of 
the country. College Department, offering four years' course with degree 
Bachelor of Arts; Normal Department, 
offering two years' course preceded by 
four years of Standard High School 
work, and leading to the Degree Bachelor of Pedagogy. College preparatory 
course. Music, art, domestic science, 
elocution, agriculture, blacksmithing, 
machinery, electric engineering, carpentry, cabinet making, automobile repairing and construction, sewing, art 
needlework, basketry, raffia, drawing 
and fine arts. Normal diploma is a life 
certificate to teach in the public schools 
of Missouri. One of the best schools 
in the country for students of limited 
means. Catalog on request. 
Benjamin Franklin Allen 
President 
Jefferson City, Missouri 
"In Free Kansas." 
WESTERN UNIVERSITY 
and 
STATE INDUSTRIAL DEPARTMENT 
QUINDARO , KANSA S 
Ideally located with city advantages and country 
surroundings. 
A good wholesome atmosphere for the growing 
students. Personal interest of teacher in student. 
Complete equipment to give best practical training. 
MILITAR Y DISCIPLINE. 
Departments: Normal, Commercial, Theological, Industrial, Music. 
TEEM S SEASONABLE . STRONG FACULTY . 
Writ e for Catalog. 
22nd Annual Session opens Sept. 10, 1917. 
Dr . K . T. Sealing, President. 
MATHE R INDUSTRIA L SCHOOL 
Beaufort, S. C. 
SEMI-CENTENNIAL 
Beautifully located on the water front. 
Academic, Domestic Science and Bible 
Courses. The object of the institution is 
the development of Christian womanhood 
and preparation of students as teachers, 
dressmakers, milliners and homemakers. 
WALDEN COLLEGE 
Nashville, Tenn. 
A classical and industrial college of the 
first rank, 
OUR AI M 
Christian character, loyal citizenship and 
education for service, 
LITERAR Y COURSES 
College, normal, preparatory, musical, 
domestic science and art. Full commercial 
and business courses. A good library and 
reading room, a strong faculty, a beautiful 
campus, good board, expenses low. clean 
athletics. Graduates from the normal course 
receive State certificates without examination. 
School Opens September 27th 
Electric lights and furnac e licit in all the 
buildings. Th e new Scienc e Hall for recitation purpose s has sixteen rooms, steam beat, 
electric lights and all moder n conveniences. 
Come to Walde n this fall and bring one 
student with you. 
For information write the President, 
E. A . WHIT E 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTE D 
All Races 
Prepar e in the best schoo l o f its kind in the State 
Subjects 
Shorthand, Typewriting , Bookkeeping , English, Penmanship, Civil Servic e Training, and SPANISH . 
COMMERCIA L CLAS S 
Leno x Communit y Center—a t 
PUBLIC SCHOOL 89 
Lenox Avenue and 135th St., Ne w Yor k City. 
Open All Year—Four Evenings Weekly. 
Fitz W . Mottley, President. 
MME. BRIDGES' SCHOOL OF 
Frenc h Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailorin g and Millinery. 
Bridges System. 
Special Course s in Designing, Copying , Draping, 
Making , Trimming , Finishing, Cutting and Fitting. 
Special reduction in tuition given to students entering in group s o f three or mor e or to on e student 
taking two or mor e consecutiv e courses. 
Individua l Instruction. A Bridge s Diploma means 
something to you . Dormitor y fo r students. 
4221 Oakenwal d Ave . Chicago, Ill, 
Stenography Typewriting Book-keeping 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
1. Short Courses in Typewriting 
2. Shorthand made as easy as A . B. C. 
3. Brief Courses in Practical Book-keeping 
W e typewrite Letters, Postal Cards, Wills; fill in 
Deeds and multigraph Circular Letters cheap. 
EDWAR D T . DUNCAN , President 
1227 SO. 17TH STREET, PHILADELPHIA , PA, 
ROLAND W. HAYES, Tenor 
Recitals Concerts Oratori o Oper a 
"An unusually good voice. The natural 
quality is beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr. Hayes sings freely and with good 
taste."—Philip Hale, in the Boston Herald. 
" A voice of unusual sweetness arid calibre.' 
—Chattanooga Times. 
Address: 3 WARWIC K ST. . BOSTON . MASS . 
Mention The Crisis 148 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
A Christian Duty 
compels you to provide for your family and dependents. Then why not 
provide for a perpetual income during sickness and accidental injuries? Wil l 
you consider your duty properly discharged if you make provision only 
down to death, and leave the widow and those dear little orphans penniless 
after your death? It is the privilege of every man and a duty every man 
owes himself and family to carry sufficient insurance to provide the necessities of life during illness, and to pay off the expenses and the mortgage 
on the home after death. 
Wh y would a man provide well for his wife and children during his life 
and leave them beggars after his death? A good Insurance Company is next 
to the Church; a SOUTHER N AI D SOCIET Y policy is better than a bank 
account; you draw from the bank your deposit plus interest; you draw from 
SOUTHER N AI D SOCIETY , not what you put in, but as long as you are sick 
and an undiminished death claim paid to the family after death. Some 
have put in $50.0 0 and drawn out $500.00 . Wh y not act today ? Tomor ­
row you may not be able to pass the examination for a good policy in a 
reliable Insurance Company. 
Southern Aid Society of Virginia, Inc. 
HOM E OFFICE: 52 7 N. 2nd St., Richmond, Va . 
District offices and agencies in all the principal cities of the State. 
INSURES AGAINS T SICKNESS, ACCIDEN T AN D DEATH . 
A . D. PRICE, President. THOS . M. CRUMP , Secretary. 
B. L. JORDAN , Asst. Secretary. 
guuiuiliiiuiuiiiuiii iiiiiiiiiii ii i 111 i ii 11:11111 111 1 inn 11 111 11 urn 1 in 1 mini mini mi mil 1111 11 iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiii 
Mention The Crisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 149 
BOOKS BY PROMINENT NEGROES 
Issued by The Neale Publishing Company, New York, N. Y. 
The American Cavalryman. By Henry F. Downing 
Mr . Downing perhaps has had a more varied career 
than any other living Negro from the Civil Wa r to 
the war between the United States and Germany. 
He was the first colored man to represent the United 
States at a city of a white government, by appointment of President Cleveland. He introduced Coleridge-Taylor to the London Public. He persuaded 
Liberia to open its doors to foreign capital. Merely 
to recount his activities in public life of the past 
fifty years would take a volume. But his highest 
renown has been won as a man of letters, and this 
is a romance of Liberia—a romance of a very high 
order, written by the only man who could have written it. $1.50 by mail. 
Haiti: He r History and He r Detractors 
By J. N. Leger 
M . Leger, formerly represented Haiti as Minister 
to the United States, and later represented Haiti 
as a member of the Peace Conference, at The 
Hague. In Europe as well as in America he is regarded as one of the ablest men of his race. Two 
editions: one in English and one in French. Illustrated. Each edition $3.20 by mail. 
The Facts of Reconstruction By John R. Lynch 
Major Lynch, an officer of the United States Army, 
lived through Reconstruction, and took a lively 
part therein. H e served as a Member of Congress, 
later became Fourth Auditor of the Treasury, and 
by far the greater part of his adult life has been 
passed in public service. The late Sen. Hoar in his 
"Autobiography" referred to Major Lynch in high 
terms. Illustrated. Fourth thousand. $1.65 by mail. 
Redde r Blood By William M. Ashby 
Prof. Ashby was recently graduated from Yale. This 
novel, his first book, is a valuable contribution to 
the literature of his race. $1.00 by mail. 
Ethiopia By Clayton Adams 
Mr . Adams writes of the Land of Promise in this 
powerful novel,—the adjective is used deliberately. 
The ancient Kingdom of Ethiopia has passed away, 
but its name still lives, not only as the proper 
appellation of the Negro race, but also figuratively, 
principally to designate the invisible kingdom of native Africans and their descendants. $1.00 by mail. 
Rac e Adjustment By Kelly Miller 
Prof. Miller, Dean of the College of Arts and 
Sciences, Howard University, is easily in the 
first rank of Negro teachers, writers, orators, and 
leaders, and is so recognized on both sides of the 
Atlantic. This volume comprises his essays on the 
Negro in America that won for him fame as a man 
of letters when they were first published periodically. 
Third edition. $2.15 by mail. 
Out of the Hous e of Bondage By Kelly Miller 
This volume by Dean Miller contains the essays that 
he had written up to the time of its publication that 
were not included in his earlier volume, "Race Adjustment," and have been written since the earlier 
volume was published. Already the sale of this new 
volume has been large. $1.65 by mail. 
Negro Culture in West Africa By George W . Ellis 
Mr . Ellis was for eight years Secretary of the 
United States Legation in Liberia. Since his 
return to America, he has written extensively on the 
Negro and his problems, and ' as taken a prominent 
place among the leaders of his race. In many respects this latest book of his is the most important 
work on the Negro yet published,—the Negro in 
Africa. Illustrated. $2.15 by mail. 
Racial Adjustments in the Methodist Episcopal 
Church By John H. Reed 
The Rev. Dr. Reed, D.D. , K.C. , writes authoritatively on the subject matter of his book. Introduction by Adna B. Leonard, D.D. , LL.D . $1.60 
by mail. 
The Black Man's Burden 
By William H. Holtzclaw 
Prof. Holtzclaw is the founder and the principal of 
the Utica Normal and Industrial Institute for the 
Training of Colored Young Men and Young Women, 
already one of the largest educational institutions in 
the South. Introduction by the late Booker T. 
Washington. Third thousand. $1.00 by mail. 
Negro Tales By Joseph S. Cotter 
Prof. Cotter is the principal of one of the largest 
schools for Negroes in the South. Like Prof. 
Ashby and Mr . Adams, Prof. Cotter reveals Negro 
life in imaginative prose fiction,—a branch of literature to which Negro authors should give greater attention. $1.00 by mail. 
The Voice of Mizriam By John Walter Paisley 
Prof. Paisley, for many years a professor of 
English Literature, has assembled in this volume 
his own poems. The book deserves a place on the 
library shelf where Dunbar's fine poems are to be 
found. $1.25 by mail. 
The New Negro By William Pickens 
Dean Pickens, Dean of Morgan College, was graduated from Yale in the highest grade of his class. 
There he won the Phi Beta Kappa Key and the 
Ten Eyck Oration. In this book, the full title of 
which is "The New Negro; His Political, Civil, and 
Mental Status," he discusses with great force and 
clarity nearly all the pressing political problems that 
now confront his race. $1.60 by mail. 
The Ke y By James S. Stemons 
Mr . Stemons is the Field Secretary of the Joint 
Organization for Equalizing Industrial Opportunities and the League of Civic and Political Reform. He holds this work to be what its full title 
implies: "The Key ; or, a Tangible Solution of the 
Negro Problem." Undoubtedly the work is a powerful study of the Negro and his problems. $1.00 by 
mail. 
Order through 
THE NEALE PUBLISHING CO., 440 Fourth Avenue New York City or THE CRISIS, 70 fifth Aven
Mentio n The Crisis 150 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
19 Monographs Sold Separately 
ADDRESS 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY :> ATLANTA. GA. 
Th e Curse of Rac e Prejudic e 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
_ An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. 'Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street •:• New York, N. Y. 
$25.OO PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War" combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street NEW YORK 
TEACHERS A live agency furnishes the 
connecting medium in a business way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia. Illinois, Indiana, Kansas. Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi. Missouri, New York, North Carolina. Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West 
Virginia. 
THE MUTUAL TEACHERS' AGENCY 
1408 New York Avenue Washington, D. C. 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
Summe r Schoo l opene d Jun e 7, 1917, and 
will clos e August 30, 1917. Shorthand , typewriting, bookkeeping , commercia l law and 
business correspondence . In on e mont h ou r 
students operat e typewriters blindfolded . In 
eight month s apt students can pass the Civil 
Servic e Examinatio n for stenographers with 
ease. Class, individua l or privat e instruction. 
WRITE, 
EDWAR D T. DUNCA N 
1227 S. 17th St Philadelphia , Pa. 
The Journal of 
Negro History 
Published Quarterly 
100 Pages 
Edited by CARTE R G . WOODSO N 
THE JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY is 
the official organ, of the Association for the 
Study of Negro Life and History, which is 
now trying not to promote an isolated research into the history of the black race but 
to show how civilization has been influenced 
by contact with the people of color. This 
publication aims to popularize the movement 
to save and make available the scattered historical materials bearing on the Negro. In 
it appear scholarly articles and valuable documents giving information generally unknown. 
It is concerned with facts, not with opinions. 
Subscription price, $1,00 per year. Foreign 
subscriptions, 25 cents extra. Single numbers, 25 cents; 30 cents by mail. 
Checks should be made payable to THE 
JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY and 
addressed to 
CARTER G. WOODSON 
1216 You St., N. W. Washington, D. C. 
University Literary Bureau 
Manuscript Criticized 
and Revised 
Poems, Short Stories, Novels, Scenarios, 
Magazine and Press Articles, Sermons and 
Addresses. 
Advice on Publication 
• Correspondence Solicited 
Strictly Confidential 
Montgomery Gregory Alain Leroy Lock 
ADDRESS: Box 102, Howard University, 
Washington, D. C. 
Correct Calling Cards 
POPULA R STYLE S FO R LADIE S O R GENTLEMEN . 
100 FO R SO CENT S O R 5 0 FO R 3 0 CENTS . N O 
EXTR A CHARG E FO R ADDRESS . AL L ORDER S 
FILLE D PROMPTLY . ATTRACTIV E PROPOSITIO N 
FO R AGENTS . WRIT E FO R SAMPLE S AN D TERM S 
THE HOUSE OF CHOWNING 
INDIANAPOLIS . INDIAN A 
AGENT S WANTE D 
$18 to $45 P e r wee k made selling PROF. KELLY MILLER'S 
new PROGRESS OF COLORED PEOPLE. Teachers, students, male or female, ministers, widows, married women, anyone with spare time, can 
make $1 per hour. Everybody buys, it's easy to sell. Write for terms and outfit at once, 
act today. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO., 523 Ninth St. 
Mentio n Tu n CRISI S 
WASHINGTON , D. C. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 151 
Do You want to Read a Live, Red-Blooded Story—a Story with a Punch in It? 
then, d o not fail to get "FRO M SUPERMA N TO MAN " by J. A . Rogers. 
Th e most striking vindication o f the Negr o ever penned. Brilliant arguments backed by an 
invincibl e array o f the world's greatest thinkers --Shakespeare— Schopenhaver— Darwin — Huxley — 
Finot. Anti-Negr o harangue -outangs overwhelme d with ridicule . Th e case against the Negr o laughed 
ou t o f court. All in an easy, breezy style you'll enjoy . 
Prof. Georg e B. Foster, University o f Chicago : " A stirring story, faithful to truth and helpful 
to a better understandin g and feeling. " 
W. N . C. Carlton, Esq., Librarian, Newberr y Library, Chicag o (in a letter to the author). "I 
shall place you r boo k in the permanent collectio n o f the Librar y wher e present day and futur e 
students o f the history o f you r race will find in it a most significant document. " 
Th e Brookly n Daily Eagle: "Fro m Superman to Ma n is a vindication o f the America n Negro. " 
Attorne y Charle s Scrutchin, Bemidji, Minnesota : " A thoughtful, courageou s book. " 
$1.00 (cloth bound) By Mail $1.10 
Additional agents wanted— Dept. "A, " Haye s Book Store. 
3640 S. State St., Chicago, Ill. 
INVESTTGAT E 
"TheSingleTax: What it is." - George 
The Single Tax and the Farmer."-Shearman 
"The Single Tax and the Business man.-Rusby 
All three booklets & The Public, the paper with the 
Single Tax point of view. 1 0 week s 25c . 
THE PUBLIC 122 E 37th St. New York 
Single 
Tax. 
TH E STANDAR D TEACHERS ' AGENCY , Est. 1897. 
1011 Ne w Yor k Avenue, Washington, D. C. 
SITUATIONS WANTED—DOMESTIC SCIENCE, BIOLOGY, MUSIC, ACADEMIC WORK (COLLEGE. SEMINARY, GRADED SCHOOL)—GRADUATES. 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Will Hel p Yo u Get A Better Payin g Position . 
REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TERM S 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 22, Wilberforce , O. 
Books? See the Selected List on 
the Back Cover 
NATURA L HAI R WIG S 
Direct from the Manufacturer 
My Business is selling fine quality Human Hair Goods direct to the wearer by mail. 
Every wig is hand made by skilful workers, using only the best of materials and should 
not be confused with machine made goods which are frequently advertised at lower prices. 
MADE TO YOUR OWN MEASUREMENTS 
No. 4 WIG 
This wig is parted from 
the cente r in front o f 
forehea d all the way 
back to nape o f neck 
and is also parted across 
the head from ear to ear. 
This wig can also be 
made with the part in 
front commencin g at 
either the right or left 
side if so desired, for 
which there is n o extra 
charge . Whe n this is 
not mentione d the wig 
wil l b e 
mad e with 
the cente r 
Wi g No. 4 part. 
FRE E — Illustrated Catalogue with instructions for ordering sent on request. 
SATISFACTION GUARANTEED—All goods as represented or money refunded. 
$14. 
Short Curly Wig 
This wig is mad e o f 
shorter hair than the 
usual wigs, and dresses 
very handsomely . It 
has a short part in front 
which I can make either 
in the center, on the 
right or the left side. 
Wi g is dressed in rolled 
curls. 
-My experienc e has 
proven that for a Short 
Curly win, this 
style makes up 
nice r than any 
other style. $9. Wi g No. 42 
ALEX. MARKS, P. 0. Box 226, Station "A", New York City 
MENTION THE CRISIS 152 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Mrs. M. Watson Rudd 
of the 
Ideal Exclusive Parlors 
announces a Special Course in the 
Art of Beauty Culture 
during the summer months. 
This course is planned with special reference 
to teachers and students contemplating a summer in New York City. As the size of the 
class is limited prospective students should 
apply early. 
Address Mrs. M. Watso n Rudd, 47 Wes t 42d 
Street, Ne w Yor k City. 
Red Rose Face Powder 
Made in all shades to suit your complexion; heals and beautifies. Price 
50c. Sample size 20c. 
Red Rose Cold Cream 
For dry faces. Price 50c and 25c. 
Red Rose Vanishing Cream 
For oily faces. Price 50c and 25c. 
Red Rose Beauty Cream 
For use at night; a real skin food 
that cleanses, softens and preserves. 
Price 75c and 50c. 
All made of the best materials. 
FLORESSENCE MFG. CO., 
239 West 63d St., New York City 
J. R. WIGGINS , Manager. 
SCHOOL OF HAIRDRESSIN G 
Full course including hair manufacturing and 
wig making—$25.oo. 
Diplomas Given. 
G. RODGERS, successor to Mme. C. Price, 
169 West 131st St., New York City. 
The SLAUGHTER SYSTEM introducing 
LLYRA'S HAIR BEAUTIF1ER 
A Guarantee d Foo d Preparatio n fo r 
th e Hair. Pric e 5 0 cents pe r box . 
Agents Wanted . System taught b y Mail or at College . 
Mrs. E. Slaughter Gambl e 
3001 LAWTON AVENUE ST. LOUIS, MO. 
MURIEL'S 
SHOPPING 
SERVICE 
You r shoppin g done for yo u in 
Th e Greatest Market in Th e 
World b y Experts at No Extra 
Cost to you. 
W e will purchas e for yo u Any 
Article yo u wis h in Department, 
Retail or Wholesale Store , or any 
trade Agency , Distributor, or 
Manufacturer. 
Yo u ma y writ e plainly describing such articles or any other of 
your "Wants " and it will get the 
quickest possible attention at the 
very lowest cost to you, saving you 
man y dollars. 
When you have all information 
concerning such articles you desire 
to purchase, send money, express 
order or registered to cover entire 
cost. If there is a balance it will 
be refunded promptly. 
All package s will be shipped 
with express charge s "Collect " 
unless otherwis e requested. 
Referenc e furnished to any purchasers wheneve r desired. 
Address all communications to : 
MURIEL'S SHOPPING 
SERVICE 
2303 Seventh Ave., New York City 
Mentio n The Crisis THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 153 
If It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
We manufacture Lodge Regalia for every 
Fraternal Society. Cash or Installment 
Plan. Cheapest Badge House in the Country. Catalogue for your Society FREE . 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.J ONES. Pres. 
N. E. Cor. 8th &. Plum 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
Let the 
- 4 in 1 -
Coupon Plan 
Increas e 
You r Profits 
Mail Order Dealers 
Sell valuabl e Instructio n 
system s b y cu t pric e cou ­
po n unde r Mone y Bac k 
Guarantee . Bi g M argin . 
Smal l Sellin g Expense . 
Complet e Plan , Sampl e 
Coupon s an d B argai n 
Bulleti n sen t o n request. 
Mail Dealer's Coupon System: 
521 So. Dearborn Street, Chicago 
IF ANXIOUS 
To improve your hair and general appearance use Seeby's Quinade and 
Quinasoap. Sold by druggists at 25c. 
each or sent direct on receipt of price. 
For FRE E sample of Quinade and full 
particulars, write 
SEEBY DRUG CO. 
Dept. C , New York City. 
FREE STYLE BOOK —HAIR — 
T o Colore d Wome n 
We arc the largest manufacturers of Colored 
Women's Ha i r . Our 
latest book showing new styles in 
hair dressing Rent 
free. Every colored 
Woman should have 
one. We sell 
thousands of our 
hair and toilet articles. Satisfaction 
guarantee d 
or money back. 
We make the best 
solid Brass Combs, 
with extra heavy 
hack, fully guaranteed. Send money 
Orde r or stamps. 
MONEY RACK IF 
NOT SATISFACTORY. 80C. postpaid. 
POSTPAI D 89c. 
Hair nets. brushes, combs and 
'diet articles manufacturers' prices. 
Send two-cent stamp. 
Agents Wanted . Address as follows: 
HUMANI A HAI R COMPANY , 
181-187 Park Row. Address Dept. 3. New York City. 
Hand Made Natural Human Hair Wigs 
Transformations, 
Switches, Puffs, Plaits, 
Bangs, Coronet Braids, that 
can b*e combe d the same as 
your own hair. Human 
hair for sale by ounce or 
pound. Hair NETS . 
W E CARR Y TH E 
LARGES T STOCK IN 
ELECTRI C 
COMBS 
Mail Orders sent to any part of the U. S. or B. W . I. Send 2c for catalog. 
Mme. Baum's Hair Emporium, Inc., 486 Eighth Avenue, New York City 
Between 34th and 35th Streets 
Mention Th e Crisis 154 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Every agent can get an auto free no CONTEST 
$60AWEEK and this free automobile 
Tub 
Guaranteed 
For Ten Year s 
You—yourself—can positively make $60 a week and get a Free 
Auto . I want men, hustling, energetic, ambitious fellows, 
anxious to make money, who are willing to work with me. Not 
for me, but with. me. Are you that kind? I want you to advertise, Bell, and appoint local agents for the biggest, most 
sensational seller in 50 years—the ROBINSON FOLDIN G 
BATH TUB. Demonstrating- Tu b Furnished. Here's an 
absolutely new invention—nothing like it. Makes Instant 
appeal. Sells easily. Gives every home a modern up-to-date 
bathroom in any part of the house. No plumbing, no waterworks needed. Folds in small roll, handy as umbrella. Selfemptying, positively unleakable. Absolutely guaranteed for 
10 years. Remember, fully 70% of homes have no bath rooms. 
Sensational Sales Successes 
Two sales a day means $300 a month. Breeze, of Idaho, made 
$400 profit in 30 day a Rev. Otto Schulze, Mo., got $1600 to date. 
Burkholder, Mont., orders $1072 in 17 days. Hamlinton, of 
Wyo., made $60 first two days. Hundreds like that. Pleasant, 
permanent, fascinating work. Write a postcard. Let me 
write you a long letter. No experience needed, no capital. 
Your credit is good If you mean business. But you must be 
ambitious, you must want to make money. That's all. Write 
a postcard now. I want to pay you $60.00 every week, 
H. S. ROBINSON, PRES. THE ROBINSON CABINET MFG, CO. 
429 3 Factories Building TOLEDO , OHI O 
Open July 1st Closed September 10th 
TH E OCEA N HOUSE 
SEA ISLE CITY, N. J. 
This hotel is right on the ocea n front. It has 
wid e porches, large conservator y dinin g roo m wher e 
HOTEL WASHINGTON 
First-class service for First-class people 
3428 South Park Avenue , Chicago , Ill. 
T-(-«i,„„-. . /Central 104-W Telephones: | Mai n 61 
HARRY E. DAVIS 
Attorney-at-Law Notary Public 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohio 
GEORG E A. DOUGLA S 
Counselor•at-Law 
800 Broad Street, Globe Building, Rooms 603 and 604 
Office 'Phone, 3297 Mulberry . 
Residence 'Phone. 5277-M Market NEWARK, N. J 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS 
Attorney and Counsellor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROWN S. SMITH 
Attorney-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn 
Te l 5437 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
Attorney and Counsellor-at-Law 
34 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. P. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHEN 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
Telephone Central 3087 
HARRY M. COOPER 
Druggists' Specialties 
Chemicals, Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 
Write for Quotations 
Room 612, 58 W. Washington St. CHICAGO, ILL. 
DR. KAPLAN, Inc. 
OPTICIANS 
531 Lenox Ave., New York 
A "Womanly" Way 
To Remove Hair 
El-Rado sanitary 
liquid 
WASHE S TH E HAI R OFF B Y DISSOLVIN G it. 
WOME N FAIRLY REVEL I N THE COMFOR T AN D 
CLEANLINESS OF HAIR-FREE UNDERARMS . 
AFTE R USIN G EL-RAD O CHIFFON SLEEVES 
CA N B E WOR N WITHOU T an y DRES S SHIELDS. 
Entirely harmless. Money-back guarantee. 
At all toilet counters. 50c and $1.00 
If you prefer, we will fill your order by 
mail if you write enclosing stamps or coin. 
MME LEILA W. ROBINSON 110 W. 136th Street. NEW YORK 
WANTED 
Agents for THE CRISIS, Dignified 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
work 
Mention TH E CRISI S A Ne w Boo k BY Dr. D u Bois 
THE NEGRO 
B v W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS , autho r of "Souls of Blac k 
Folk, " "Quest of th e Silve r Fleece, " "Selec t Bibliograph y o f 
th e Negr o American, " etc . 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. He is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa, America, and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
256 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
At the low price of 60 cents net—By mail 66 cents 
Dr . D u Bois's ne w boo k is th e latest additio n t o a remarkabl e 
serie s of low-price d ne w book s wit h whic h everybod y shoul d be ­
com e acquainted . 
THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 
94 VOLUMES NOW READY 
Published by HENR Y HOL T & COMPANY , 3 4 West 33d Street, New York 
Is made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY , H. A . L. FISHER, W . T. BREWSTE R 
and J. ARTHU R THOMSON . 
Cloth bound , good paper , clear type , 256 pages per C±f\.- tvolume . Each complet e an d sold separately - - 60c. net 
POSTAGE EXTRA 
" A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 6o cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES: 
EVOLUTIO N By J. A . Thomson LATI N AMERIC A By W . R. Shepherd 
TH E FRENCH REVOLUTIO N VICTORIA N LITERATUR E 
By Hilaire Belloc By G. K. Chesterton 
ROM E By W . Ward e Fowler GERMAN Y O F TODA Y 
PROBLEM S O F PHILOSOPH Y By Charles Towe r 
By Bertrand Russell EURIPIDES AN D HIS AG E 
NAPOLEO N By H. A . L. Fisher By Gilbert Murray 
TH E CIVIL WA R By* F. L. Paxson UNEMPLOYMEN T By A . C. Pigou 
ORDER THROUGH THE PUBLISHERS OR THROUGH 
The CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
MENTION THE CRISIS THE CRISIS Book 
You can order through the CRISIS any book printed at 
the regular publisher's price. 
"The true University of these days is a collection of books."—Carlyle. 
A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
NATIVE LIFE IN SOUTH AFRICA. (Sol. J. Plaatje) $1.5 0 
HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF AN EX-COLORED MAN . (Anonymous). 1.20 
NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY. (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
TH E LIFE AND TIMES OF BOOKER T . WASHINGTON. (B. F . Riley). 1.50 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W. E . B. D U Bois) 1.25 
TH E WHITE MAN' S BURDEN. (T . Shirby Hodge) 1.00 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
HALF A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIFE AND WORK. (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 
JOHN BROWN. (W. E. B. Du Bois) 1.25 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINCE HALL AND HIS FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford).. . 1.00 
TH E HAITIAN REVOLUTION. (T . G. Steward) 1.25 
NEGRO CULTURE IN WEST AFRICA. (George W. Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO. (W. E. B. Du Bois) 6 0 
TH E EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R . Lynch) 1.50 
LIFE AND LETTERS OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR. (W. C. BerwickSayers) 2.2 5 
POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR , 2.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H. E. Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OUT OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
BOOKER T . WASHINGTON. (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman Beecher 
Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address, THE CRISIS, : : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 