The CRISIS 
SPRING 
NUMBE R 
APRIL, 1922 
15 CENTS A COPY 28th Annual Financial Statement 
of the 
Southern Aid Society of Virginia, Inc. (Condensed ) 
RECEIPT S 192 1 
Jan. i, 1921, Cash Balance Brought Forward $ 98,688.17 
Dec. 31 , 1921, Annual Income 781,392-32 
Gross Receipts for 1921 $880,080.49 
DISBURSEMENT S 
Dec. 31 , 1921, Total Paid Out (Including investments made during 
the year) $807,957.60 
Cash Balance Dec. 31 , 1921 $ 72,122.89 
ASSETS LIABILITIE S 
Cash Balance Dec. 31, 1921 $72,122.89 Capital Stock $30,000.00 
Real Estat e 362,266.71 Bills Payable (Unmatured notes on 
Real Estat e Mortgage s 86,082.48 Purchase Price of another Company's 
Federal, State and City Bonds 42,258.00 debit) 60,412.24 
Bills Receivable 12,774.29 Real Estat e Mortgage (Mortgage asFurniture and Fixtures 7,500.00 sumed on recent purchase) 4,000.00 
Inventories of Sundry Accts 5,210.81 Deposits of Employee s 17,400.63 
Ledger Accounts 7,510.00 
SURPLU S FUN D 468,892.31 
Total $588,215.18 Total $588,215.18 
CAPITA L AN D SURPLU S $ 498,892.31 
Total Amount of Claims Paid to Dec. 31 , 1921 2,511,894.92 
The unusual business depression of 1921 was a fiery trial to practically all 
businesses. The Industrial Sick Benefit Business was especially adversely affected 
by the lack of employment of thousands of policyholders. Some were forced to 
retire. Most of them experienced a great slump in the year's business. Only a few 
were able to show an increase in business over the former year. The Southern 
Aid Society of Va., Inc., was numbered among the favored few. 
The Society did its largest business during 1921. It served acceptably a 
larger number of people than ever before. It is now better prepared to protect 
its membership—through its New Liberal Policy—which provides for One Small 
Premium, protection against Sickness, Accident and Death. 
District Offices and Agencies located throughout the State of Virginia and the 
District of Columbia. 
Southern Aid Society of Virginia, Inc. 
Home Office: 527 N. Second Street 
RICHMOND, VA. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D PEOPLE, A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CONDUCTE D B Y W . E. BURGHARD T DU BOIS ; JESSIE REDMO N FAUSET, LITERAR Y EDITOR ; 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, BUSINES S MANAGER . 
Vol. 23-No . 6 APRIL, 1922 Whole No. 138 
Page 
COVE R 
"Spring." Drawing by Yolande Du Bois. 
OPINION 
Th e Worl d and Us; The Dye r Bill in the Senate; The Sterling-Towner 
Bill; Maria Baldwin; The Case of Samuel Moore ; The Spanish Fandango; 
Show Us, Missouri; Again Africa; The Demagog; Help 24 7 
TH E NEGR O BANK . Illustrated 25 3 
LE X TALIONIS . A Story. Robert W . Bagnall 25 4 
TH E PORTUGUES E NEGRO . Nicolas Santos-Pinto 25 9 
BRAWLEY' S "SOCIA L HISTOR Y OF TH E AMERICA N NEGRO " 26 0 
SON G O F TH E SON . A Poem. Jean Toome r 26 1 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D 
PEOPLE 26 2 
PRIDE. A Poem. Mortimer G. Mitchell 26 5 
TH E HORIZON . Illustrated 26 6 
TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 27 5 
TH E RIC H BEGGAR . A Poem. Mary Effie Lee Newsome 28 0 
THE MAY CRISIS 
The cover will be Albert Smith's fine painting of Rene Maran . Th e special articles will be on 
the late Bert Williams and on the leaders o f Negr o fraternities. 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTIO N TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
R FNFWAL S • The date o£ expiration of eack subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the lubscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
fTTANG E O F ADDRESS * The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accom 
panied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
-p^torerl as second class matte r Novembe r 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New 
York , under the Ac t of March 3, 1879. 244 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution fecli a juit -pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Trainimg Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Sciences The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
For farther information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manual Training & Industrial School LINCOLN UNIVERSITY 
FOR COLORED YOUTH 
Pioneer in Collegiate and BORDENTOWN , N . J. 
A high imtltutiea for the training el Miam i Theological Education youth. Excellent equipment, thorough lastruotlon. wholesome surroundings. Academic training far all Lincoln Men are Leaders in the various students. 
Courses In carpentry, airleulture and tradss lor boys. professions in Forty States. Including auto repairing. 
Courses In domestic selenee and domaatla art tor The College is ranked in Class I. by the girls. American Medical Association. A new' trades building, thoroughly equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and madernly 
equipped. Address; 
Term , reasonable. Join B. Kendall, D.D. , Lincoln TJnlvaralt-r, 
For Information address Cheater County, Penna. 
W . R . VALENTINE , Principal 
Wiley University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and Oklahoma State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University. University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented on its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1920 . Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M. W. DOG AN, President 
The Cheyney Training 
School for Teachers 
Cheyney, Pa. 
A Pennsylvania State Normal School offering. In addition 
to the regular Normal Course of two years, professional 
three year courses in Home Economics and Shop Work. A 
diploma from any of these courses makes a graduate 
eligible to teach in the public schools of Pennsylvania. 
A three-year High School Course is offered to all who 
have completed the eighth grammer grade. 
Next term begins September 18, 1922. 
For further particulars and catalog, write 
Leslie Plnckney Hill, Principal Cheyney, Pa. 
There Will Be No Summer School for 1922 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS
Atlanta University Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High School, 
Normal School and College. Special emphasis 
is laid upon the training of teachers. Students 
come from all parts of the South. Graduates 
have a fine record for successful work. 
For further information address 
President Edward T. Ware Atlanta, Ga. 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere . 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work:. 
Institution offers full courses in the following departments. College, Normal, Hig h 
School, Gramma r School, Domestic Science, 
Nurse Training and Industrial. 
Good water , steam heat, electric lights, 
natural drainage, splendid dormitories. Expenses very reasonable. 
Winte r Term Began December 7, 1921 
For catalog and other information address 1 
PRESIDENT J. KELLY GIFFEN Knoxvllle, Tenn. 
1870 CLAR K UNIVERSIT Y 1921 ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Over 100 acres of beautiful campus. Twelve buildings 
with new $150,000 administration building with modem 
chapel, gymnasium and laboratories ready for use In 
September. Strong faculty—Religious atmosphere—Athletics—Co-educational. Admission only by application. 
RE-ARRANGE D COURSE S O F STUD Y 
Junior High School—7th and Sth Grades and 1st and 
2nd years* High School Courses, with certificate. 
Junior College—3rd and 4th Year High School with 
Freshman and Sophomore years of College work, with 
Diploma. 
College—Four years above High School, or two years 
above Junior College Course, with degree of A.B. 
Domestic Science—Commerce—Normal— 
Pre-medical Course 
53rd year of nine months opened September 21. 1921. 
$150.00 per year pays tuition, board room and laundry. 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING , President 
The Florida Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahasee, Florida 
SIMMONS UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. Founded 1879. , . 
The only Institution In the State harln* for Its oWecl 
Collegiate Ministerial. Medical, and Legal training for Colto°ffi.nc.. Social Seme . Nurdn. and 
Music. Domestic Science. Mlaslonarr 
«orr«»°nd«nc. ««™* - Desrsea seTewd. 
President C . H . Parrlsh 
 ADVERTISER 246 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist Collega) 
ATLANTA, GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOHN HOPE, President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY CHARLOTTE . N . C . 
Blddle University, operated under the auspices of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Departments—High School, Arts and Sciences, Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course is the requirement for entrance to the first year 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the 
scientific, German is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class Is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first Is purely English, 
Greek and Hebrew are taught In the others. 
All students in the High School Dept. are required 
to take trades In the Industrial Dept. 
For further Information, address 
President H. L. MeCrerey, 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christion influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, High School, Normal, Commercial, Musical, ^Domestic Science, Sewing, 
Printing and Tailoring. 
For further information address 
JOHN H. LEWIS, President 
dlSHO P J, S. FLIPPER . Chairma n Truataa Board 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 246 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Howard University 
Washington, D. C. Founded by GENERA L 0. 0. HOWAR D 
J . STANLE Y DURKEE , A.M. , Ph.D., D.D., President 
EMMET T J . SCOTT , A.M. , LL.D. , Secretary-Treasurer 
COLLEGIATE AND PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS 
(Winte r Quarter January 3, 4, 1922 
REGISTRATIO N | Spring Quarter March 18, 20, 1922 
FOR CATALOG AND INFORMATION WRITE 
F. D. WILKINSON , Registrar 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y
Founded 1899 Incorporated 1904 
. BEREA N 
Manual Training and 
Industrial School (Non-Sectarian) 
S. College Ave. & N. 19th St. 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Winter Term Opening January 3, 1922 
DA Y AN D NIGH T SESSION S 
Write
1926
 for Bulletin to the
MATTHE W ANDER
 S. College Avenue,
 Principal 
SON , D.D. 
 Philadelphia, Fa. 
VIRGINIA UNION UNIVERSITY 
(Richmond , Va.) 
In addition to regular high school, college, pre­ medical and theological courses, now offers an espe­ cially arranged course In connection with the School of Social Work and Public Health of this city. This course will lead to a decree. For particulars address The President. 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincoln Hospital and Home 
New York, N.Y. 
 WASHINGTON , D. C. 
Talladega College 
Talladega, Alabama 
Founded in 1S67 for the Education of 
Negro Leaden 
Beautiful and Healthful Location. 
Literary, Scientific, Educational, Social Service, Theological, Musical, 
Business Administration, Journalism, 
Nurse Training Courses. 
High Standards of Christian Manhood and Womanhood. 
For further information address 
F. A. SUMNER, Presiden t 
R0GER WILLIAMS UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE 
Founded 1866 Location Ideal 
It offers courses in the Liberal Arts, Normal, Academic and Musical departments. 
For further information write 
SAMUE L A. OWEN , President 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND, LA. 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H. Society of Ne w York. Students 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkana s 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN, Prt.idtnt 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL An Episcopal boarding school for (Iris, under the 
direction of the sisters of St. Mary . Address: TH X 
618TER-IN-CHARGE, 6188 Germantown Avenue, 
Philadelphia. Pa. 
"JUST THE PLACE FOR YOUR GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla. Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational. 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEOD BETHUNF , - . Principal. 
Mention The Crisis THE CRISIS 
Vol. 23. No. 6 APRIL 1922 Whole No. 138 
Opinion of W. E. B. Du Bois 
THE WORLD AND US cratic trades unions of the American 
JAPAN won at Washington. Federation of Labor it has so long 
The Anglo-Saxon Entente been exploited itself that it cannot 
sought to drive a wedgebetween r.ow easily accomplis the two grea h uniont repre . ­
sentatives of the yellow race, but 
Japan foiled them. China and Japan 
stand nearer than ever before and 
the day is in sight when they will 
present an unbroken front to the aggressions of the whites. America 
posed as the friend of China but she 
was simply the friend of exploitation 
in China and she was out-witted both 
by Japan and England. 
The British Empire is yielding to 
the darker races, not because it wants 
to but because it must. The white 
races are split with hatred. The approaching entente between England 
and Germany is as yet abortive. 
France is openly catering to the darker races, both yellow and black. For 
the first time in history England is 
willing to give Egypt with its Negroid inhabitants the beginnings of 
political autonomy. She has granted something to India and must grant 
more. The colored West Indians are 
pounding on her doors. Black West 
Africa cannot long keep still. 
Everywhere effort is being made 
in America to make the wage laborer 
bear most of the burden of reduced 
prices. The coal barons seek to maintain their outrageous profits by the 
starvation of miners. Everywhere 
the pressure goes on and labor is impotent because through the aristoRussia is the most amazing and 
most hopeful phenomenon of the 
post-war period. She has been murdered, bullied, lied about and starved 
and yet she maintains her government, possesses her soul and is simply compelling the world to recognize 
her right to freedom even if that freedom involves the industrial reconstruction of her society. 
France is incurring the condemnation of the world largely because 
of her attitude towards Negroes. She 
paid in blood, destruction and cash 
more than any other people on earth 
in order to smash the German military machine. She is now asked to 
put her trust in England and America rather than in Africa for regeneration and unless she does she is 
threatened. But threats work two 
ways. 
There is a new pope in Rome, an 
11th Pius, succeeding the war pope 
Benedict XV as the 260th successor 
of St. Peter. He is undoubtedly going to come to better understanding 
with Italy. But the question that 
concerns us is whether or not he is 
going to continue the catering of the 
Holy See to the wealth of American 
Catholics; will he continue to allow 
the American hierarchy, despite some 
of its nobler souls, to refuse to train 
and ordain Negro priests? 
247 248 THE CRISIS 
TH E DYE R BILL IN TH E SENAT E 
THE Republican Party at its 
last convention advocated 
legislation against lynching 
in its platform. The President of the United States in his 
message asked for such legislation. 
The Republican Party has a large 
majority in both the House and the 
Senate. The Republican Party is 
therefore responsible absolutely for 
the success or the failure of the Dyer 
Anti-Lynching Bill. 
Moreover among those voting for 
this bill in the House there are 8 
Democrats! One from Illinois, 1 from 
Kentucky, 1 from Massachusetts, 1 
from New Jersey, 3 from New York, 
and 1 from Pennsylvania. Bourke 
Cockran and Anthony Griffin, Democrats of New York, and Myer London, a Socialist, spoke in favor of the 
bill. This puts a double responsibility upon the Republicans because 
the Democratic help of which they 
are sure makes their ability to pass 
the bill beyond any question. 
Nor is there any need to fear a 
filibuster in the Senate. According 
to rule 22, any 16 Senators can demand a vote on the limitation of debate, and debate can be definitely limited by a two-thirds vote of the Senate. The Republicans with Democratic support can command a twothirds majority in the Senate for this 
bill. / / then the Senate does not pass 
the Dyer Anti-Lynching Bill, any Negro who votes for the Republican 
Party at the next election writes 
himself down as a gullible fool. 
TH E STERLING-TOWNE R BILL 
We in February of the 
vicious provisions in the 
bill now before Congress 
and designed to furnish national aid for common school training. By mistake we called this the 
Smith-Towner Bill because we have 
become used to looking to Hoke 
Smith of Georgia for every anti-Negro atrocity introduced in Congress. 
This was a mistake because, thank 
God, Hoke Smith is out of Congress, 
as we trust, forever. The bill now 
under consideration is known as the 
Sterling-Towner Bill. But after all, 
what's in a name? The provisions by 
which the South is to be allowed and 
encouraged to make ignorance among 
Negroes permanent, while white 
children are educated from the proceeds of taxes paid by Negro citizens, 
is a disgrace so unspeakable that it 
deserves the denunciation of every 
decent American citizen. 
MARI A BALDWI N 
I MET Maria Baldwin first in 
1885. She was already a school 
teacher—already the quiet, almost diffident personality, with 
beautiful brown face and speaking 
eyes and with a low voice full of earnest inquiry. She had a few of us at her 
house of an evening, once a week. It 
was a sort of salon, unnamed, unorganized, but palpitating with spirit. 
I was then in my hottest, narrowest, 
self-centered, confident period, with 
only faint beginnings of doubts 
and revolt. Most things I knew definitely and argued with scathing, unsympathetic finality that scared some 
into silence. But Maria Baldwin was 
always serene, just slightly mocking, 
refusing to be thundered or domineered into silence and answering always in that low, rich voice—with 
questionings, with frank admission 
of uncertainty which seemed to me 
then as exasperatingly weak. 
Yet she grew on us all. Her poise 
commanded greater and greater respect. Her courage—her splendid, 
quiet courage astonished us, and so 
she came to larger life and accomplishment. She fought domestic 
troubles and the bitter never-ending 
insults of race difference. But she OPINION 249 
emerged always the quiet, well-bred 
lady, the fine and lovely Woman. 
She died a teacher, teaching men, 
women and children; and how strange 
a mockery of our democracy it is that 
most Americans are chiefly interested 
to know that her pupils, her thousands of public-school pupils, were 
white Massachusetts school children. 
THE CASE OF SAMUEL MOORE 
SAMUEl MOORE, a Negro 
prisoner in the Atlanta Penitentiary, has recently been 
brought int o prominence 
through the friendship of Eugene V. 
Debs. Moore had served 30 years 
for the unintentional killing of Harry Jandorf when he was 17 years 
old. Out of 48 years he has spent 
less than 11 years in freedom. He 
was in a reformatory between the 
ages of 7 and 11 and was serving a 
year's sentence in the District of Columbia jail when Jandorf was killed. 
He was tried by a white jury for killing a white man. The trial lasted 
two days and the Prosecuting Attorney congratulated the jury on "one 
of the quickest convictions ever secured in the district". The testimony was conflicting. Moore maintained, and has always maintained, 
that he killed Jandorf in self-defense, 
hitting him with a shovel while Jandorf was attacking him with a knife. 
He said that Jandorf had threatened 
to kill him and that he had appealed 
without success to the officers on 
guard for protection. 
Moore was sentenced to be hanged 
in 1892 but President Harrison commuted his sentence to life imprisonment "on account of his youth and 
the lack of premeditation of the 
crime". Moore has been at Atlanta 
since 1902 and has been treated with 
such cruelty there and knows so 
much of what has happened that it 
is impossible to get consideration 
for his case. Under the parole law 
he was eligible for parole in 1906 
but his case was not even considered 
until 1913 and was denied then and 
also in 1916, 1919 and 1920. 
In 1921 the case was taken up with 
Attorney General Daugherty and 
the Attorney General promised to 
look into the matter. Utterly baseless statements have been made that 
Moore has assaulted his guards and 
other prisoners. There is absolutely 
no record of any such facts. There 
is, however, a statement of his jailer 
that unless he is soon released he will 
go insane. Moore is today the oldest 
prisoner in Atlanta. Many people 
of intelligence and integrity speak 
highly of his character. One of the 
deputy wardens, who was in charge 
of him for 10 years, has only good to 
say of him and offers to do anything 
to bring about his release and yet 
he remains in the Atlanta Penitentiary. He is 48 years old and he has 
been a slave and a prisoner for 37 
years. 
Martha Gruening of New York has 
for years interested herself in this 
pitiful case and has secured thousands of names to a petition for 
Moore's release. Frank Miller of the 
Mission Inn at Riverside, New York, 
stands ready to take charge of Moore. 
President Harding and Attorney 
General Daugherty are playing golf 
in Florida. 
TH E SPANISH FANDANG O 
THE audience was ideal—small, 
rapt and responsive. Afterward in the Parish House we 
danced amid fresh young joy. 
Then in an upper room at midnight 
we foregathered: there was Dabney, 
of course, master without ceremony; 
and Gilpin with his voice—that wonderful rolling depth of sounding reverberations, shot with laughter. 
One of us had run for the Legislature 
last year—another handled autos, 
etc. We drank ginger-ale that had a 25 0 TH E CRISIS 
reminiscent — slightly suspicious — 
taste. (Gilpin didn't like it—he said 
he didn't want the flavor spoiled with 
ginger-ale!) Then one at the piano 
played an obligato to our talk and 
laughter, low enticing things, yet not 
interrupting. We ate—there were 
biscuits and tender golden chicken 
and more—and talked reminiscently. 
Next Dabney bringing out his banjo 
rollicked Gilpin dancing to his feet. 
Dabney told an inimitable story of an 
Uncle Tom's Cabin Company in old 
Richmond days, all colored: Eliza 
came in from the wrong side and met 
the dogs instead of fleeing from 
them. The dogs got to fighting—the 
audience was entranced, convulsed. 
Then at last—it was 2 A.M.—Dabney took down the Golden Guitar and 
all was still. He played softly the 
Spanish Fandango. 
Have you ever heard Dabney play 
the Spanish Fandango? Dear God! 
There will be threads of smoke, 
and sprawling, indistinct men; a tiny 
tuning as of drops of musical rain 
and then a swell of silvery sound 
softening to a wail. The swish and 
swirl of dark and lacy skirts and 
flicker of slim young limbs, all crimson beauty. There are skies and 
trickling waters, lifting and falling 
to music—whispering and crying; 
soft, so soft, that at last they drift 
away to utter music almost soundless, 
pulsing in ecstacy, with now and anon 
the rough whir and roll of the recovering bass, out of which the silvery 
music emerges—re-born, alive, wailing, dancing and dying— 
I slept the night fitfully with quivering nerves and rose hurriedly—for 
I had a deed. You see I was tired 
from talking into the burning eyes 
of 3,000 school children on yesterday, 
and from the holy revel of the night, 
and I had to get to Huntington. There 
are three lines—two round-about and 
slow; one, the Chesapeake & Ohio, 
direct, but through "Jim Crow" Kentucky. I hurried to the city ticket office. Useless—the clerk lied suavely 
—"the diagram is at the depot—you 
can easily get a seat there." I did 
not try. I knew. I walked straight 
to the Pullman with a porter. The 
conductor was rough and curt. "Go 
to the ticket office—I can't sell you a 
seat." I hesitated. There we stood: 
a depot porter with golden face and 
sombre eyes; a black inscrutable train 
porter. A big fat angry white conductor. Then I girded myself for 
War. "You can assign me when the 
diagram comes," I said. "Put the 
bags on." I stumbled on through the 
car aflame and bitter. I sank to an 
empty corner seat. Supposes he continued to refuse. The car was filling. 
I would buy the whole drawing-room 
—it was taken, just then. We moved 
across the slimy Ohio to Kentucky. 
Ah! he would have me there—Law 
and Gospel against me. But 1 stuck, 
grim, with throbbing temples. After 
a thousand years, he slouched in: 
"Pullman ticket!" he growled. 
"I have none—a seat to Huntington." 
"$1.20," he mumbled. 
It was over and I had won. I 
leaned back. The thoughtful porter 
brought me a pillow. I closed my 
eyes and listened again to the dim seductive strains of the Spanish Fandango. 
SHO W US, MISSOUR I 
THE colored people of Missouri 
have taken a tremendous step 
in advance. Throughout the 
Border States and the South 
it has long been the custom to tax 
colored people for State universities 
to which only white students were 
admitted. If an institution for colored youth was maintained, it was a 
cheap, inferior caricature. Gradually the colored people of the nation 
are waking up to this unspeakable OPINIO N 251 
injustice. West Virginia has secured 
a State Negro college with a fair appropriation. Some improvements in 
higher educational facilities have 
been made in Tennessee, Florida, and 
Louisiana. 
But only in Missouri have any adequate steps been taken. There a Negro university is planned. A board 
of curators consisting of a few prominent white and colored men and 
women have been appointed. For 
the most part they are educated persons of experience. The State has 
appropriated $500,000 for new and 
adequate buildings on the site occupied by the institution known formerly as Lincoln Institute. Here a 
new Lincoln University is to be built. 
This is a splendid beginning. 
Now, Missouri, show us! Establish a scale of decent salaries which 
will enable the officers and teachers 
to be self-supporting. Select as president and members of the faculty, 
men of thorough training, wellknown accomplishment, and elither 
wide experience or unusual promise. 
Do not take old men who have lived 
their lives and fulfilled their promise—select young men. You have 
the pick of the black nation to choose 
from. Most colored teachers are today wretchedly underpaid and outrageously overworked. There is so 
little chance for advancement or research or decent support of a family 
that our best men are being driven 
out of the profession. Yet we have 
today 15 young men and women with 
the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
from the highest institutions of the 
land; scores of students who have 
made the highest record and are men 
and women of character and experience. Let Missouri select such a faculty that, beginning with that State, 
we can sweep through the South and 
demand and man our schools. 
AGAIN , AFRIC A 
WHAT we want today is the 
use of every weapon of 
civilization to bring about 
a change of attitude on the 
part of the world toward Africa. To 
this end we have commerce, education, religion and continuous and intelligent propaganda. These we have 
and these are all we have. We have 
neither armies nor navies, nor airships nor submarines, to apply force 
to the embattled powers of the world, 
whose grip today holds Africa. 
Perhaps it is our greatest opportunity that we are thus weak in our physical demand for justice. With this 
physical weakness and armed with 
the rightfulness of our cause, we have 
a chance to work for a mighty victory 
by industrial, intelligent and moral 
means; and with us are working today all the forces that stand for peace 
and disarmament, that stand for democracy, that stand for human brotherhood. 
These are powerful allies. We may 
fail and they may fail. It may be 
that the appeal to brute force will 
continue to be the last resource of 
the oppressed down into the twentyfirst and twenty-second centuries; but 
today and for Africa—no matter what 
may be true for India and Ireland— 
for Africa our program is clear: 
1. To promote modern education 
of the natives aiming at intelligence as well as technique, and 
carried out by indigenou s 
schools and native students 
trained in culture lands. 
2. To bring together for periodic 
conference and acquaintanceship the leading Negroes of the 
world and their friends. 
3. To promote industry, commerce 
and credit among black groups. 
This does not mean yelling and 
lying and ranting about gigantic projects that never existed, 
and squandering hard-earned 252 TH E CRISI S 
wealth in crazy and ill-conceived 
schemes. It means small, efficient, honest enterprises, quietly 
and carefully carried on for 
years, until in fifty years or a 
century we shall have knit the 
Negro world together in thrift. 
After this program has been carefully and devotedly and successfully 
followed, Africa will belong to the 
Africans and no man will dare gainsay them—and perhaps no one will 
want to. 
TH E DEMAGO G 
FROM now on in our new awakening, our self-criticism, or 
impatience and passion, we 
I must expect the Demagog 
among Negroes more and more. He 
will come to lead, inflame, lie and 
steal. He will gather large followings and then burst and disappear. 
Loss and despair will follow his fall 
until new false prophets arise. This 
is almost inevitable in every growing, surging group of low intelligence and poverty. But it is permanently dangerous only as the Demagog finds the cleft between our incipient social classes wide and growing. This, under old economic and 
social conditions, is the day when we 
would naturally breed aristocracies 
of birth, wealth, training and talent, 
and uncared-for masses of brute and 
criminal poor. Our common social 
oppression and serfdom to the white 
world has saved us from these extremes and left us with smaller inequalities of wealth and education 
than most groups of 12 millions. 
Nevertheless the ties between our 
privileged and exploited, our educated and ignorant, our rich and 
poor, our light and dark, are not what 
they should be and what we can and 
must make them. It is here that the 
New Negro Demagog thrives and 
yells and steals. "They are ashamed 
of their race"; "They are exploiting 
us"; "They are copying the white 
man's color line"—he shrieks, as he 
dexterously fills his own pockets and 
wastes the pennies of the poor. 
Now the difficulty is that back of 
his exaggerations and dishonesty lies 
that kernel of truth that gains him 
his following; there are plenty of 
black folk who are bitterly ashamed 
of their color, who shrink with blind 
repulsion from the uglier aspects of 
their race's degradation, and who 
willingly batten on the black poor. 
They are few in the aggregate, but 
they exist; and beside them stand the 
vast number of us who believe in our 
race and seek its weal, and yet make 
no effort to reach down and draw up. 
These latter see no personal duty of 
theirs toward black thieves and prostitutes, no responsibility for black 
poverty. 
For this attitude we must substitute a feeling of group responsibility, 
realizing that if we do not know and 
befriend our unfortunate, scoundrels 
will use them to their own ends and 
to our undoing. And such demagogs 
will be doubly strong because they 
can count on the applause and backing of the sinister whites; of those 
who advertise and pat on the back 
every skunk among us who combines 
with his filth sufficient ridicule and 
criticism for our better efforts. 
HEL P 
ON October 17, 1921, the "Shuffle Along" Company of New 
York gave a benefit performance for the N. A. A. C. P. 
which netted $1,026. On October 21, 
the Ladies' Service Group of Washington, D. C , gave a costume assembly which netted $309. On February 
24, 1922, the Committee "of 300 of 
New l^ork gave a Pre-Lenten Card 
Tournament and Dance which netted 
$2,000.00. Three efforts and $3,335 
for Freedom! Next? THE NEGRO BANK 
PRESIDENT S
L E. Williams, Jesse Binga,
Wage Earners', Savannah Binga State, Chicago
NEGR O banking may be said to have 
^ begun with the philanthropic effort 
known as the Freedmen's Savings Bank of 
shameful memory. It was incorporated by 
Congress in March, 1865, as the "Freedmen's Savings and Trust Company" and 
among its incorporators were Peter Cooper, 
William Cullen Bryant, John Jay, Edward 
Atkinson, Levy Coffin and many others of 
equal prominence. This bank lived until 
1874 and received in all fifty-five million 
dollars of the poor freedmen's hard earned 
cash. It appears to have been decently 
conducted until 1870 when the charter was 
amended so as to allow investment in real 
estate mortgages. The bank failed in 1874, 
having at the time 32 branches and 61,131 
depositors, whom it owed $3,013,699. A 
I part of this was repaid slowly during the 
next 20 years, but somebody still owes the 
defrauded blacks $1,291,121! "Of all disgraceful swindles perpetrated on a struggling people, the Freedmen's Bank was 
;imong the worst and the Negro did well 
lo t to wait for justice but to go to bankng himself as soon as his ignorance and 
|)verty allowed." 
t The first Negro bank was the Capitol 
.vings Bank of Washington, D. C , which 
oned in 1888 and lasted 16 years, when it 
 OF NEGRO BANK S 
 J. W , Sanford, T. E. Erwin, 
Solvent, Memphis Commercial, Richmond 
failed. This was followed by the Alabama 
Penny Savings Bank in 1890, the Memphis 
Solvent Savings & Trust Company in 1906, 
and three banks in Richmond, Va.—the 
True Reformers, the Mechanics, and the 
St. Luke. Of these the Alabama and the 
True Reformers have gone out of business. The other three still survive. 
The CRISIS has secured a list of 49 Negro 
banks. A few of these banks (1 in Georgia, 
1 or 2 in Virginia, and 1 in Florida) have 
recently failed. On the other hand, there 
are a number of small banks from which 
we have not been able to get reports. There 
are then 'probably about 60 Negro banks in 
the country at present distributed as fol­
'ows: 
In the South 34: Virginia 14, North Carolina 8, Georgia 6, Texas 2, South Carolina 
2, Alabama 1, Florida 1; in the Border 
States 10: Tennessee 4, District of Columbia 2, Missouri 2, Kentucky 1, West Virginia 
1; in the North 5: Pennsylvania 2, Illinois 
2, Ohio 1; and about ten other small ones 
whose exact location we have not learned. 
The laws as to banking and state requirements differ vastly throughout the 
country. In the South they are .very lenient and the banks are practically .private 
institutions with little state supervision ex253 254 TH E CRISI S 
eept in the case of the larger ones. In 
the North, on the other hand, the state 
supervision is very rigid. 
The largest Negro banks, according to 
their date of establishment, are as follows: 
The Wage Earners' Savings Bank of Savannah, Ga., was established in October, 
1900. It had a paid up capital of $50,000 
and resources, September 6, 1921, amounting to $1,059,046.43. It had on deposit 
$925,773.29. It is regularly examined by 
the state and its president is L. E. Williams. 
The St. Luke Penny Savings Bank of 
Richmond, Va., was established in August, 
1903. It had a paid up capital of $50,000 
and total resources, September 6, 1921, of 
S538,020.81. Its deposits amounted to 
8458,804.69. It is examined regularly by 
the state and its president is a woman, 
Mrs. Maggie L. Walker. 
The Solvent Savings Bank and Trust 
Company of Memphis, Tenn., was established in July, 1906. It has a paid up capital of $81,072.28. Its total resources 
amounted, April 28, 1921, to $981,806.75. 
It had deposits of $879,316.77. It is regularly examined by the state and its president is J. W. Sanford. 
The Binga State Bank of Chicago, 111., 
was established as a private bank in 1908, 
and chartered as a state institution in 
1920. It has a capital stock paid in of 
$100,000. Its total resources, September 
6, 1921, were $425,735.58. Its deposits 
amounted to $299,522.68. It is examined by 
the state. Its president is J. W. Binga. 
The Modern Savings Bank of Pittsburgh, 
Pa., was just opened for business in 1921 
with a paid in capital stock of $125,000. 
Its assets already amount to $188,614.67. 
It has deposits amounting to $46,617.67. 
It is regularly examined by the state and 
its president is Jacob L. Phillips. 
The Metropolitan Bank and Trust Company of Norfolk, Va., was established in 
1909. It has a paid in capital of $150,000. 
The total resources are $916,755.22 Its 
deposits, September, 1921, amounted to 
$678,709.70. 
The Tidewater Bank and Trust Company 
of Norfolk, Va., was established in 1919. 
It has a capital stock of $103,700. The total 
resources, June 30, 1921, were $555,774.06. 
Its deposits amounted to $343,859.57. 
Brown and Stevens, Bankers of Philadelphia, Pa., have a private bank which is 
not examined by the state. The capital is 
$100,000. The total resources, September 
8, 1921, were $1,233,031.13. Their deposits 
amounted to $823,356. 
Some of the small banks are as follows: 
The Commercial Bank and Trust Company 
of Richmond, Va., with resources of $132,­
212; the People's Savings Bank and Trust 
Company of Nashville Tenn., with a capital stock of $25,604; the Mutual Savings 
Bank of Charleston, S. C , with a capital 
stock of $22,081, and deposits of $148,053; 
+he First Standard of Louisville, Ky., with 
a capital stock of $63,727; the Farmers and 
Merchants' Bank of Boley, Okla., with a 
$20,000 capital and total resources of $198,­
723; the Mutual Savings Bank of Portsmouth, Va., with resources amounting to 
$456,664. It is regularly examined by the 
state. 
Many interesting and growing institutions have been omitted in this list because 
we {have not received information from 
them. W e hope to hear from such banks 
in the near future and to publish a supplementary article. 
LEX TALIONIS 
A Story 
ROBERT W. BAGNALL 
T T was good to be home again after twelve 
years' absence in foreign lands. Even 
when business is good and your firm has 
treated you as liberally as mine, you long 
for home and country. 
These thoughts were in my mind as I 
sat in an easy chair in my friend's office, 
awaiting his return from the telephone. 
The wood-fire on the hearth and its glow 
warmed the cockles of one's heart. As I 
puffed my pipe, I thought of the past days 
I had spent with this man who was my best 
friend, days of college life with all of their 
intimate associations. He was a big fellow, 
big in body, mind, and heart. He had gone 
far in his profession. Doctor Townes was 
now recognized as a surgeon of rare ability. 
Mine host came in and we sat on into the 
night, smoking ipipe after pipe, talking of 
old times and of old associates. SOME NEGRO BANK S 
FIRST STANDARD , Louisville BING A STATE, Chicago 
BING A STATE , Chicago WAG E EARNERS' , Savannah 
METROPOLITAN , Norfolk FIRST STANDARD , Louisville 
,25 5 256 TH E
"Wha t became of Langston?" I asked. 
"Yo u remember him,—old Czar Langston, 
the proud Southerner. I think he was from 
this town and came back here to practice 
law." 
My friend sat up straight. "Didn't you 
hear of his strange case? " he asked. 
"No, " I answered. "The last I heard of 
him was that he wag establishing a practice 
in this city." 
Townes arose and walking over to his 
book shelves, pulled out a scrap-book and 
opened it to a clipping. "Read this," he 
said. 
It was a clipping from a local paper, the 
M Inquirer, dated some eight years 
back. I read: 
"The whole city is stirred over the mysterious disappearance of John Langston, 
one of our prominent attorneys and a member of one of the first families of the South, 
who left his home to see a client five days 
ago and has not since been heard of. Mr. 
Langston was called up by Mr. Ketz, the 
wealthy brewer, whose attorney he is, and 
requested to come over to his residence at 
once as he needed his advice on a matter 
which would not permit delay. Mr. Langston left his house as the clock was striking 
ten, his wife testifies, saying that he would 
be home before midnight. He was seen by 
several citizens on the street and when last 
observed was entering a secluded park 
which provides a short cut to Mr. Ketz's 
residence. No one has seen him since. 
"Mr. Ketz states that he did not telephone 
Mr. Langston on the evening in question 
and that some one must have imipersonated 
him. The missing attorney's accounts have 
been examined and found to be in excellent 
condition, his health was good, and his 
habits regular. It is feared that he has 
met with foul play. 
"Attorney Langston had no enemies and 
was liked by all except the Negroes, whom 
he profoundly detested. His wife and two 
children are prostrated with worry. 
" A careful search has revealed no trace 
of the missing man." 
"This is strange", I said. "Do you mean 
to tell me that they never found any trace 
of Langston?" 
"From that day to this, the world has 
neither seen nor heard of Langston, so far 
as it knows", answered my friend. 
Something in the voice of my friend as 
he uttered the words—"so far as it knows" 
—startled me. 
"Doc" , I said "you know far more about 
this than appears. You have some inside 
knowledge, something that contains a deeper tragedy than even appears on the sur­
 CRISI S 
face. Come, tell me, if you can do so, what 
it is." 
Townes paced the floor for several minutes, puffing furiously at his pipe. Finally 
he stopped in front of the fire-place and 
said: "W e have shared many confidences, 
Bob, old man, and there is no reason why 
I shouldn't tell you what I know. I know 
you will be as silent about it as if you didn't 
know it. I think I shall feel better when 
I have shared my knowledge with some 
one." He began: 
"Langston, you will remember, always 
hated colored people. Yo u will recall the 
quarrel we had in college over Flournoy, 
the big colored half-back and baseball star. 
"Yo u remember Flournoy, a giant of a 
fellow, a crack athlete, a splendid scholar, 
a gentlemanly chaip, jolly but considerate 
and well liked. He was a fine looking fellow whose Negro blood showed only in his 
olive complexion and a slight crinkle in 
his hair. Yo u and I both liked him, you 
will remember, and when he beat me in the 
honors contest I didn't begrudge him the 
place. I knew that the better man had 
won. 
"Langston, you will recall, raved about 
it, saying that such cattle as Flournoy had 
no business in the university and that the 
'nigger-loving' professors had cheated for 
Flournoy. 
"I told Langston that he was a cad and 
a disgrace to the university, and that 
there wasn't a finer gentleman in the entire university than Flournoy. 
"Well when I came down here to practice, Langston hunted me up. I think it 
was largely at the instigation of his wife, 
who came from the same little New England town as myself and whom I had 
known from the days when she was a little 
tot. I used to drop over to his home quite 
frequently at first. He, like most of the 
Southerners, was afflicted with Negrophobia. He couldn't talk an hour without 
referring to the so-called Negro problem. 
He could not tolerate the Negro in any but 
a menial position. He thought it a crime 
for a Negro to show that he had self-respect and he always claimed that education 
ruined the Negro. His own Negro servants 
feared and hated him. 
"He tried in vain to bring me to his 
viewpoin t and was continually calling me 
to task for calling colored people mister and LE X TALIONI S 257 
FLOURNOY' S SISTE R 
madam. He told me that I was ruining 
myself by accepting invitations to their 
meetings and holding conferences with 
them. It was this color matter which finally estranged us. I found Flournoy settled 
here. He had gone in for chemistry at the 
university and had secured a position here. 
He had inherited a little money and had 
his own little laboratory where he was constantly making experiments. 
"I hunted him up and had him over often 
for a pipe and a chat and frequently I 
would drop in to see him. Langston, when 
he learned this, remonstrated vehemently 
and when I told him that I reserved to myself the privilege of choosing my own 
friends, gave me to understand that no 
man who took 'a damn nigger' as an intimate associate could come to his home. 
"Langston and I thus became estranged, 
although we wer e friendly enough when we 
•passed each other on the street. I noted, 
however, that he was beginning to drink 
considerably and going with a rather gay 
set. Once too when we met on the street 
we were near to quarrelling. 
"It happened that Flournoy had gone to 
New Yor k on a business trip. He had me 
over to his home to tea the night before. 
His mother, who always reminded me of an 
old ivory cameo, acted as hostess, and afterwards his little sister, a delicate and pretty 
child of sixteen, who possessed a voice 
which gave great promise of rare sweetness, sang for us. 
"The next day just as I met Langston 
the sister passed us on the street and 
smiled sweetly. I raised my hat. 
" 'Who's that?' asked Langston, raising 
his hat and at the same time whirling about 
and staring with his usual, frank, Southern interest in women. 
" 'Flournoy's sister', said I a bit maliciously. He was angry at having mistaken her for white and made a slurring 
remark. I resented it hotly. 
"'Pish!' he retorted, 'they're all alike. 
I'll show you whom she was grinning at', 
and he walked away. 
"Ho w it happened I do not know. Perhaps it was an accident. Perhaps he was 
drunk. A t any rate the night before Flournoy returned, his sister was found prone in 
The park cruelly assaulted. She died on the 
third day but not before she had told us 
all. Langston had met her again and spoken to her. She recognized him as an acquaintance of mine and responded. He 
followed her and attempted to take her arm 
as they reached the park. Frightened, she 
cried out and ran. He overtook her, made 
an open proposition and when she recoiled 
in horror, he brutally attacked her. 
"When she died Flournoy sat in silence, 
his head in his hands. A half hour later I 
missed him. I found afterwards that he 
had been to Langston's house but found him 
out of town. Still the gentleman, he said 
nothing to Langston's wife. 
" A month later Flournoy's mother died, 
broken hearted. 
"The world knew nothing of the cause of 
the little girl's death. He commanded me 
to secrecy. The little girl had died of 
brain fever, I reported. When a white man 
is the guilty party the law jests at such 
cases, which are too frequent here in the 
South. 
"Bob, a passion will burn out a man's life 
like a stroke of lightning. Never have I 
before seen a man change as did Flournoy. 
He had been an upstanding giant, with a 
straight back and a light step. He had 
been jolly, enthusiastic, ardent. Now he 
became stoop-shouldered and old. His hair 
grew white and his face became furrowed 
with deep lines. He grew morose and si­258 TH E
lent and would brood for hours. He became careless of his dress and deserted his 
acquaintances. He gave up his position and 
devoted himself to secret experiments, 
shutting himself up for days in his laboratory, refusing everyone entrance. The old 
woman who kept house for him said that 
at such times he would not even come to 
his meals but ordered her to pass them in 
to him through a crack in the door. 
"He wouldn't come to see me, so I persistently looked him up. I looked for something to happen. Langston had returned 
and had built himself up more and more 
in his profession. He knew that the girl 
had died, but what was the life of a Negro 
girl to him? He seemed more concerned 
because I always refused to speak to him 
than about her death. 
"Wh y didn't Flournoy kill him, you are 
about to ask? You or I would have done 
so. But, Bob, men of mixed blood are sometimes different. His first passion over, 
Flournoy did nothing and never spoke of 
the tragedy or of Langston. He was no 
coward, I knew that. He had been a fellow who went in a great deal for religion, 
but now he never went to church and never 
prayed. Sometimes while talking to me 
he would grow silent all at once and turn 
white and shiver as if with the ague, while 
his eyes would glare like those of a madman. I feared that he was going insane 
under the strain. 
"I remember one night just a week before Langston disappeared, I went to see 
Flournoy. His eyes were bright with triumph and he seemed more like himself of 
old, but suddenly he began to glare and 
shiver and then he burst without apparent 
cause into wild laughter like that of a 
fiend from hell. 
"It caused my blood to curdle. I broke 
out: 'My God, man, if you don't get away 
from here you will go mad!' 
"Instantly he calmed himself and said: 
T beg your pardon, but I haven't slept for 
four days and nights because of an experiment. I am not myself.' 
"I left him with my mind very much disturbed about his state. 
" A week later Langston disappeared. I 
was at first inclined to suspect Flournoy 
but found that he had left the city for Atlanta the day before the disappearance and 
did not return until the day after it hap­
 CRISI S 
pened. When I learned that I was as much 
at sea as the public. 
"Now comes a queer thing. Read these, 
Bob. " 
Townes took out of his scrap-book two 
old newspaper clippings, dated three weeks 
after the disappearance of Langston. One 
was a short clipping. It read: 
Demented Negro Imagines Himself 
Langston 
" A queer incident following the disappearance three weeks ago of Attorney 
Langston, of whom no trace has been found, 
is the mysterious dementia of a strange Negro. This man imagines himself to be the 
missing attorney turned black. He went to 
Langston's office and insisted upon entrance. 
When he was ejected he went up to the 
house and tried to force his way to Mrs. 
Langston and the children, crying out that 
he was their husband and father. The servants shut the doors in his face and kept 
him from disturbing Mrs. Langston, who 
has been prostrated since her husband's 
death. Attorney Marsh, the missing man's 
partner, when interviewed, said that the 
strange thing about the Negro who is a 
pure black, is that he somehow reminds him 
of Langston. The police are looking for the 
insane man." 
The second clipping was longer. It had 
big scare-heads of type: 
"Negro Brute Tries to Assault Wife of 
Missing Attorney" 
It told how the insane Negro, who 
thought himself Langston, had gone to the 
Langston home and forced his way tiirough 
a window. He suddenly appeared in Mrs. 
Langston's bedroom when she was preparing to retire for the night. She was so 
frightened that at first she was speechless. 
He advanced toward her with outstretched 
arms, crying—"Wife , don't you know me? " 
When he seized her in his arms, the horrorstricken woman screamed and Langston's 
uncle, who was in the house, rushed into 
the room and shot the Negro, wounding 
him. A mob of the best citizens soon gathered and dragged the monster into the public square. There they kindled a fire and 
burned the Negro to death. Until the end, 
the man, moaning and crying and crazed 
with pain, declared that he was Langston. 
The article then entered upon an argument that the incident showed the danger 
of educating Negroes, for the creature 
burned was clearly an educated man. 
I felt an uncanny feeling creep over me 
as I finished the article. TH E PORTUGUES E NEGR O 259 
"Wha t do you make of it? " asked 
Townes. 
"I didn't know what to make of it," I 
answered. 
"I will continue," said the doctor. "Three 
months ago Flournoy died. He was terribly injured by an explosion of chemicals. 
He sent for me and I sat beside him when 
he died. He told me all. 
"Bob , that man they burned alive was 
John Langston! " 
"But the paper says that he was a black 
Negro and had kinky hair!" I objected. 
"Nevertheless he was Langston. It wa s 
Flournoy's revenge. He had planned it 
during the months of brooding after his 
sister's awful death. 
"It was Flournoy who impersonated the 
brewer whom Langston last left home to 
see. He had left town the day before, 
doubled on his tracks, got off the train five 
miles away and secretly made his way to 
his laboratory. Flournoy met him in the 
deserted park, over-powered him, bound 
and gagged him, and took him to his laboratory. There for three weeks he kept 
him, treating his entire body with a chemical solution he had discovered. With acids 
he so damaged his vocal cords that no one 
would recognize his voice. 
"This was the object of those long, secret experiments to find something which 
would turn human skin permanently black, 
with the blackness of a Negro; to find something else which would turn the hair unalterably kinky. The day Flournoy burst 
into his laugh of triumph, he had at last 
been successful in his experiments. During those three weeks he pointed out to 
the helpless Langston in full and graphic 
detail what awaited him as a Negro. The 
white man's mind gave way under the strain 
when he finally looked into the glass and 
saw himself black with kinky hair, and 
he became utterly insane. But one lucid 
thought remained—he was Langston! He 
wandered to his office and home with the 
results we have learned. 
"Langston's relatives and friends had 
burned him alive because he dared to take 
his own wife in his arms." 
My friend fell silent. We gazed into the 
fire with horror in our eyes, our pipes cold 
and forgotten. 
Did the world ever parallel such a revenge ? 
THE PORTUGUESE NEGRO 
NICOLAS SANTOS-PINTO 
A paper read at the Second Pan-African Congress, 
Palis, September, 1921.1 
WHE N I say we, I mean to speak of 
the great association of Portuguese 
Negroes with headquarters at Lisbon which 
is called the Liga Africana—an actual federation of all the indigenous associations 
scattered throughout the five provinces of 
Portuguese Afric a and representing several 
million individuals. This federation is directed and presided over by an illustrious 
colleague of African descent, a scientific 
man of clear talent and culture. This Liga 
Africana, which functions at Lisbon in the 
very heart of Portugal so to speak, has a 
commission from all the other native organizations and knows how to express to the 
government in no ambiguous terms but in a 
highly dignified manner all that should be 
said to avoid injustice or to bring about the 
repeal of harsh laws. That is why the Liga 
Africana of Lisbon is the director of the 
Portuguese African movement,—but only in 
the good sense of the word without making 
any appeal to violence and without leaving 
constitutional limits. To do otherwise would 
be to stir up prejudice against a great undertaking and to lose all that has been 
gained. 
It has been our dream and ambition to 
make of our Portuguese Africa from the 
moral, intellectual and material point of 
view, a prosperous country,—a dream and 
ambition to whose realization we will never 
refuse any sacrifice, but to which on the 
contrary we will give the very best of our 
intelligence, of our energy, of our mindis 
and of our purse. 
It is indisputable that the different African races which are under the domain of 
the Portuguese state have not yet attained 
the degree of development common among 
white people. I am speaking always of 
the mass of people for we have with us 
Portuguese Negroes and half castes who are 
splendid physicians, inspired poets, engineers, lawyers, musicians, publicists, paint­260 TH E CRISI S 
ers, financiers, in a word a real and numerous intelligentsia. To attain to a general 
development we must transform these 
groups, we must imbue them with a feeling 
for order, with economic foresight, teach 
them love of work and give them schools, 
many schools, both trade and art schools. 
The thrifty are the strongest. A people 
which does not know how to practice cooperation is a people ignorant of the conditions of life and more than that without 
a right to live for it becomes a troublesome element in the human community. 
Economic action is basic action. This 
sort of conformity in envisaging the problem with fundamental principles of contemporary sociological science is the heart 
of all history. To my way of thinking economic action ought to precede all political 
action, for without fairly comfortable conditions of life we risk suffering surprises 
which will retard the future of our race. 
My decided opinion is that when Portuguese Africans know how to get together 
in strong economic organizations as our 
brothers have done in North America, they 
will see their rise as citizens met with 
great respect. Furthermftre I hold that we 
ought to start this work immediately in the 
interest of the future of our race which 
needs to overcome its native tendency toward lack of foresight. 
BRAWLEY'S "SOCIAL HISTORY OF THE 
AMERICAN NEGRO" 
THE recent awakening on the part of 
American Negroes to a sense of racial 
consciousness is phenomenal when we realize that there is nothing in our secular or 
religious life to warrant it. For unlike the 
Jews we have given up our early religious 
beliefs and forms of worship and have taken 
on the religious custom of the country. To 
such a degree indeed that we bade fair for 
a time to out-Christian the Christians. And 
it is hardly necessary for me to point out 
how the secular history of America and indeed of other countries is presented to us 
in school and college with literally no reference at all to the deeds and exploits of distinguished black men. 
Our race consciousness arose then spontaneously as a result of a vague straining 
after the facts which we dimly felt must 
belong to our racial development. By sheer 
analogy we evolved the idea that if such 
and such conditions were a part of the 
life of other races, they must be a part of 
ours. 
And now comes Benjamin Brawley's* "Social History of the American Negro" , a 
book which substantiates all those vague 
feelings, which by collecting and re-threading the scattered beads in the chain of our 
racial existence presents to us our racial 
life as a whole. 
Here is our pre-American life, our position in colonial days, our priceless gift of 
labor which as Dr. DuBois has so often 
pointed out laid the foundation for the 
country's prosperity. We learn of early 
slave insurrections before the Revolution 
as magnificent even in their futility as the 
revolt of the Colonies against England. 
We are heartened to learn in detail of the 
very real part which we played in 1776, 
and to see the Revolution in the light of 
what it meant to us. 
This indeed is the chief merit of the book 
in that it presents American history as it 
must have appeared to black men. Through 
the long years Mr. Brawley leads us up to 
the Missouri Compromise when the Negro 
Problem really begins, past Vesey and 
Turner to the Abolitionists, and the circumstances presaging the Civil War. A 
special chapter is devoted to Liberia. The 
last five chapters present a review of civic 
and social conditions among Negroes. 
Mr. Brawley's contribution to the Negro 
problem calls for our gratitude. For the 
first time we are able to grasp as a whole 
our life and its many ramifications in this 
country. When we see the arduous road 
we have followed and realize that always 
the struggle has been upward, we know that 
our hopes for the future are not in vain. 
J. F. 
*Thc AlacMillan Company, New York. SONG OF THE SON 261 
SONG OF THE SON 
JEAN TOOME R 
POUR, O pour, that parting soul in song, 
O pour it in the saw-dust glow of night, 
Into the velvet pine-smoke air tonight, 
And let the valley carry it along, 
And let the valley carry it along. 
O land and soil, red soil and sweet-gum tree 
So scant of grass, so profligate of pines, 
Now just before an epoch's sun declines 
Thy son, in time, I have returned to thee, 
Thy son, I have in time returned to thee. 
In time, for though the sun is setting on 
A song-lit race of slaves, it has not set; 
Though late, O soil it is not too late yet 
To catch thy plaintive soul, leaving, soon gone, 
Leaving, to catch thy plaintive soul soon gone. 
O Negro slaves, dark-purple ripened plums, 
Squeezed, and bursting in the pine-wood air, 
Passing, before they stripped the old tree bare 
One plum was saved for me, one seed becomes 
An everlasting song, a singing tree, 
Carrolling softly souls of slavery, • 
All that they were, and that they are to me,— 
Carrolling softly souls of slavery. National Association for the Advancement 
THE DYER BILL 
Following our victory when the House 
*• of Representatives on January 26 
passed the Dyer Anti-Lynching Bill by a 
vote of 230 to 119, the National Office is 
bending every effort towards prompt and 
favorable action by the Senate. The bill 
is now in the hands of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, composed of the following: 
Knute Nelson, Minnesota, Chairman 
William P. Dillingham, Vermont 
Frank B. Brandegee, Connecticut 
William E. Borah, Idaho 
Albert B. Cummins, Iowa 
LeBaron B. Colt, Rhode Island 
Thomas Sterling, South Dakota 
George W. Norris, Nebraska 
Richard P. Ernst, Kentucky 
Samuel M. Shortridge, California. 
Charles A. Culberson, Texas 
Lee S. Overman, North Carolina 
James A. Reed, Missouri 
Henry F. Ashurst, Arizona 
John K. Shields, Tennessee 
Thomas J. Walsh, Montana 
The names italicized are Republicans. 
The bill has been referred to a sub-committee of the Judiciary Committee composed of Senator Borah, Chairman, and 
Senators Colt, Dillingham, Overman and 
Shields. Our immediate task is to show 
the sub-committee and the committee as a 
whole that "public sentiment throughout the 
country demands early and favorable action on the bill. Every interested person 
is urged to send telegrams or letters to one 
or all of the names above. A few dollars 
spent in this fashion will do almost inconceivable good. You have often wanted to 
do something tangible against lynching. 
Here is your opportunity! If you cannot 
afford to send each a wire, send as many 
as you can. Or get several friends to join 
you, signing all of your names to the wires. 
This is an old method but it is most effective. 
One of the means which the National Office has evolved of demonstrating to the 
Senate the public sentiment behind the bill 
is the drafting of a memorial to be signed 
by eminent citizens. This reads: 
"Memorial to the United States Senate 
"The killing and burning alive of human beings by mobs in the United States 
is a reproach upon our country throughout the civilized world and threatens organized government in the nation. 
"Since 1889 there have been 3,443 
known mob murders, 64 of the victims 
being women. In only a few instances 
has prosecution of the lynchers been attempted. American mobs murdered 61 
persons in 1921, of whom 4 were publicly burned at the stake. 
"The House of Representatives on January 26, 1922, in response to insistent 
country-wide demand, passed the Dyer 
Anti-Lynching Bill, which invokes the 
power of the Federal government to end 
the infamy of American mob murder. 
"This bill is now in the hands of the 
United States Senate. The undersigned 
United States citizens earnestly urge its 
prompt enactment." 
This appeal was sent to a selected list of 
representative persons in America. It has 
already been signed by 160 individuals, the 
number including 19 state governors, 18 
mayors of large cities, among them the 
mayors of New York City, Boston, Milwaukee, Louisville, Baltimore and Charleston, 
S. C ; 87 arch-bishops, bishops and prominent churchmen—Protestant, Catholic and 
Jewish; 24 college presidents and professors 
m Harvard, Radcliffe, Columbia, Chicago, 
California, Howard, Atlanta, Morehouse, 
Hampton, Pennsylvania, Wellesley, Michigan and other institutions; 33 newspaper 
and magazine editors, including the New 
York Evening Post, the Chicago Daily 
Neivs, the Nation, the New Republic, the 
Omaha Bee, the Emporia Gazette through 
the famous author and editor, William Allen White, and many other white and colored journals; 24 eminent jurists and lawyers, including George W. Wickers-ham, 
former Attorney-General of the United 
States, John G. Milburn, president of the 
New York Bar Association, Judge Julian 
262 N. A. A. C . P. 263 
W . Mack of Chicago, Judge Edward Osgood 
Brown of Chicago, and Moorfield Storey; 
and 18 other prominent citizens, including 
Edward W . Bok, owner and former editor 
o f the Ladies' Home Journal, Samuel S. 
Fels of Philadelphia, L. S. Rowe, president 
o f the American Academy of Political and 
Social Science, Talcott Williams, former 
Lead of the Columbia University School of 
Journalism, and Louis F. Post of New York. 
Another step wa s the impressive mass 
meeting held at Town Hall, in New York 
City, on March 1. A t that meeting Congressman Dyer, Mr. Storey, Dr. Du Bois 
an d Mr. Johnson 
wer e the principal 
speakers. 
No stone is being 
left unturned. Our 
biggest problem is 
securing fund s to 
carry on the figbt. 
W e urge every person to contribute as 
liberally as he can, 
whether the amount 
be large or small. If 
you want to do your 
share in this fight, 
act now. The one 
dollar, or five dollars, 
or hundred dollars, 
that you give now 
may be the margin 
between victory and 
defeat! During our 
eleven year fight we 
have expended $35,­ CONGRESSMA N L. C. DYE R 
ing the afternoon there was considerable 
discussion in the town and Bullock's "offense" grew with each telling. Towards 
nightfall threats were made to lynch him. 
That night Bullock's father, a respected 
minister of the town, had the sheriff lock 
up his son over night for safe-keeping. 
A few hours later a mob formed and started to the jail. On meeting a crowd of colored men and boys a fight followed, in 
which several white and colored men were 
injured. Later in' the night the mob reformed, went to the jail, seized Plummer 
Bullock and another colored man and 
lynched them. The 
mob then set out to 
find an d lync h 
Matthew Bullock, a 
brother of Plummer; 
but Matthew Bullock 
escaped and reached 
Buffalo, N. Y., and 
later crossed the border into Canada. 
Bullock resided' at 
Hamilton, Ontario, 
for some ten months, 
working every day 
and leading an exemplary life. One 
day he was recognized by a former 
Nort h Carolinian 
who informed the 
authorities at North 
Carolina, who in 
turn wired the Chief 
of Police in Canada, 
000. This, however, 
is less than $3,000 a year to end lynching. 
During the next three months we could 
use legitimately and without extravagance, 
$100,000! Americ a must be aroused! Will 
YOU help awaken her? 
THE BULLOCK CASE 
I N January, 1921, Plummer Bullock, a 
young colored man, went into a store 
in Norlina, N. C , to purchase some apples. 
After paying for some of the better grade, 
the clerk, a young white youth, attempted 
to give him some rotten ones. Bullock protested, and when he stoutly maintained 
that he should receive what he had paid for 
 dispute arose. Bullock left the store 
when threats were made to beat him for 
daring to talk back to a white man. Dura
and asked that Bullock be held "for inciting to riot and shooting a white man." The citizens of Norlina 
txpressed themselves as being "greatly delighted" on hearing of Bullock's arrest and 
it is declared that they "eagerly anticipated 
Bullock's return." In this fashion began 
a case which has aroused greater international interest than any case since pre-Civil 
Wa r days when fugitive slaves fled to Canada for refuge. 
The Buffalo Branch asked Mr. White to 
go to Hamilton, where he spent several 
days assisting Rev. J. D. Howell, who led 
the fight to prevent Bullock's extradition, 
and Treleaven & Treleaven, attorneys employed to defend Bullock. The National 
Office was also instrumental in securing 
copies of court records and other necessary 264 THE CRISIS 
information from North Carolina. A great 
deal of publicity was gained in the Ameri 
can and Canadian press, presenting the 
facts regarding lynching in the United 
States and proving that Bullock could not 
be given a fair trial if returned to North 
Carolina. 
On January 18, the Canadian Immigration Board, sitting at Hamilton, ordered 
Bullock to be deported to the United States 
on the ground that he had not properly reported to immigration officials when he 
entered Canada. An appeal was immediately taken to the Canadian Commissioner 
of Immigration, at Ottawa. On hearing 
the evidence, the Hamilton decision was set 
aside and Bullock was freed. 
Early in February, however, Bullock 
was re-arrested on the demand of the Department of State at Washington, acting 
at the request of the governor of North 
Carolina, and was held for extradition on 
a charge of attempted murder. On February 25, a hearing on the extradition demand was held before Judge Snider at 
Hamilton. Judge Snider demanded that 
the state of North Carolina produce witnesses to prove that Bullock was guilty of 
the charge of crime against him and to 
disprove that the demand for extradition 
was solely subterfuge to get Bullock back 
where he could be railroaded to jail and 
perhaps lynched, as was generally felt 
throughout Canada. He adjourned the hearings for one week to allow the producing 
of such witnesses. Judge Snider acted well 
within his legal rights in taking such a 
step. Bullock admitted freely that he 
fired several shots in defense of his life 
when attacked by the mob while the mob 
was on its way to the jail to lynch Plummer Bullock. Under the provisions of the 
treaty between Canada and the United 
States, shooting in defense of one's life 
is not an extraditable offense, while attempted murder is. 
Governor Morrison of North Carolina at 
this juncture proved himself either ill-advised or ignorant of the law when he refused to send witnesses to Hamilton. On 
March 3, Judge Snider ordered that Bullock be released from custody. 
The National Race Congress at Washington, of which Rev. W. H. Jernagin is 
president, was exceedingly active in this 
case and deserves full share of the credit 
for the victory. The Buffalo Branch of 
the N. A. A. C. P. was also active, holding 
three large mass meetings to arouse public 
interest in the Bullock case, raising funds 
to aid the National Office in handling the 
case, and in employing an attorney of Buffalo to defend Bullock in the event that 
he had been deported to the United States. 
To Rev. J. D. Howell, of Hamilton, the 
major portion of the credit should go for 
his splendid efforts in leading the fight for 
Bullock. 
FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR YEAR 1921 
LACK of space in the March issue of 
TH E CRISIS, made it necessary for us 
to defer publication of our financial statement for the year 1921. The report in full, 
is given below: 
TREASURER' S REPOR T 
of the 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE Yea r Ending Decemher 31 , 192 1 
BALANC E SHEE T 
ASSETS" 
Cash in banks, Dec. 81 , 1921. . $1,992.7 2 
Value of emblems on hand 127.5 0 
Furniture and fixtures 3,746.8 1 
Petty cash fund 100.0 0 
Tulsa fund 26.3 7 
Anti-lynching fund 151.2 5 
$6,144.6 5 
LIABILITIES 
Due special funds:— 
Arkansas defense fund $1,087.2 3 
Pan-African congress fund . . 60.3 9 
Maclean memorial fund 69.1 6 
Special gift fund 27.0 0 
The CRISIS 875.7 9 
Accounts payable 3,631.4 8 
$5,751.0 5 
Net worth 393.6 0 
$6,144.6 5 
INCOM E AN D EXPENS E 
General Fund 
INCOM E 
Contributions:— 
Branches $8,438.7 6 
Miscellaneous 10,081.6 7 
Memberships:— 
Branches 37,395.7 7 
Members at large 3,166.6 8 
$59,082.8 8 
Literature sales $897.5 0 
Branch card files sold 176.5 0 
Profit on emblems sold 70.4 0 
$1,144.4 0 
$60,227.2 8 
Net loss 3,438.6 2 
$63,065.9 0 
EXPENS E ' 
Advertising , $186.8( 0 
Branch Bulletin 700.8 2 
Clippings 257.5 2 
General expense and supplies.
Appropriations for legal de­
 1,886.7 0 
fense 309.5 5 
L'Sht 184.6 5 
Meetings 182.0 0 
Multigraphing 186.8 5 
Postage 3,900.0 1 
Printing 3.S89.5 6 N. A. A. C. P. 265 
Rent of offices 1,839.96 
Salaries:— 
Administrative 10,407.68 
Publicity 2,260.00 l d d * 6,724.09 
Clerical 15,154.52 
Special services 1,225.00 
Telepiione 3I9CW13 
Telegrams 555.37 
Traveling expense 6,877.45 
Miscellaneous disbursements.. 8.80 
Appropriation towards expenses 
of Pan-African congress... . 850.00 
Deoreciation on furniture.... . 197.20 
Pins and buttons 1,359.77 
Accounts payable 3,631.48 
$63,605.91 
SPECIA L FUN D 
ANTI-LYNCHIN G FUN D 
Balance in bank, Dec. 31, 1920 $1,550.11 
Receipts during the year ],6G3.8f 
$2,221.9£ 
Expenses during the year 2,373.2-1 
Deficit $151.2U 
ARKANSA S DEFENS E FUN D 
Balance in bank Dec. 31, 1920 $1,214.51 
Contributions received during year... . 2,678.31 
$3,892.81 
Expenses during the year 2,805.0:; 
Balance Dec. 31, 1921 $1,087.2.' 
TULS A RELIE F FUN D 
Contributions received $3,506.24 
Expenses 3,532.61 
Deficit $26.31 
PAN-AFRICA N CONGRES S FUN D 
Contributions received $2,813.1; 
Expenses 2,752.7.' 
Balance Dec. 31, 1921 $60.3: 
CRISIS FINANCIAL STATEMENT 
Revenue Dr. Cr. 
Sales $38,596.75 
Subscriptions $16,047.50 
Less unexpired subs... 6,308.74 9,738.76 
Advertising revenue 14,918.79 
Interest on Liberty Bonds... . 63.75 
Total revenue $63,318.0. 
Expenses 
Crisis book accounts $154.75 
Paper purchases 11,727.00 
Printing 13,89».31 
Engraving 1,079.66 
General expense 6,105.89 
Salaries 21,780.00 
Postage 4,591.40 
Stationery and supplies 1,172.50 
Bad debts 3,965.58 
Depreciation 201.42 
Total expenses $04,677.16 
ASSET S AN D LIABILITIE S 
ASSETS LIABILITIES 
Cash in bank.. $32.89 Accts. payable: 
Petty cash fund 25.00 (schedule 1) $3,728.67 
Accts. receivable: "History of NeAdvertisers . . 9,300.11 gro in the War " 83.25 
Agents 17,309.20 Reserve for iinN. A. A . C. P. 875.79 expired subs. 6,308.i"4 
Depos. w. P. O. 325.00 Net worth 23,784.31 
Liberty Bonds. . 1,500.00 
Paper inventory 602.12 
Crisis bank accounts inven. 99.17 
I'urn. & fix.. . . 3,826.90 
Unexpired insur. 8.73 
$33,904.97 $33,904.97 
A CONTRIBUTING MEMBER 
A N appreciated action was that of the 
Supreme Lodge, Knights of Pythias 
of the Eastern and Western Hemispheres, 
at a session recently held in New York 
City, when it voted to take out a contributing membership as a body in the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People. 
We should be happy to have other fraternal organizations of the country follow 
the Pythians' example. 
The letter making application for membership reads: 
The Supreme Lodge of the Knights of 
Pythias of the Eastern and Western Hemispheres, at its session recently held in New 
York City, voted to ally itself with your organization as a contributing member thereof, if such is permissible, and to pay each 
year for said membership the sum of $100. 
(Signed) W. ASHBI E HAWKINS . 
PRIDE 
MORTIMER G . MITCHELL 
OH ! Negro youth, 
Let me say to you 
That pride should swell 
You r heart bands too, 
When e'er you hear 
A national air, 
Or see the flag 
Float free and fair; 
Fo r in the days 
That have gone by, 
Your father's blood 
Has helped to dye 
The glorious hue 
Of every stripe. 
He fought 
To give this country mighi 
On many a battlefield 
He's bled, 
And in foreign sod 
He's left his dead. The Horizon compiled by Madeline G. Allison 
MESSIA H Baptist Church in Yonkers, N. 
Y., and Mt. Olivet Baptist Church, in 
New York City, have appointed women as 
members of the Board of Trustees. The appointees are Mrs. Emily Brown at Messiah 
and Mrs. Richetta R. Wallace at Mt. Olivet. 
C Bishop Brooks, formerly of Baltimore, 
Md., is now Chaplain for the Supreme 
Court of Liberia. 
C A 10 percent dividend has been declared 
by the Sumter Investment Corporation, a 
Negro real estate enterprise in Sumter, 
S. C. Messrs. W. T. Andrews is 'president; 
R. M. Andrews, vice-president; and H. D. 
McNight, secretary-treasurer. 
C Anita Patti , Brown, the noted Negro 
singer of Chicago, 111., is studying in Europe under Herr Victor Beigel. Miss Brown 
is attended by her accompanist, Miss Doxie. 
They will resume recitals in America in the 
fall of 1922. 
C Messrs. James B. and Benjamin N. Duke 
have donated $75,000 toward a hospital iov 
Negroes in Durham, N. C. A similar sum 
is now to be raised by colored and white 
citizens. The following persons have been 
elected members of the Board of Trustees 
for the hospital: Dr. S. L. Warren, president; W. G. Pearson, vice-president; I. M. 
Avery, treasurer; W. Gomez, secretary. 
C During 1921, over 1,200 homes were constructed in Atlanta, Ga. The Negro race 
built 25 per cent, of thest homes. 
C During the 20th National Conference of 
the Y. M. C. A., the overseas secretaries 
held a reunion. In the picture are Messrs. 
B. F. Lee, Jr.; J. E. Blanton, B. F. Hubert, 
Robert E. Parks, William Stevenson, George 
Thompson, John Hope, A. L. James and 
B. F. Seldon. 
OVERSEA S SECRETARIE S OF TH E Y . M. C. A. 
266 THE HORIZON 267 
REA R VIE W OF VILL A LEWARO , IRV1NGT0N-0N-THE-HUDS0N , NE W YOR K 
G Mrs. Lelia Walker-Wilson, daughter of 
the late Madam C. J. Walker, has arrived 
in Cairo, Egypt. This is her first stop enroute from Paris to Palestine. Mrs. Wilson recently contributed $1,000 to the National Child Welfare Association to aid in 
its work among the colored children of the 
country. The photograph is a reproduction of Villa Lewaro, Mrs. Wilson's mansion at Irvington-on-the-Hudson, New 
York. 
La Tribuna of Rome reported Mrs. Wilson's presence during the papal election as 
follows: "W e could not fail to mention in 
our inventory of those present, as most 
prominent among the vast throng, Mrs. 
Lelia Walker Wilson of New York. " 
C Gross receipts of the Southern Aid Society of Virginia, Inc., for 1921, amounted 
to $830,080; disbursements, $807,957. Its 
cash balance December 31, 1921, was $72,­
122, with a capital and surplus of $498,­
892; its assets are $588,215. During 28 
years of business the company has paid 
claims amounting to $2,511,894. Messrs. 
J. T. Carter is president; B. L. Jordan, secretary, and W. A. Jordan, assistant secretary. 
C R. Augustus Lawson, pianist of Hartford, Conn., has been heard in pianoforte 
recitals at Fisk University, Talladega College, Spelman Seminary, Tuskegee Institute, and in St. Louis, Mo. 
C In Detroit, Mich., Robert L. Ward, a 
Negro, has been elected a constable. Mr. 
Ward was a former overseas officer. 
(I Millie Nash, of 313 Sprott Alley, Sewickley, Pa., solicits information leading 
to the whereabouts of her daughter, Lizzie 
Easton, whose maiden nam© was Lizzie 
Law. 
C In November, 1919, John T. Oatneal was 
elected one of tw.o Justices of the Peace 
in Washington Court House, Ohio, for a 
term of 4 years. He is the first colored man 268 THE CRISIS 
John T. Oatneal Julius C. Westmoreland
ever elected to office in the County. Mr. 
Oatneal has made a splendid record and 
during the Presidential campaign of Mr. 
Harding, he filled a number of assignments under the State Speakers' Bureau. 
During the Taft administration he was examiner in the United States Pension 
Bureau. He was born in Franklin County, 
January 8, 1868. He received the degrees 
of A. B. from Virginia Normal and Collegiate Institute in 1890 and LL.B. from Shaw 
University in 1893. 
C. Collector Malcolm H. Nichols in Boston, 
Mass., has appointed Julius C. Westmoreland, a Deputy Collector of Internal Revenue. Mr. Westmoreland was born in Atlanta, Ga., January, 1879, being one of 10 
children. He attended Atlanta University 
for 4 years, and went to Boston in 1902, 
where he was employed by Harvey Fisk & 
Sons, a leading investment and banking 
house. After this firm discontinued its Boston office, in 1915, Mr. Westmoreland 
opened an office of his own and acquired several large real estate holdings. 
In 1910 he received a certificate from the 
Lowell Institute Collegiate Courses in cooperation with Harvard University; later 
he completed courses at the Suffolk Law 
School in Boston. Mr. Westmoreland is 
married and has one child. 
0 Robert S. Cobb, secretary of the Missouri 
Negro Industrial Commission, enjoys the 
distinction of being the first Negro of Missouri to have an office and clerical force in 
the State Capitol, at Jefferson City. Mr. 
Jobb was born February 2, 1888, at Cape 
 Robert S. Cobb J. Arthur Jackson 
Girardeau, Mo. After graduating from 
Knoxville College he took post-graduate 
work in History and Constitutional Law 
and became a teacher in the public schools 
of Missouri. His father, the late Professor J. S. Cobb, served as a public school 
teacher for 38 years. Mr. Cobb was business and religious secretary in the army 
"Y " at Camps Dodge and Dix. In 1911, he 
married Miss Bessie Mae Myers of Clinton, 
Tenn., and is the father of 3 children. The 
Industrial Commission is asking the Legislature for an appropriation of $25,000 to 
carry out more effectively the educational 
and industrial phases of the Commission's 
work. 
C The position of State Librarian is a new 
achievement among Negroes. Not only does 
the librarian have charge of the copywriting and filing of all State documents and 
reports, but he also handles matters such 
as looking up questions of law for judges 
and members of the Bar. J. Arthur Jackson of Charleston, W . Va., was appointed 
Assistant State Librarian by the late S. W. 
Starks, the first colored State Librarian, in 
1901. He served in this capacity until 1917 
when the Supreme Court appointed him 
messenger and librarian. A few months 
ago he was appointed Librarian of the State 
of West Virginia. 
(I John W. Lewis, a Republican, has been 
elected a member of the Borough Council 
in Morrisville, Pa. The town has 2,000 
white and 15 colored voters. Among Mr. 
Lewis' opponents was an ex-postmaster. 
In Morrisville, Mr. Lewis is the second larg­THE HORIZON 269 
John W . Lewis Amo s M. Scott
est tax payer, a director and vice-ipresident 
of the Chamber of Commerce, a large stockholder in the New Morrisville Trust Company, and chairman of the Street Committee. Mr. Lewis has done business in coal, 
hay and feed, and real estate insurance and 
general brokerage. He was born in 1866 
in the suburbs of Morrisville, Pa., and educated at the local public school. 
(I Amo s M. Scott was born in Peach Bottom, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, November 21, 1859. He left home when 9 
years old, tramping 95 miles to Philadelphia. His capital was 35 cents. He sold 
newspapers, blacked boots, and worked as 
a teamster. Later he worked for 3 years 
in the United States Mint, after which he 
served a term as Assistant Postmaster of 
the Senate, in Harrisburg, and as Record 
Clerk in the Quarter Sessions Court in 
Philadelphia; then he embarked in hotel 
business, operating Hotel Scott at 12th and 
Pine Streets, Philadelphia. A t the fall 
primary in 1919 Mr. Scott was a candidate 
for the office of magistrate. He was defeated; however, in November, 1921, he 
won the election by a majority of 60,000 
votes. The citizens of Philadelphia have 
tendered Mr. Scott a banquet at which more 
than 600 people were present, including 
Judges, Senators and Representatives. In 
1888 Mr. Scott was married to Malvina 
Gurley. They are the parents of 3 daughters, the oldest of whom is her father's 
confidential clerk. 
C In the death of P. B. S. Pinchback, at 
 The Late Gov. Pinchback The Lat e Mr . Williams 
Washington, D. C , we realize the passing 
of a Negro who from small beginnings rose 
to be Senator and Governor. Mr. Pinchback was the son of Major William Pinchback, a white planter of Mississippi. His 
mother, Eliza Stewart, was a mulatto. Mr. 
Pinchback received his education in Cincinnati and began life on his own responsibility as a cabin boy on canal boats. In 
the sixties he enlisted and became a captain of volunteers. He entered politics in 
1867. In 1871 he was appointed a school 
director; in 1872 he was Congressman, 
and in 1873 Acting Governor of Louisiana; and in 1882 Surveyor of the Port 
of New Orleans. He was refused his seat 
as United States Senator, though the injustice of his unseating was so great that 
the salary was appropriated to him. Mr. 
Pinchback was born May 10, 1837. In 1860 
he was married and became the father of 
6 children. He is survived by his widow, 
3 sons and 1 daughter. 
C. The late Samuel Laing Williams was an 
attorney, a civic worker, an author, a public speaker, and Assistant United States 
District Attorney in Chicago during the 
Roosevelt and Taft administrations. Mr. 
Williams was born in Savannah, Ga. A t 
the age of 9 he went to Lapeer, Mich., 
where he attended public school and was 
graduated from high school with honors. 
He entered Michigan University and won 
the first degree awarded a colored man in 
that institution; later he was graduated 
from the Columbia College of Law in Wash­270 THE
ington, D. C. For a few years he served as 
a clerk in the Pension Office, and in 1889 
he went to Chicago where he became associated with the firm of Barnett & Williams. Mr. Williams is survived by a 
widow, Fannie Barrier Williams. 
C Biddle University at Charlotte, N. C , will 
be known in the future as the Johnson C. 
Smith University, in honor of its largest 
individual donor. In order to perpetuate 
the former name of the school, the Administration Building has been named Biddle 
Memorial Hall. Since September, 1921, 
Mrs. Smith has given $115,000 for buildings and a sufficient sum for the erection 
of an arch over the main entrance of the 
campus. Her further benefaction will provide a permanent endowment fund for current expenses, enlargement, and upkeep of 
the university. Dr. H. L. McCrory is president. 
C The "Negro Veterans of the World War " 
has been organized with the following officers: Dr. T. E. Jones, national chairman; Captain Campbell C. Johnson, vicechairman; Louis R. Mehlinger, secretary; 
Victor R. Daly, national organizer; Elijah 
Reynolds, treasurer; William A. Ryles, director of publicity; Captain N. B. Marshall, 
chairman of the New York District. Dr. 
Jones says: "The organization is the inevitable outgrowth of the discrimination that 
has been practiced everywhere against the 
Negro veteran. Especially has this discrimination been most rampant in the 
South, in the treatment of suffering and 
 CRISIS 
disabled men. Our organization means to 
root out these cases and to stir up the 
country to the suffering and dire need of 
these men." 
C Secretary of the Treasury Mellon has approved the expenditure of $2,500,000 for a 
Negro veterans' hospital in Tuskegee, Ala. 
Mr. Mellon's approval of the site was made 
over the protest of colored ex-servicemen 
throughout the North who urged that the 
hospital be located at a place where it would 
not be necessary for soldiers and their families to ride in "Jim-Crow" cars in order to 
reach it. 
(I The colored General Hospital in Kansas 
City, Mo., is the largest municipal hospital 
in the United States. It is rated as "A " 
class according to the standardization of 
the American College of Surgeons, the 
American Medical Association, and the National Medical Association, and its graduates are recognized by the State of New 
York. It has a bed capacity of 300. Its 
staff consists of 47 nurses, a superintendent 
of nurses, an assistant superintendent of 
nurses, a supervisor of contagious diseases, 
an assistant supervisor of contagious diseases, 6 supervisors of departments, a pathologist, an assistant pathologist, a technician, a clinic physician, a visiting iphysician, 
a roentgenologist, and 9 internes, one of 
which is a dental interne. The visiting staff 
consists of 65 physicians. The institution 
has its own laundry, steam heating and 
electric light plants. It is supported by 
the tax payers of Kansas City, and every 
STAFF OF GENERAL THE HORIZON 271 
position connected with this hospital is filled 
by a colored person. The Superintendent is 
Dr. William J. Thompkins. 
G Three white and two Negro members of . 
a lynching party have been sentenced to 
life imprisonment at Oklahoma City, Okla., 
for the lynching on January 14 of Jake 
Brooks, a Negro packing-house worker. 
They are Lee Whitley, 29; Charles Polk, 
18; Elmert Yearta, 19; Robert Allen, 27; 
Nathan Butler, 40. The last two are Negroes. Judge James I. Phelps in pronouncing sentence told the defendants that their 
conduct warranted the electric chair. 
G The Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity has 
granted two scholarships of $50 each out 
of its Douglass Scholarship Fund. A t the 
last convention this fund was reorganized 
and in the future the scholarships will be 
larger. Dr. Thomas W. Turner, of Howard University, is chairman of the fund. 
G Mt. Moriah Baptist Church of Camden, 
S. C , has celebrated its 56th anniversary. 
Judge Mindle L. Smith was the principal 
speaker. The church was established by 
the Rev. Monroe L. Boykin who served until 1898 and has been made pastor emeritus. He has been succeeded by his son, 
the Rev. J. W. Boykin. 
G The sum of $30,000 has been given to 
the" National Association of Audubon Societies to aid in the study of wild birds. 
Mr. T. Gilbert Pearson, who is president 
of the organization, at 1924 Broadway, 
New Yor k City, states that teachers who 
form Junior Audubon Clubs will receive 
free material to aid in their work of teaching bird study. 
G Among those elected to fill vacancies on 
the Board of Trustees at Howard University, is Dr. M. O. Dumas, a Negro physician of Washington. Others are Milton 
E. Ailes, vice-president of the Riggs National Bank of Washington, and General 
John H. Sherburne, who led a colored artillery regiment in France during the 
World War. 
G A scholarship of $2,000 is to be established for Harvard University in memory 
of the late Maria L. Baldwin, the Negro 
principal of the Agassiz School in Cambridge, Mass. 
C Edward Jones has been awarded $5 in 
gold for the best design for a letterhead 
to be used by the Musical Art Society of 
Hampton Institute. This society is responsible for the series of concerts during the 
winter at Hamlpton. Among attractions 
this year is the Russian Symphony Orchestra. 
G The Elbridge L. Adams Prize Debate 
has been held at Hampton Institute. The 
subject was "Resolved, That the United 
States Government Should Own and Control Its Mining Industry". The Douglass 
Literary Society presented the negative 
argument and won with the following team 
—John T. Jones, S. Miller Johnson, Harry 
E. Cook. Each one was presented with a 
gold medal. The Dunbar Literary Society 
presented the affirmative side. The Adams 
Prize Essay Medals were awarded as folHOSPITAL, KANSAS CITY 272 THE CRISIS 
lows: W. A. Shields, silver; J. W. Williams, bronze. The subject related to government ownership and control of the mining industry, with special reference to coal, 
iron and petroleum industries. 
G. Abyssinia Baptist Church, in the downtown section of New York City, has been 
sold for $190,000 and property has been 
purchased in the Harlem Negro section, 
138th Street and Seventh Avenue, where 
a $335,000 edifice will be erected. This 
church was organized 114 years ago. The 
Rev. A. Clayton Powell has been pastor 
for the past 14 years. The membership is 
4,000. 
C The Florida Sentinel Publishing Company at Jacksonville, has declared a dividend of 5 percent on its stock. The company owns and operates a printing plant 
valued at $30,000. The business of the corporation during last year amounted to $41,­
000. 
C The Choral Society of Virginia Normal 
and Industrial Institute recently sang before legislators in the hall of the House 
of Delegates, in Richmond. Miss Anna L. 
Lindsay was the musical director and Miss 
Johnnella Frazier, the accompanist. Two 
quartettes were composed of Misses Ac ­
quilla Matthews, Gladys Sears, Beatrice 
Robinson, Ruth Robinson and Messrs. 
Archie Richardson, Clifton Averette, James 
Fuller, Leroy Turner. Professor John M. 
Gandy is principal of the school. 
C The Radiator, a Negro bi-monthly insurance magazine, is being published at Durham, N. C. Its purpose is to fill a need 
among colored insurance sellers and buyers for a closer association with each other 
and a greater knowledge of insurance practises. It requests every Negro insurance 
company to appoint a contributor to supply 
it with news about his company. The editor is Sadie Tanner Mossell. 
C. Among numbers presented at a Cappella 
concert of the Oratorio Society of New 
York, held at Carnegie Hall, was "Music 
in the Mine", by R. Nathaniel Dett, the 
Negro pianist-composer. This number 
was the only one repeated. 
C Three plays for benevolent purposes 
have been presented since 1919 by the 
I. X. L. DRAMATIC CXTJB, MINNEAPOLIS THE HORIZON 273 
AT THE CONVENTION OF THE DELTA SIGMA THETA SORORITY IN PHILADELPHIA 
I X L Dramatic Club of Minneapolis, Minn. 
The success of the players is due to the interest and direction of Miss Eva B. Walker. 
Amon g plays which the club will present in 
the future are works of Albert Hurt, a 
promising young Negro writer of Minneapolis. Each member of the I X L Dramatic 
Club is also a member of the local branch 
of the N. A . A. C. P. 
C The Delta Sigma Theta Sorority held its 
annual convention at Gamma Chapter, University of Pennsylvania. The convention 
headquarters were located at Bennett Club 
House, this being the first time that a colored organization has convened within the 
walls of this institution. A plan was formulated for the establishment of a National 
Federation Board which shall control certain activities and relations between the 
existing colored sororities in the United 
States. The next convention will be held 
December 27 to 29, 1922, at the University 
of Iowa. 
C Henry O. Tanner, the Negro artist in 
Europe, has been selected among 25 of 
the world's most eminent artists whose 
work will be shown in Pittsburgh, Pa., at 
the 21st International Art Exhibit. Eleven 
of Mr. Tanner's paintings were recently 
on exhibit at the Detroit Institute of Arts. 
Since 1895 Mr. Tanner's work has been 
exhibited annually in the Paris salon. In 
1897 his picture "The Raising of Lazarus" 
won a medal and was purchased by the 
French government for the Luxembourg. 
C After three weeks' operation, the colored Carnegie Branch Library in Oklahoma 
City, Okla., had issued cards to 206 persons, with a record of an average daily 
loan of 60 books. 
C Among the 15,000 waiters, cooks, and 
pantry attendants of the Pennsylvania 
Railroad, not a single case of contagious 
or communicable disease was found during two months' examination. 
C In the Legislature of New Jersey, Dr. 
W. G. Alexander, a Negro, has begun his 
second term of office. 
C The City Council of Philadelphia has 
passed an ordinance appropriating $100,­
000 for the erection of a recreation center 
to be named in honor of the late Fannie 
Jackson Coppin. Mrs. Coppin was the wife 
of Bishop L. J. Coppin and a well-known 
social worker. 
C Twelve million dollars worth of insurance was written during last year by the 
Standard Life Insurance Company of Atlanta, Ga. It paid $149,000 in death claims 
among 132 policyholders. It has a total of 
$20,700,000 worth of insurance in force. 
The officers of the company are Messrs. 
Heman E. Perry, president; N. B. Young, 
T. H. Hayes and A. L. Lewis, vice-presidents; J. A. Robinson, secretary; C. A. 
Shaw and C. E. Arnold, assistant secretaries; T. J. Ferguson, cashier; R. L. Isaacs, 
treasurer; Dr. C. C. Cater, medical director; W. H. King, director of agencies; 
George D. Eldridge, actuary. 274 THE
C In the high school at Rockford, 111., Roland Williams finished the 4 year course 
in 3% years. He had 36 credits, while 
only 32 are required. William Garrett performed so well as a football player that he 
was picked as an all star man on the circuit team. 
G A t the first annual meeting of stockholders of the People's Ice & Fuel Company, 
Little Rock, Ark., nine-tenths of the stock 
was represented in person or by proxy. 
After 5 months' operation, the management 
reported a net profit of $12,000. 
C The Progressive Choral Society of Bowling Green, Ky., has presented Mine. Florence Cole-Talbert, coloratura soprano, in a 
recital at State Street Baptist Church. 
There was a large and appreciative audience. Mrs. Talbert was assisted by 
Charles R. Taylor, a student of Howard 
University. Miss R. Lillian Carpenter was 
at the piano. 
G Daisy Payne, colored, has been elected 
a member of the executive committee of 
students at Indiana University which will 
have general executive supervision of the 
million dollar memorial campaign. Members were chosen on a basis of scholarship 
and prominence in student affairs. 
G On February 14, in Boston, Mass., Governor Cox and Mayor Curley were speakers 
at the celebration marking the 105th anniversary of the birth of Frederick Douglass and the 5th anniversary of the dedication of Frederick Douglass Square. Flags 
at the City Hall, Faneuil Hall and the 
State House were flown at half mast until 
noon. 
G The Coleridge-Taylor Chorus of Toronto, 
Canada, has given a recital. The aim of 
the group is to become a 'permanent Canadian chorus. Since last April the organization has grown from 19 to 50 mem­
 CRISIS 
bers, with Messrs. Robert P. Edwards and 
Earnest A. Richardson as conductor and 
associate conductor, respectively. 
G A new site, which cost $155,000, has been 
purchased for Walden University in Nashville, Tenn. The old property has been adjoined to Meharry Medical College, for 
which the General Education Board and 
the Carnegie Foundation have appropriated 
a cash endowment of $500,000. 
C The Board of Education in Washington 
has adopted a resolution which will give 
all persons, regardless of race or creed, access to and use of the branch libraries to 
be established in the District public schools. 
C The following lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: 
Texarkana, Ark., February 11, P. Norman; threatening a white man. 
Ellaville, Ga., February 13, Will Jones; 
shooting two white farmers. 
Indianola, Ga., February 17, John Glover; 
shooting up Negro school-house. 
G Virginia D. Sutton, a colored woman of 
Chicago, has won a judgment for $50 
against the Missouri Pacific Railroad. Mrs. 
Sutton purchased a ticket for Little Rock, 
Ark. A conductor required her to ride in 
the Negro smoking-car, as the Negro passenger coach was filled; when she refused 
to do so, the train was stopped and she was 
put off. 
G Lawrence Warner, for 25 years an employee of the City National Bank, NewYork, and for 30 years a resident of Brooklyn, is dead at the age of 68. He was born 
in Alexandria, Va., and is survived by a 
widow, 3 sons, 1 daughter, and 1 brother. 
G In Little Rock, Ark., a new colored Y . W. 
C. A. building has been erected by the 
National Headquarters at a cost of $40,­
000. The colored people, themselves, furnished the building at a cost of $7,000. 
CLAYDA CLUB Y. W. C. A. GIRL RESERVES, 
NORFOLK, VA. Y. W. C. A., LITTLE ROCK, ARK. The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
WHER E the mind is without fear and 
the head is held high; 
Wher e knowledge is free; 
Wher e the world has not been broken into 
fragments by narrow domestic walls; 
Wher e words come out from the depths of 
truth; 
Wher e tireless striving stretches its arms 
toward perfection; 
Wher e the clear stream of reason has not 
lost its way into the dreary desert 
sand of dead habit; 
Wher e the mind is led forward by Thee 
into ever-widening thought and action— 
Into that heaven of freedom, my Father, 
let my country wake. 
—Rabindranath Tagore.
* * * 
The success of New York Negroes on 
the stage has been duplicated recently in 
Los Angeles by the production of "Africanus", a two-act play by Eloise Bibb 
Thompson. The Los Angeles Record says 
approvingly: 
Working with pliable material sensitive 
to color and rhythm, Olga Grey Zacsek, director, produced some interesting results 
with "Africanus" . There was nothing stiff 
nor ungraceful about the work of these Negro actors and actresses and the lilt of their 
musical voices was pleasing to the ear. . . . 
The play is rich in Negro humor, some 
of it of a delicious order, and the audience 
was kept laughing most of the time. 
The epilogue was unusual in its sensuous 
beauty, no little part of the effect being due 
to the artistic dancing of Anita Thompson. 
In stage settings Miss Zacsek has struck 
a note entirely new to Los Angeles, follow 
ing the lead of Arthur Hopkins and Edmund Johnson, disciples of Gordon Craig. 
Tracy and Oliver were the artists. 
H. W . Hanemann writes in Life of Achmed Abdullah's "Night Drums " (Mc ­
Cann's) : 
The native drums (which go rub-rub-rubrumbeddy-rub and then banng) whisper 
the sinister news of "rinderpest striking 
the long horned cattle of the Massais . . . 
of a M'pongwe medicine-man brewing dead 
mysteries" and of a fast black Master Mind 
plotting to becomei the 'Imperial Wizard 
of an All-African Ku Klux Klan to overthrow the white control. Unfortunately, 
they also whisper a lot of indigenous names 
which mieht have been made up out of the 
top row of letters on a typewriter keyboard. 
These choice cuts of native dialect stick up 
throughout the book like seven foot fences. 
Just as soon as you are able to take M'yamt 
M'bi-likini without holding on the pommel, 
along comes Rakaiz al-'Utabs and knocks 
you for a row of zaouias. Ail Likewise, 
gewald! 
Unless you are terribly wrought up over 
African intramural affairs, you'll probably 
fall right off at the first etymological jump. 
* * * 
An exhibit of Negro art was held recently in the 135th St. Branch of the New York 
Public Library. Here, through the activity 
of Mr. A. G. Dill, the work of some 38 colored artists was shown. Worth Tuttle 
commenting on the exhibit in The Freeman, 
asks: 
What does one expect to find in such an 
exhibition of Negro art: the imagination 
and humor of such yarns as Uncle Remus 
vsed to spin; the unique pathos of the spirituals; or the depth of tragic feeling which 
Mr. Du Bois and others have revealed in 
Negro literature? One feels, however, that 
it is not quite fair to make such demands 
of a first exhibit of Negro painting. The 
painter, especially the young painter, is 
likely to be unconscious of anything so limiting as race; and if, in the peculiar case 
of the Negro, he is conscious of it. he is 
likely to be sensitive about revealing it. 
Both his temperament and his training under white masters, with white models, in 
c'asses with students of other races incline 
him towards catholic views or a lack of 
interest in racial work. 
Yet in the field of nainting and sculpture 
the American Negro has a freedom for selfexpression that has been denied him in literature. For such expression, three sources 
of inspiration and material are open to 
him. There is the history of the race, there 
are the contemporary types of Afro-Americans; there is also, as Mr. Benjamin Brawley remarks in "The Negro in Literature 
and Art" , the racial temperament 
The historical material for the Negro 
artist lies in the story of the pre-dynastic 
empires of Africa and the incidents of 
slave-days in America. It would be absurd to see anything more than an artificial 
connection between the Ethiopians of ancient Africa and the Negroes of modern 
America. The American Negro today, 
however, reading of the discoveries of the 
remains of early African culture, can experience the same thrill of racial and national pride which the American Jew ex275 276 THE
periences when he thinks of the restoration 
of Jerusalem and the Sinn Feiner feels 
about the Celtic revival. Who knows but 
that the Negro, with all his innate appreciation of beauty, and fired by the knowledge of the past glories of his race, may 
develop in the country an art as natively 
expressive as that of Nubia at the height 
of its civilization? It is interesting to note 
as the first utilization of this African material, the symbolic Egyptianesque figure 
of a Negro girl recently presented to the 
New York Public Library by Meta Warrick Fuller, the Negro sculptor whom Rodin commended. 
ALL ABOUT THE DYER BILL 
A SUMMAR Y of press reports on the 
Anti-Lynching Bill follows. First as 
to party feeling: 
The Petersburg Index-Appeal feels that 
"it is a matter of deep regret that the 
democrats in Congress should have lent 
themselves to the republicans for a cheap 
political trick", since, so far as it "can recall the House democrats have not made 
such an issue of any other measure which 
has come up recently". "So bitter has been 
the democratic opposition that the bill may 
be regarded virtually as a party measure", 
states the Pittsburgh Press, which prompts 
its neighbor the Leader, to inquire "Wha t 
can be expected of a non-progressive and 
largely illiterate population, which has been 
virtually standing still since the surrender 
at Appomattox, when 25 per cent of its 
national political representatives in official 
places defend the right to commit capital 
crimes?" The St. Louis Post Dispatch 
thinks that "political cowardice carried the 
measure through the House, and the hope 
that the Senate will kill it is a compliment 
to the judgment and courage of the Senate," though the Baltimore Sun feels that 
republican leaders in the House have thus 
"incurred a grave political liability without 
surely paying off a debt" since by this 
"single stroke Mr. Harding's conciliatory 
policy toward the Southern States has been 
killed aborning". 
* * * 
As to the effect of the law, editors differ. 
The Grand Rapids Press says: 
" A jury is a jury, filled with as many 
prejudices in a federal as in a state court", 
and the Minnesota Star feels that even if 
such a law were sustained "one may doubt 
whether it will end lynching", since "behind the lynching of Negroes is nearly 
three centuries of social injustice which has 
fostered lynch law". The Memphis NewsScimitar states that "the passage of the 
law will be equivalent to serving notice 
upon state officials that they have been re 
lieved of responsibility", and the Richmond 
Times Dispatch thinks "the criminal element among the Negroes will be embold­
 CRISIS 
ened to commit crimes which inspire lynch 
law, in the belief that they will receive a 
measure of federal protection under the 
act not now enjoyed". "The existing statutes 
of every state afford ample grounds for 
prosecution and punishment of persons 
guilty of the crime of lynching . . . 
Wherein would the offense be heightened 
cr the execution of justice upon the offender be made more certain by restating 
those statutes in federal terms?" inquires 
the Atlanta Journal. 
But the Springfield Republican champions the bill on the ground that "America's right to be called a civilized country is 
at stake", and, while admitting the invasion of local government, concludes that 
"if the states will not or cannot put a stop 
to lynchings, the federal government must 
intervene to the extent of its power" . 
* * * 
It means progress: 
The Providence Journal feels the measure is a "long step toward wiping out one 
of our worst national disgraces", in agreement with the New York Globe, which 
thinks that "the prompt passage of the 
bill by the Senate will be a step forward in 
American civilization". 
* * * 
In the present circumstances it is inevitable thinks the Columbia, S. C , State: 
"If states persist in placing lawlessness 
above law, it is certain that the United 
States, soon or late, will intervene and, in 
so doing, have the moral support of the 
great majority of the people except in the 
states at which intervention is aimed." 
* * * 
The Houston Post chimes in: 
We don't want federal laws infringing 
upon every activity of our state government; but we are going to get federal laws 
unless we enforce our state laws. 
* * * 
The strongest plea for reform in lynching comes out of the heart of the South, 
from the Greensboro, N. C , Daily News. 
As everybody knows, Canada has refused 
to turn Matthew Bullock over to the authorities of his native state. The editor of 
the News replies to Governor Morrison's 
comment: 
The governor might as well face the 
truth now as later. The Canadian authorities are refusing to extradite Matthew Bullock simply because they have heard that 
down here in North Carolina where the 
odds in population are two and three to 
one, the wealth and power of the whites 
100 to 1, the laws and the courts are the 
whites' in the ratio of 2,500,000 to 0, whites, 
unwilling to live under the laws of their 
own making, practice murder on corporate 
scale and rarely ever come to account 
for it. THE LOOKING GLASS 277 
Wha t makes Governor Morrison so sure 
that Warren County officials who informed 
him a year ago that there was no danger 
of a "so-called lynching" which took place 
while the assurance was being transmitted 
by telephone, would know any better now 
if another "so-called lynching" were beingconspired? It lays no great burden on 
one's credulity to believe another lynching 
unlikely; but the faith is prompted by no 
history of the state in dealing with this 
crime. 
Indeed, North Carolina's official attitude 
toward lynching has been except in rare 
instances a record of cowardice and disgrace. Governor Morrison declares that 
"lynchings are never winked at by the authorities and are always prevented where 
the authorities have any knowledge of the 
approach of danger and an opportunity to 
prevent it". Often the authorities do not 
take the trouble even to "wink". The history of our state is replete with lynchings 
which did not cause our officers even to 
bat an eye. 
* * * 
This honest editor does not stop with the 
bare accusation; he gives page and line: 
But how long has it been since a mob 
in Governor Morrison's town went to a 
hospital, ran over the women nurses, took 
from a ward a wounded Negro and lynched 
him as easily as an undertaker could have 
taken him out and buried him? Wha t did 
Charlotte do to punish the men who desecrated the soil of the signers? And how 
long before that was it when a Rowan 
County mob broke into jail during a special 
term of court which had been called to try 
a group of prisoners kept many weeks in 
Charlotte jail, lynched three of them while 
13 special deputies and a military company 
looked helplessly on because the sheriff 
openly said he would "shoot no white men 
to save a damned nigger" ? And how long 
prior to the visit of that Rowan mob was 
it that the same "people as a whole" could 
not prevent the lynching of two black brats, 
aged 13 and 11? 
How long has it been since Solicitor H. 
E. Norris, perhaps the most powerful prosecutor in North Carolina, conducted three 
futile investigations, filled with perjury, 
into lynchings, one of which occurred in a 
churchyard in Governor Bickett's home 
county, another in Wake after the officers 
had captured the criminal, and a third 
growing out of a Franklin lynching with 
the prisoner safely behind the bars? 
Wh o has forgotten Lee Robinson's effort to 
convict 25 lynchers in a county 100 per 
cent mum in its attitude? Wh o doesn't 
recall the Greene County sortie into Lenoir 
to get Old Joe Black who was taken from 
jail and murdered on a 'simple misdemeanor? 
* * * 
Wh y shouldn't mob rule flourish in North 
Carolina? Wh o prevents it? The editor 
concludes: 
Wh o doesn't recollect Governor Craig's 
call on the resident judge to conduct an investigation, the jurist's declination and the 
subsequent inquiry of Solicitor Henry E. 
Shaw and Judge W. M. Bond into that 
community murder? And who can name 
one man in Greene or Lenoir counties who 
lifted up his voice in support of a solemn 
investigation which Chief Justice Walter 
Clark called "the Kinston performance"? 
Who will ever forget the Goldsboro mob's 
easy victory over the jailer and the twitting 
of the late Justice Allen by Judge Clark 
because Judge Allen did not prevent mob 
murder in his home town? Omit Goldsboro's 1920 resistance and Winston-Salem's 
1918 fight against the mob and North Carolina's record is shameful, indeed. 
QUESTION AND ANSWER 
The constant anxiety in the mind of the 
white man during the World War, especially after the introduction of black 
troops into the struggle, was speculation 
as to the ultimate effects on colored populations. Alfred L. P. Dennis writes in the 
New York Times: 
Africa and Asia had seen the skeleton 
in the closet of European civilization. 
What would the backward races now think 
of their white lords and masters? Would 
they be lost in wonder and in fear at the 
tragic mysteries of modern warefare? 
Would they bow as heretofore in the presence of inventors and captains of aircraft 
and high explosives, of poison gas and 
tanks? Or would they remember that on 
occasion White men had fled before African 
soldiers who had been welcomed by white 
women? Would Asiatic troops recall that 
they had been summoned from their homes 
to aid Europeans in a desperate struggle 
for existence and that at times they had 
been set as guards over white prisoners? 
* * * 
The same speculation, differently directed, Mr. Dennis points out, was in the air 
at the time of the Disarmament Conference: 
A t the recent conference in Washington, 
the exact problem of the use of native Asiatic or African troops in western wars did 
not arise. The entire subject of land armnments was pigeonholed because there was 
no adequate substitute guarantee for international security provided or proposed by 
this conference. Nevertheless, in a larger 
sense the general subject of the relation 
of Asia to America and Europe, whether 
for peace or war, was indeed the main occasion and material of the Washington 
Conference. That gathering took its bearing first of all from the fac t that the western world had not only engaged in contro­278 THE
versies with Asiatics but also had direct 
concern in disputes between Asiatic States. 
* * * 
Just what the material and physical effect on the attitude of the black world to 
the white will be, remains to be seen. But 
certainly from the psychological side the 
soundness of the statement, the truth shall 
make you free, has been proven. A veil 
has been torn from the eyes of the East and 
Europe suffers from the new vision thus 
turned upon her. In his book the "Scourge 
of Christianity", Paul Richards tells how 
Europe practices Christianity—in Asia. 
And his words have been eagerly heard and 
quoted by Asiatics, in particular the Hindus, who find in the theme the very essence 
of their own feeling for the mockery of 
white religions. Some passages most 
quoted in Indian papers follow: 
Christians worship one Son of Asia 
. . . at a great cost to the others. 
Europe finds it natural to take one Man 
of Asia as Master, and all his brothers as 
slaves. 
Christians think that since one Asiatic 
alone is the Son of God, the rest can fairly 
be treated as sons of the Devil. 
The Christianity of Christ died when 
Asia ceased to teach it. 
* * * 
When Christ comes again He will have 
to give up being an Asiatic and a Carpenter if He wishes to be admitted into the 
Christian countries of America and Australia. 
If it pleased the "native" of Judea to 
reappear as a "native of India", how many 
Englishmen would remain Christians? 
If Christ came again, would He not 
choose again to be a son of the enslaved 
people rather than a citizen of the Empire? 
The Christ, if He comes, will not be of 
the white race; the colored peoples could 
not put their faith in Him. 
If Christ has not changed His ideas, 
Christians will have, when He returns, to 
change their habits. 
* * * 
The Gospel is not only for individuals; 
it is also for the nations. 
The nation too must learn: Thou shalt 
not steal the land of others; thou shalt not 
kill defenseless nationalities; thou shalt 
not commit adultery with colonies and dominions; thou shalt not bear false witness 
against enemy governments. . . . And 
the supreme command: Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor—all peoples whatsoever, black, 
yellow, white, African or Asiatic, strong 
or weak, small or great—thou shalt love 
as thyself. 
It is for the nations that this was written : This is my commandment, that ye 
 CRISIS 
love one another .. . ye are members 
one of another .. . do not unto others 
what ye would not, they should do unto you. 
Judge not that ye be not judged. . . . 
Let him who is without sin throw the first 
stone. . . . Remit your debts to one 
another. . . . Forgive your enemies. 
For the nations it is written: Thou 
wicked servant, because thou hast not forgiven the debt of another, thou shalt be delivered to the executioner. . . . Agre e 
quickly with thine adversary, lest haply 
thine adversary deliver thee to the judge, 
and the judge to the officer and thou be 
cast into prison. Verily, I say unto thee, 
thou shalt by no means come out until thou 
hast paid the last farthing. So shall it 
be done to you, O nation! if you forgive 
not everyone your brother nation from your 
heart. 
If thou wouldst be perfect, first go, liberate all thy colonies, and then come, follow 
me, said Jesus to the rich nation. 
MUSIC HATH CHARMS 
Henry NEVINSON, the explorer, pays 
a tribute in the Baltimore, Md., Sun, 
to the people who could produce the spirituals which recently he heard in Lexington, 
Va.: 
Dwellers in the Southern States often bid 
us beware of sentiment in thinking of the 
Negro. Well, without being anything but 
a hardened old cynic who has seen all the 
evils of the world, and feels no surprise at 
them, I certainly find something irresistably attractive in the humor, the pathos, 
and the music of the Negro people, whether 
dark black or almost pale enough to be 
white. Partly, I suppose, it comes from the 
sight of a people suffering for the sins, not 
of their own race or of their own fathers, 
but of my race and my fathers, whose 
atrocious sins are visited upon the descendants of victims long ago. 
Southerners (and not Southerners only!) 
tell me that if I lived among "colored ' 
people, I should soon hate or fear or despise 
them just like everyone else. It might b^ 
so, but I cannot yet believe it. For I have 
known the African in his native forests of 
Central Africa, among the hills of Zulu­
•and, along the shores of Mozambique, and 
among the poisonous swamps of the West 
Coast; and though I have often been in 
danger in Africa, it was never from an 
African that the danger came. I have 
watched their savage rites of fetish and 
magic; have shared their savage games, 
and listened to their wild music of drum 
and ochisangi as they danced all night under the full moon outside their forest 
kraals. To some extent I have come to 
know their nature, and it is a fine peculiarity of man that sympathetic knowledge generally brings liking. 
In the American "colored" people I seem 
to find much the same old traits that still THE LOOKING GLASS 279 
distinguish the main family of their race— 
the generous good-humor, the irresistible 
laughter, the faithful response to the man 
who keeps his word to them, and above all, 
the delight in music and emotional art. 
Americans tells me I am wrong. They tell 
me it is actually dangerous even to suggest 
decent qualities in a Negro. It may be so; 
my experience in this country is very brief. 
But I have known the Negro at far lower 
levels of what is called civilization than 
here, and even at his lowest levels I have 
found some decent qualities. 
THE GLORY THAT WAS AFRICA 
AFRICA emerges at the very beginning 
of history, says the New York Evening Post: 
The view that the Negro's place in history and civilization dates from about the 
time a Dutch ship brought the first slaves 
to Virginia is not confined to our South, 
but it is an utterly fantastic view. Not 
merely did the Negro build up powerful 
kingdoms' in the Nile Valley. He traded 
with Solomon when Jerusalem was at its 
greatest importance, and sent gold, ivory, 
jewels and cloth to the first Greek and Semitic colonies in North Africa . When the 
advance of Mohammedanism began Negro 
converts to Islam helped to conquer Northern Afric a and Spain. Kingdoms almost 
worthy of comparison with Ethiopia arose 
and sank in various other parts of Africa. 
Archaeology is expected to supply much 
more information upon the history and culture of the Negro in earliest times, and 
will do its part to give the Negro a larger 
background and greater dignity. 
One of those wonderful kingdoms was 
and is Abyssinia. The Boston, Mass. 
Transcript tells us: 
Ye t here is a land where the reputed 
descendant of King Solomon still sits on a 
golden throne and rules over a Biblical people. . . . The Emperor, or Negus, 
seeks to stand pat on his descent from King 
Solomon, and receives the homage of his 
feudal princes, or rases, until, some day, 
they cease to pay homage, and overthrow 
him for another. From time to time, as 
we have said, Abyssinia is brought to the 
attention of the outside world by some rude 
collision with civilization. British citizens 
are abused by some King Theodore; some 
Sir Robert Napier goes with an army, chastises him, and returns Lord Napier or Magdala. Or Italy seeks to add Abyssinia to 
her colonial possessions, and undergoes the 
awful and overwhelming .defeat at Adowa 
a victory of barbarism over civilization 
which has left Abyssinia comparatively undisturbed by European adventurers ever 
since. 
With it all, Abyssinia is a most interesting country. No country could fail to be 
interesting where the ruling classes, 
though claiming descent from the Jews of 
David's and Solomon's time have been 
Christians since the fourth century; where 
princes still live in castles and pay and exact feudal tribute; where a strong army 
lives by plunder, and the state bases a most 
singular financial system on a currency 
consisting of bars of rock salt and cartridges! Abyssinia is one of the most picturesque of lands, mountainous but not unfruitful. Its farmers, as well as its towns, 
are those of the Old Testament. Its people, though mixed with Negro blood 
through the importation of black women 
as wives, are by the paternal line of ancient Hamitic descent, and if well bred are 
of straight and handsome features, of an 
olive tint or quite fair. Hopelessly mediaeval, "back numbers" to the extent of 
many centuries, they are nevertheless 
brightly intelligent. They are an anomaly 
among the nations. 
* * * 
Wha t does Africa mean today to the 
American Negro? Certainly a dear Fatherland but not, as the Mississippi Legislature would seem to indicate, a place of return. As the St. Louis, Mo., Globe Democrat points out: 
Any suggestion that the Negro population in this country can be materially reduced by migration to Africa is fatuous. 
In the days of slavery the wishes of the 
individual counted for little after satisfactory arrangements had been made with his 
owner. But how could free-born American 
citizens of color be "sent" as the Mississippi resolutions request, to Africa if they did 
not want to be sent? Obviously the greater 
number would not want to be sent. The 
Negro is here to stay. His presence here 
may long give rise to a race problem, but 
proposed solutions must assume that his 
presence is going to continue. Solutions 
predicted on the possibility that he won't 
be present involve so violent an assumption 
as to be worthless. 
IN PASSING 
To William Edward Burghardt Du Bois: 
Du Bois in Cleveland Dear William A S an 
AUTHOR, editor, scholar 
and public speaker, your contribution to the advancement of your race 
has been one of the greatest. You are a 
big asset to these United States, and to the 
world at large.—MOSES CLEAVELAND, Cleveland, Ohio, Press. 
I N MEMORIAM COLORED kiddies of Newark, N. J., keep the statue 
OF Lincol n spotl( ssl T y clea n 
Each morning from three to five girls and 
boys in this tender and practical way show 
their appreciation of what the emancipator 
did for their race.—Detroit Free Press. 280 THE CRISIS 
YOUTH'S TROUBLES LITTLE Sammy Lincoln 
Lee is jest as black as he 
kin be, an he is pitchm fer 
our nine 'cause we don't draw no color line. 
Sam's got de coives; he's got de speed dat 
always keeps us in de lead, so we don't 
mind if he is black an' lives down by det 
railroad track. 
Las' week he strikes out fifteen guys, 
an' makes the rest hit pop-up flies. He's 
got a shine-ball dat's immense, an' when he 
Crows dere ain't no dents put in it we'en 
dey swings dere clubs; Sam makes dem 
look like busher-dubs. 
But dere's de pity of it all—w'en Sammy 
grows up big an' tall, he won't be on no 
big league club, not even on de bench as sub, 
'cause big league players must be white, 
an' Sammy Lee is black as night. 
Las' Sunday, me an' Sammy seen a big 
league battle played between de Panthers 
an' de Kangaroos, an' little Sammy got de 
blues, fer as we watched it from a tree, 
he's puzzled an' he says ter me, "Where is 
de colored players at? I ain't see one go 
up ter bat!" So Billy Briggs an' me jest 
dream an' wonder if dere ain't some scheme 
to change Sam's color, black as tar, an' 
make him white like us kids are.— GEORG E 
MORIARTY , in Ballads of Baseball. 
TH E WOR M TURNS LOUIS WESLEY , George 
Smith and George Nelson, 
Negroes who compose the board 
of School District No. 61 , Nevada County, 
yesterday filed in the Supreme Court their 
appeal from a peremptory mandamus issued 
by Judge Haynie of the Nevada Circuit 
Court requiring them to build and maintain 
a school for white children of the district. 
The mandamus was issued in August, on 
petition of white residents of the districts, 
who declared that the Negro directors had 
made no provision for the white children, 
although they maintained a school for Negro children. They testified that there were 
1 2 white children in the district. 
In their reply the directors said that 
there was no schoolhouse for children, but 
that a Negro school had been operated in 
the district for 38 years. They alleged that 
there were 100 Negro children of school age 
in the district, and that they had no funds 
with which to make provision for the white 
children.—Little Rock, Ark., Gazette. 
Guess the Answer Professor FLINDERS 
PETRIE says that nearly 
AALL THE PEOPLE THAT have been 
poured into America are Europeans, and 
they are all "at the same political and social stage, of the same senility of civilization." W e need to be mixed, he says, with 
"a race less sensitive in nerves, though not 
less perceptive in thought; and above all, 
it must be a race which commands the respect and affection of those who have lived 
among it and know it best. I leave the reader to think what cultivated race of the present world would fulfill these conditions." 
What race is it? Is it the Jewish race? 
If so, America must be all right. It cannot 
be the Eskimos; they are not a cultivated 
race.—Boston Transcript. 
HONO R IN TEXAS THE Avalanche believes firmly in giving the white folks 
preference every time, but until 
just recently it has been impossible to secure the help of white people in the homes, 
except at wages that none other than a rich 
man could afford, and to ask a white person 
two months ago to wash, would have been 
considered an insult. To ask a white man 
to sweep the floor of an office or a shop 
would have been considered equally such. 
Things have changed, however, and the 
writer is now employing two colored folks 
and ten to fifteen white people, but if the 
party who wrote this article [applying for 
a job], will apply at our office, we will give 
him or her either positions that these colored folks occupy, at the same wages, or 
even fifty percent above the wages they are 
drawing, and will do so cheerfully.—Lubbock, Tex., Avalanche. 
THE RICH BEGGAR 
MAR Y EFFI E LE E NEWSOM E 
T N jasper and onyx and gold 
His city I soon shall behold. 
0 Paradise! 
Though on earth naught to me has been 
told 
Of jasper, in onyx and gold, 
Yet in spite of what earth may have doled, 
I've Paradise! THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 281 
JOSEPH K. BRICK AGRICULTURAL 
INDUSTRIAL and NORMAL SCHOOL 
BRICKS, N. C. 
This School offers a first-class High School 
Course, including Domestic Science, Domestic 
Art, Agriculture, Work in Wood, Iron and 
Mechanical Drawing, Piano and Vocal Music, 
Night School. 
Teachers and officers, 26 ; enrollment, 360; 
boarders, 220. Cottage and buildings, 14. 
School farm, 1.128J4 acres. Strong athletic, 
literary and Christian associations. School term 
34 weeks. Environment fine. School receives 
four mails a day. Our postoffice handles money 
orders, registered matter and parcel post mail. 
For further information write 
T. S. INBORDEN , Principal, BRICKS , N . C. 
MANASSAS INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
MANASSAS , VIRGINI A 
Beautiful location, 191 acres, fourteen buildings. Direct 
railroad connections. 
Th e only school of its kind in historic Northern Virgini a 
State standard Four-Yea r Hig h School Course. 
Advanced Grade School. Business and Trade Courses. 
High moral standards. Prepare boys and girli to become 
useful men and women; terms reasonable. 
For Information addre u 
EDWAR D D . HOWE , PRINCIPA L 
St. Philip' s 
Norma l & Industria l School 
San Antonio, Texas. 
(FOR GIRLS) 
Normal, Academic, Junior an d Music Courses, 
Teachers' Training, Domestic Sciences and 
Arts, Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring, Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookeeping and Spanish. 
Boarding facilities. Ideal location. 
Faculty from leading Universities. 
Writ e for Bulletin. 
Artemisia Bowden, Principal 
Wilberforce University 
Summer School 
9th ANNUA L SESSIO N 
June 19th t o July 29th, 1922 
Wonderful natural beauty, ideal place for health, recreation and study. Large faculty, inspiring lectures, splendid 
educational- equipment and excellent cuisine. 
Courses: College, Normal, High School. 
Special Features: Bibl e School and School of Philanthropy. 
Catalogues sent on application. 
Address all mai l to the Director of the Summe r School. 
Gilbert H. Jones, Director. 
ENROLL
DERRIC K BUSINES S
KINDERGARTEN DEPARTMENT 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY 
In full operation since igi 2 
Professional course of two years 
Address 
Kindergarten Department Atlanta University Atlanta, Ga. 
The Colored Teachers'Bureau Will Help Yon Get a Better Paying Position 
REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TE8M I 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Bo x 21, Wilberforce , 0 . 
K MONEY GETTER becau it A CROWD GETTER 
churches and Clubs looklns for a »lay that will afford ari 
"Nlng of Slda-Spllttlne Fun . should bare 
The Slabtown Convention As entertain mast In one att; full of wit 
n d good humor. Scores of churches have cleared Iron 
Jna to Two Hundred Dollar* In One Night. PRICE . SO* 
MIS S NANNI E H . BURROUGHS , Author 
Lincoln Heights. Washington. D. r. 
Public Sentiment is changing The Stenographers' Institute to 
DUNCAN' S BUSINES S SCHOO L You can be an expert stenographer, bookkeeper and typist 
and earn a large salary. We thoroly interpret all text books 
and present the subjects in such a way that a student's mind 
can easily grasp the explanation. Then the student takes 
pleasure in executing the work. It is done easily, accurately 
and speedily. Duncan's psychological method of training 
makes It easy for a student to write from 100 to 150 words 
per minute in shorthand and from 40 to 90 words per minute 
on the typewriter. Man y graduates from other schools are 
coming to us to be better trained. New Classes organized 
April third. Writ e Edward T. Duncan, 1227 S. 17th St., 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
A wonderful opportunity to earn big money 
is offered to men and women who are real 
workers and who want to connect with a high 
class proposition. W e have several good openings for agents to sell ORCHARDVILL E LOT S 
at $29.50 each, on VER Y EAS Y TERMS , 
also 10 and 20 acre tracts of good farm land 
at $32.50 per acre. Read our ads elsewhere 
in this publication and then send for details 
regarding our attractive offer to agents. 
WRIT E TODAY . 
• 19 S. La Salle Street CHICAGO , ILL . BB M 
NOW! 
 SCHOO L ONL Y SCHOOL OF ITS KIN D 
SHORTHAND TYPEWRITING, BOOKKEEPING, OFFICE PRACTICE, FILING. 
BAV F TIM E AN D MONE Y DORMITORIES , 18.60 PE R WEE K BOYD' S 30-DA Y SYSTE M 
" M. J. DERRICK , Principal and Manage r 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 28 2 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
HAV E YO U A COP Y OF 
THE CRISIS Calendar 
for 1922? 
It is our 
"Negro Homes Calendar" and contains twelve elegant pictures of beautiful and attractive homes in possession of 
Negroes in various parts of the United 
States. 
The cover carries a remarkable picture of 
"Villa I/ewaro", the home of the late 
Madam C. J. Walker , at Irvington-on-theHudson, N. Y . 
Price Fifty Cents. 
Supply limited. 
Let your orders come at once. 
Immediate attention assured them. 
SPECIA L OFFER: — 
A copy of our 192 2 CRISI S Calendar will 
be sent free to any one sending us at one 
time three paid up yearly subscriptions to 
TH E CRISIS . 
TH E CRISIS is $1.50 per year. 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 70 Fifth Avenue New York, N. Y . 
Is there a CRISIS agent in your community? If not, will you recommend 
some energetic and reliable person who 
will serve us in your locality? Our terms 
to agents are liberal. 
YOUNG'S BOOK EXCHANGE The only establishment dedicated to collecting 
and distributing the history and literature of 
the African and his descendants. Books
of print a specialty. 
135 WEST 135th STREET 
NEW YORK, N. Y. 
 out 
HOMES 
I am in a position to sell you a 
beautiful home in CORONA, L. I. 
Attractive one and two family 
homes in the most delightful section of New York City. All city 
improvements, best of schools 
and very convenient to any section of New York City for 5 
cents. 
Or will build to suit the demands 
of any one. 
Full information cheerfully given'^ 
L. S. REE D 
46 East Jackson Ave. 
CORONA, N. Y . CIT Y 
WRITER S ! Hav e you a Novel, Short-Stories, a Play , Poena , or 
other work you desire publlehed In book or pamphle t 
form ? Submit your literary work to us and let us 
explain our plan of publication. Send return postage. 
Write : 
WILLIAM M . KELLEY 3 QUINCY St, Brooklyn, New York. 
Your Gold Tooth Polished 
Your White Teeth Bleached 
By Using Dr. WELTERS ' Antiseptic 
—TOOTH POWDER— Asbolutely Free From Grit and Acid 
And Prevents Decay 
Ask your druggist. If he hasn't got it, ask him to 
order it for you. Send 27 Cents in Stamps 
for a full size package. 
The E. A. Welters' Tooth Powder Co., Inc. 410 BROAD ST. JACKSONVILLE, FLA. 
Agents and Distributors Wanted 
Extra Large Profit Guaranteed 
The Largest and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation
— m — Owned and Controlled by Negroes in the United Stales
Not an Ordinary Dentifrice bid a Scientific Preparation Specially Prepared for Polishing "GOLD" 
in the Mouth, "BLEACHING' the Teeth, Healing and Hardening Bleeding Gums. 
MENTION THE CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 283 
Fifty Years in the Gospel Ministry 
by 
Theophilus Gould Steward 
Chaplain U S. A. , Retired 
Published by the 
A. M . E. BOOK CONCERN 631 PIN E STREE T PHILADELPHIA , PA. 
Pronounced BY our Editor, Dr. Wright, one of 
the best books of autobiography appearing this 
YEAR, and one of the best ever written by one of 
our race. Contains vivid descriptions of historic epochs. Relates numerous Philippine experiences. Is described by an eminent authority 
as "a wonderful book by a wonderful man". 
Beautifully, charmingly, yet naturally, the story 
of A varied life is honestly related. 
PRICE $2.70, Postpaid, from Publishers 
Cleota Collins, Lyric Soprano "SHE COMBINES AN EXCELLENT VOICE with ARTISTIC FINISH OF THE MOST MATURE kind. HER singing PROVED AS 
CHARMING AS ANYTHING THE CONCERT PROGRAMS will OFFER 
THIS SEASON."—Detroit Daily News. 
GEORGE LACY, Manager, 
166 HAMILTON AVENUE COLUMBUS, OHIO 
E. ALDAM A JACKSO N GRADUATE OF INSTITUTE OF MUSICAL ART 
ORGANIST-Di rector of Music <->f St. Marks M. E 
Church; Concert Accompanist; Piano, Voice, 
Theory, Instruction, Conducting, Coaching. 
Harmony taught from beginning to completion. Private or correspondence. 
Geothius system. 
ITUDLO: ISO W . 138th IT., New York, IF. Y. 
Telephone Morningside 1708. 
AGENTS WANTED 
FOR A NIGH GRADE LINE OF CALLING CARDS, BUSINESS CARDS, INVITATIONS, SOCIAL STATIONERY, ETC BIG DEMAND EVERYWHERE. LIBERAL COMMISSIONS. PROMPT DELIVERIES. WRITE FOR SAMPLEI AND TERMS. 
THE HOUSE OF CH0WNIN6. INDIANAPOLIS. IND. 
HOTEL DALE 
CAPE MAY , N. J. 
Open March 15 
Rates reduced in keeping with the times. This 
magnificent Hotel, located in the heart of the 
Most Beautiful Seashore Resort in the world, 
is replete with every Modern Improvement. 
Superlative in Construction, Appointments, 
Service and Refined Patronage. Orchestra 
daily. Garage, Tennis, etc., on Premises. 
Special attention given to ladies and children. 
Booklet. 
E. W . DALE, OWNER. 
Righ t No w is th e 
Tim e t o Buy 
ORCHARDVILLE 
LOTS WHIL E YO U CA N GE T THE M A T 
$2950 
$3.00 DOW N AN D $1.50 PE R MONT H 
With the coming of better times comes an increased demand for lots in beautiful Orchardville, where hundreds of people bave already 
bought lots and where many, many more are 
doing so right along. Soon the big rush for 
lots will be on in full force, and there are 
apt to be many disappointed people because 
only A limited number of lots ARE GOING TO 
TO be sold AT the present low PRICE. 
The fact that Orchardville is so well known 
now means much towards the increasing DEmand, and makes it necessary for each prospective purchaser to act as quickly as possible. 
As stated in previous announcements, the lots 
are sized 30 x 144 feet and are sold under a 
MONE Y BAC K GUARANTE E to protect the 
purchaser against misrepresentation. The terms 
are only $3.00 down and $1.50 a month PER 
lot. N O INTERES T at any time. 
Our FREE BOOKLE T tells all about this offer 
and will be mailed to you without any obligation on your part. Simply write your name 
and address on the coupon below and send it 
to us TODAY , before you forget it. The 
booklet, with other interesting matter, will be 
sent to you promptly. W e are sure you will 
find them interesting. 
Arenson Realty Development Corp. 19 S. La Salle St., Chicago, 111. 
(Coupon) 
WRIT E PLAINL Y 
Arenson Realty Dev'pt Corpn., 
19 S. LA Salle Street, Chicago, 111. 
Gentlemen:— 
I am interested in your Orchardville lot 
offer and would like to receive full details without obligation to me. 
Name 
ADDRESS 
TOWN AND STATE 
CRI-4-22 
Mention Th e Crisis. 284 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
BERT WILLIAMS 
Th e Greatest Entertainer the Worl d has Ever 
Known is Dead. 
He brought Joy and Forgetfulness of Care to Millions. Many Men Learned to Laugh Because of Him. 
An d Laughter is a Big Aid to Life. 
Bert Williams was an Artist. He was a Great 
Actor. He might have been Know n as a Great Tragedian, had he Been Born White . But the Worl d for a 
Lon g Time no w Ha s Refused to Take Black Me n Seriously. So the Whit e Worl d made Bert Williams the 
World's Greatest Comedian. 
He Could say more with a Grunt than Most Men 
Can in a Monologue . His Gestures were Sentences and 
his Word s Complete Stories. 
Fortunately his Genius is Preserved to the Worl d 
on Phonograph Records. He was under contract, made 
several years ago, to a Whit e Company. 
Had He Lived out this Contract He would have 
become , as he had promised, an Exclusive Black Swan 
Artist. 
In the Early Months of this Undertaking, when 
Every Dollar Counted Double, He put Thousands of 
Dollars into the Making of Black Swan Records. H e 
gave his Encouragement, his Advice , his Help, his Lov e 
to us. He Lightened our Burdens. He Assured us of 
Success. 
Bert Williams is Dead. But the Joy that H e Gave 
to the Worl d will Live Forever and Multiply. 
PACE PHONOGRAPH CORPORATION 
Makers of 
BLAC K SWAN RECORDS 
2289 Seventh Avenue, New York, N. Y. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 28 5 
Postag e 
Prepai d 
We make this special offer for 30 days, to pr
the wonderful 
value, style and fit of 
Progres s tailoring. We will tailor to 
your special order, a pair of these 
stylish $6.00 pants, send them to you 
postage prepaid and guarantee two 
years' solid wear or money back for 
only $1.95 . 
Agents Wanted-lTeZ a 
every "week, taking orders from your friends 
and neighbors for our high class tailoring. 
No experience necessary. 
Big Sample Outfit FRE E 
Drop us a line today and w e will send you absolutely free our 
big assortment of woolen samples, style book and special wholesale prices on our made-to-measure suits—$12.45 up and made-tomeasure pants—$1.95 up. Full details of this offer sent FREE. 
The Progress Tailoring Co., Dept . D-117 Chicago, 111. Mention The Crisis. 28 6 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
BE A LAND OWNER 1 PREPAR E FO R YOU R FUTUR E 
INDEPENDENC E by SECURIN G 
A WOODVILL E ESTAT E 
OF 1 0 OR 2 0 ACRES OR MORE, ON 
VERY EAS Y TERMS , AT 
$
32 5 0 Per Acre 
Liberal reduction on 20 acres or more. 
SPECIA L ADVERTISIN G DISCOUNT TO 
THOSE "WHO AC T QUICKLY . 
A LOT FREE with each 10-acre tract. 2 
lots with 20 acres, Each tract sold under 
a MONE Y BAC K GUARANTEE . 
The cry heard everywhere is "Back to the 
farm". People are disgusted with the uncertainty of city life, with its strikes, lay-offs, 
high cost of living, congestion, etc., and are 
anxious to get out into the country where they 
can enjoy the life of the country gentlemen. 
The desire for farm land was never greater 
than at the present time because the working 
man realizes how much better off he would be 
on a farm of his own than grinding away the 
rest of his life as a city laborer. 
That is why this offer is meeting with such 
favorable response. Our Woodville tract is 
nicely located in the wonderful state of Michigan, and is being sold under a plan that makes 
it very easy for anybody to secure 10 acres or 
more. 
Our FREE booklet tells all about this offer 
and will be mailed to you on receipt of the 
coupon below, properly filled in. Mail it TC'­
DAY. The booklet will be sent to you promptly and we are sure you will find it interesting. 
Arenson Realty Development Corp. 19 S. LA SALLE ST., CHICAGO, 111. 
(Coupon) 
WRIT E PLAINL Y 
Arenson Realty Dev'pt Corp., 
19 S. La Salle Street, 
Chicago, 111.' 
Gentlemen:— 
I am interested in your Woodvill e offer and 
would like to receive full details without obligation to me. 
Name 
Address 
Town and State 
CRI-4-22 
MENTION
Agent s Wante d 
I N EVER Y 
TOW N AN D 
LOCALITY . 
GOO D PA Y 
Catalog Free 
TH E EAS T INDI A 
TOILET GOODS 
MFG. CO. 
31 6 N . CENTRAL DEPT. B 
OKLAHOM A CITY , OKLAHOM A 
TH E POPULAR QUIN O TOILETTES 
LILAO & ROSE TOILET WATER (75C). DELIGHTFUL FACE PowDER (25C). BOUQUET TALCUM POWDER (15C). COLD CREAM 
(35C). VANISHING CREAM (35C). BEAUTY ROUGE (25C). 
WITCH HAZEL CREAM (50C). LIQUID SHAMPOO (75C). SHAMPOO SOAP (25C). QUINO HAIR GROWER (50C). TEMPLE OIL 
(75C). TETTER SALVE (75C). HALRTONE ($1). HAIR TONIC 
(75C). TAR LOTION (50C). VEGETABLE HAIRTONE ($1). SENT 
POSTPAID. AGENTS WANTED. 
Gantt, QUIN O School, Nashville, Tenn. 
LINCOLN MOTION PICTURE CO. Est. 1916. Capitalized $75,000 
$50,000 common, $25,000 8% preferred. 
Oldest Film Corporation in the World Producing Negro Photo-plays. 
1181 CENTRA L AVE. , LOS ANGELE S 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
JOS. L. JONES, Pre*. 
641 W . 9TH ST. CINCINNATI, OHIO 
YO U CA N BAN K B Y MAI L 
FIRS T STANDAR D BAN K 
Louisville, Ky . 
Capital and Surplus (Paid) 
$110,000.00 
Wilson Lovett, President 
MME. G. B. NEEDLES 
FIN E FUR S 
FUR GARMENTS MADE TO ORDER 
Remodeling, Repairing, Redyeing 
2202 Seventh Ave., New York, N. Y. 
Telephone Morning.ide 7590 
Tel. 6417 Fort HILL Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ArroiiciY »KD COUHICLLOI-AT-LAW 
14 SCHEEL STREET BOSTON, MASS. 
 THI CUTIS. A Selected List of Books 
Dealing with the Negro Problem 
Thes e price s d o no t includ e postage . Postag e extra . 
Two COLORED WOMEN WITH THE AMERICAN EXPEDITIONARY 
FORCES. (Hunton and Johnson) $2.5 0 
TH E HEART OF A WOMAN AND OTHER POEMS. (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1.50 
THE SOUL OF JOHN BROWN. (Stephen Graham) 2.00 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W. E. B. DuBois) 2.00 
A CENTURY OF NEGRO MIGRATION. (Carter G. Woodson) 1.10 
TH E CURSE OF RACE PREJUDICE. (James F. Morton) 2 5 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (Benjamin Brawley) 2.00 
THE NEGRO MIGRANT IN PITTSBURGH. (Abraham Epstein)... .5 0 
GRANNY MAUMEE AND OTHER PLAYS FOR A NEGRO THEATRE. 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.75 
HALF A MAN. (Mary White Ovington) 1.2 0 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
UNSUNG HEROES. (Elizabeth Ross Haynes) 2.50 
THE SHADOW. (Mary White Ovington) 2.0 0 
JOHN BROWN. (W. E. B. DuBois) 2.0 0 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 2.00 
PRINCE HALL AND HIS FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford).. 1.00 
THE VOICE OF THE NEGRO. (Robert T. Kerlin) 2.50 
THE NEGRO. (W. E. B. DU Bois) 9 0 
TH E EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861. (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
THE NEGRO FACES AMERICA. (Herbert J. Seligmann) 1.75 
DARKWATER. (W. E . B. DuBois) 2.2 5 
POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.5 0 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H . E. Krehbiel) 2.00 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) 2.0 0 
A SOCIAL HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN NEGRO. (Benjamin 
4 0 0 ' Brawley)
TH E NEGRO IN LITERATURE AND ART. (Benjamin Brawley).. 1.50 
FIFTY YEARS AND OTHER POEMS. (James Weldon Johnson) . . 1.50 
THE HISTORY OF THE NEGRO CHURCH. (Carter J. Woodson) . 2.1 5 
THE UPWARD PATH. (Pritchard and Ovington) 1.35 
FIFTY YEARS IN THE GOSPEL MINISTRY. (T. G. Steward)... 2.70 
Address: THE CRISIS, : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y Madam C. J. Walker's 
Beauty Aids 