TH E CRISIS 
RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Vol . 4, No . 6 OCTOBER , 1912 Whol e No . 24 
C 
H 
I 
L 
D 
R 
Ε 
Ν 
' 
S 
N 
U 
M 
Β 
Ε 
R 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SO N OF F T O 
Wilberforc e University 
The only school in the country for Negro 
Yout h which has a Militar y Department 
equipped by the National Government, and 
commanded by a detailed United States Arm y 
Officer. 
DEPARTMENT S 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L TECHNICA L 
COMMERCIA L THEOLOGICA L 
CLASSICA L MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Bankin g taught by the actual operations 
i n the Students' Savings Bank . Twelve Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, Te n 
Building's. Healthful surroundings, exceptiona l community. Maintaine d in part by the 
State of Ohio which supplies facilitie s for the 
thorough trainin g of teachers. 
Fal l term began September, 1912. Writ e 
for Catalog. 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH , Presiden t 
WM . A. JOINER, Superintendent, C. Ν. I. 
Department. 
Address all communications to 
BOX 36 WILBERFORCE , OHIO 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga. 
The courses of study include High School, Norma l School and College, wit h manual training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduates are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautifu l Situation . Healthfu l Location . 
Th e Best Mora l an d Spiritua l Environment . 
A Splendi d Intellectua l Atmosphere . 
Note d for Honest an d Thoroug h Work . 
Offers full courses in the following departments : 
College, Normal, Hig h School, Gramma r School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage, expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fal l Ter m Bega n September, 1912. 
Fo r information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
Λ Theological Department, with all subject s 
generally required in the best theological seminaries. 
An Academy, wit h manual training, givin g a 
preparation for life or for college. 
The positive mora l and. religious aim of the 
school, its hig h standards of entrance and of class 
work, its fine new buildings and well-equipped 
laboratories and librar y prepare a faithful student 
for a. life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RICE HOVEY , President 
Fisk University 
NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Th e largest colore d college i n the South . 
A new departmen t of sociolog y an d socia l 
service . A notabl e equipmen t i n lan d 
an d buildings. Endorse d b y the Genera l 
Educatio n Board . Fo r informatio n address 
GEORG E A. GATES , President 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D 
PEOPLE . A T 26 VESE Y STREET . NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Edited by W . E BURGHARD T D U BOIS , with the co-operation of Oswald Garrison Villard,' 
W. S. Braithwaite, M . W . Ovington, Charles Edwar d Russell and others. 
Contents for October, 1912 
ARTICLE S PAGE 
MR. HARE . A story for children 292 
SOM E BOOK S FO R BOY S AN D GIRLS . By Jessie Fauset 295 
HISTORI C DAY S IN OCTOBER . By L . M . Hershaw 298 
A PLE A FO R TH E SURVIVA L O F TH E PROTECTORATE S O F 
SOUT H AFRICA . By Frances Hoggan, M . D 300 
TH E CUBA N REVOLUTION . By James B. Clarke 301 
DEPARTMENT S 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 267 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 276 
OPINIO N 280 
EDITORIA L 287 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 299 
TH E BURDE N 302 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTRA . 
RENEWALS : Whe n a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your 
subscription is desired. If the blank is BLU E your subscription expires NEX T month. If the 
blank is YELLO W your subscription expires THI S month. If the blank is RE D your subscription 
has already expired and no further copies of the magazine will be sent until you renew. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 264 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Avery College Training Schools 
NORT H SIDE , PITTSBURGH , PA . 
A superior training school for young colored women, thoroughly instructing 
its students as a means of self-support in dressmaking, cutting and drafting, domestic 
science, music, nurse training, millinery, and an intermediate English course. This 
institution is under the influence of no religious denomination, is the oldest endowed 
chartered Negro institution in America. The accommodations in its dormitory, 
which is in charge of a competent matron, are excelled by no colored institution 
in this country. 
The hospital department offers the same course as the large hospitals of the 
State of Pennsylvania, fully equipped with its operating rooms, diet kitchen and 
ambulance service. The course requires three years' lectures on general nursing, 
anatomy, ethics, surgery, obstetrics, asepsis, antiseptics, gynecology, pediatrics, eye, 
nose, throat, materia medica, therapeutics and dietetics under a staff of white and 
colored physicians. Catalogues now ready. 
Address all communications to 
JOSEPH D. MAHONEY , Secretary 
Bo x 154 Nort h Side, Pittsburgh, Pa. 
Dayton a Educationa l an d Industria l 
Schoo l fo r Negr o Girls 
DAYTONA, FLORIDA 
It reaches, by reason of its location, a large 
territory of Negro children deprived of educational privileges. 
Its comfortable home life and Christian in r 
fluences insure a certain individual attention 
and superior training impossible in larger Institutions of its kind. 
Mrs. Frances R. Keyser, formerly in charge 
of the White Rose Home for Working Girls, 
in New York City, has been elected Principal 
of the Academic Department. Write for catalog 
and detailed information. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUN E 
Founder and Principal 
Binghamto n Normal , Industria l an d 
Agricultura l Institute 
BINGHAMTON, N. Y. 
Courses offered: Academic, Trades, Agriculture, Music and Band Instruction for boys. 
A course in Dining Room work and the Ar t of 
Serving is offered to men and women in addition to other studies. Arrangements can be 
made for anxious students to work out part 
expenses. Attached department for boys and 
girls between the ages of ten to fifteen years. 
For terms and Information address 
FRE D C. HAZEL , President 
(Graduate Hampton Institute) 
Campus and Far m contains 105 acres overlooking 
the Chenango and Susquehanna Rivers. 
Agricultura l and 
Mechanical College 
Open all the year round. For 
males only. Strong, practical and 
theoretical courses leading to 
degree of Bachelor of Science in 
Agriculture, and Bachelor of 
Science in Mechanics. Board, 
lodging and tuition, $7.00 per 
month. Write to-day for catalog 
or for further information. 
JAS. B. DUDLEY , President 
GREENSBORO. N. C. 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 265 
Northwestern Normal, Agricultural and 
Industrial Institute, Lorain, Ohio. 
A partly free industrial school, the only institution in the Northwest that offers a thorough industrial and literary, moral and religious training to 
Negro youths. Beautifully located in sight of Lak e 
Erie . Healthful location. Fal l term opens October 
1, 1912. Fo r information address 
Rev. S. Douglass McDuffie, Principal. 
Lorain. Ohio. 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
16 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M . 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon 
champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity 
for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. 
Belongs in the library of every friend of social 
justice. Pric e 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAME S F. MORTON , JR. 
244 West 143d Street New York , N. Y . 
The Power of Womanhood 
A Speech by Joseph Wellington 
PRIC E 20 CENT S 
Sol d by 
TH E STANDAR D NEW S COMPAN Y 
131 West 53d Street, New York 
AGENT S WANTE D EVERYWHER E 
A Remarkable Book by Wm. George Jordan 
The MAJEST Y of CALMNES S 
CONTENTS : 
Th e Majesty of Calmness. 
Hurry , the Scourge of America . 
The Powe r of Personal Influence. 
The Dignit y of Self Reliance. 
Failur e as a Success. 
Doing Ou r Best at Al l Times. 
The Roya l Road to Happiness. 
Ornamenta l Covers. Price , 26c. Postpaid. 
Order from FRANCE S L . DUSENBERR Y 
(Book Shop) 
27 E . Randolph St. Chicago, Ill. 
Beginnin g to Thin k o f Christmas ? 
Our Book Department is arranging some 
appropriate combinations suitable for inexpensive gifts. 
Watch for our announcement next 
month. 
The 
Quest 
of the 
Silver 
Fleece 
A NOVE L 
by 
W . E . BURGHARD T 
DU BOIS 
Drawing s by 
H . S. D E LA Y 
Her e is a story of the darker worl d 
in the South and in Washington , D . 
C. It is dramatic in style and absorbing in interest and expresses the 
feeling of colored people about themselves and their own problems; at the 
same time it shows how both black 
folk and white are caught in the 
powe r of Kin g Cotton. 
A T AL L BOOKSTORE S 
PRIC E $1.3 5 NE T 
A . C . McCLUR G & CO . 
New York Chicago San Francisco 
OF INTEREST TO 
VOCAL STUDENTS 
Tone Placing and 
Voice Development 
Practica l method of singing for 
daily practice, based upon artistic 
principles, together with a carefully prepared number of exercises, 
forming a comprehensive, progressive and self-explained course in 
voice building, which constitute the 
technical side of the vocal art. 
Comment from the world-renowned conductor of 
the Paulist Choi r of Chicago, Ill., whose choir has 
just received the first prize awarded at the Singing Contest held in Paris on Ma y 25, 1912: 
"Dea r Mr . Tinsley : 
' 'I take great pleasure in commending your 
very useful and succinctly written book on 'TonePlacing and Voice-Development.' You r own appreciation of the psychology of singing and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly reduced to a simple system. 
"Cordiall y yours, 
"Fathe r WILLIA M J . FINN , C. S. P., 
"Directo r Paulist Choristers of Chicago. " 
Pric e $1. Address the publisher : 
PEDRO T. TINSLEY 
6448 Drexe l Avenu e CHICAGO, ILL. 
or Clayton F . Summy, 64-66 E . Va n Bure n St. 
(Steinway Hal l Bldg.), and Lyo n & Healy , Adams 
and Wabash Sts.. Chicago, Ill. 
Mention TH B CRISIS . 266 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
SCHOOL OF BEAUTY CULTURE AND HAIR DRESSING 
KELSEY' S 
328 Leno x Avenue 
Telephone Harle m 1896 
126th Street, NE W YOR K 
Manicuring , Shampooing, Hai r Dressing, Marce l War ­
ing, Facia l and Bod y Massage, Hai r Making , Chiropody , 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimite d practice In parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summe r Course, $7.50 up. Sen d for 
booklet. Mme . A . Carte r Kelsey , Gen' l Intr.; Dr . Samue l 
A . Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen' l Manager . 
Buy Direct From the Producer 
This magnificent French Curl Ostrich Plume is full 17 inches in length, made of the highest grade hard flue ostrich selected from t
Save Importer's. 
Wholesaler's 
and 
Retailer's 
Profits. 
Has a very 
glossy fiber and 
is extra wide, with heavy drooping head. 
Let us send you this Plume on 
approval. Send us 15c to pay express 
charges, and we will send you this beautiful Plume in black, white or colors, to your 
express office C. O. D. with privilege of examination. If satisfactory pay the express agent 
$1.95 and the Plume is yours. If. however, you 
don't think this the most marvelous value you ever 
saw if you can duplicate of your dealer for less than 
$
5.00 tell the express agent to return the Plume to us and we 
will refund your 15c. Or, if you prefer to send the full amount, 
$1.95, we will send the Plume by return mail, postage prepaid, 
and if' not satisfactory. we will promptly refund your money. 
We take all the risk. For complete line of Ostrich Feathers including bargains in Willow Plumes write for free catalog. 
Special full 18-INCH OSTRICH PLUME 2.28 
sSouth African Importing Co. Dept. Cr BLAC K AN D COLOR S 1841 Wabash Ave.. Chicago. 
•You r old feathers made Into beautiful 
Willow Flumes. Send them to us and we 
will quote you a price. 
You Never Saw Anything Like 
KOKOR A 
The Oriental Novelty Perfume. It's 
NEW . Decorated metal box containing 
10 dainty little "perfumers" mailed postpaid for 35 cents; and the odor—that's our 
own creation—you'll like it. Send to-day ! 
Alexander Specialty Go. 
494 Highland Avenue, Passaic, N. J. 
Folding BATH TUB 
Costs little, nO plumbing, requires little water. 
Weight 15 pounds, and folds into small roll. 
Full length baths, far better than tin tubs. Lastas for 
years. Write for special agents offer and description. Robinson 
"Mfg.. CO. , 205 Adams St.,Toledo, 0. Mfrs. Turkish Bath Cabinets. 
"Persons who are looking for a site 
for an Old Folks' Home in Westchester 
County will learn something to their 
advantage by inquiring at TH E CRISIS 
office. 
Telephone 3253 Harle m 
CARPE T CLEANIN G 
Cleaners and Renovators 
For Particular People 
Ne w Yor k Carefu l Cleanin g Burea u 
12 West 135th Street 
We make a specialty of cleaning and renovating 
carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered furniture ; 
we also vacuum clean in the home. W e are not 
the largest carpet cleaner in the warld, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOIN G CAEPET 8 AN D 
SPECIALT Y 
RUG S OUR 
REA L ESTAT E 
Valuable Texas Lands 
For Sale 
Larg e tracts of farm land in the best localities 
of the State for sale at very flattering prices. 
Small tracts of good lands suitable for farming , 
truck, fruits and any domestic product. W e have 
for sale a numbe r of large farms already in cultivation, good houses an ' barns, wells, and nice pasture 
lands, which can be obtained at reasonable rates. 
Cit y property a specialty. Business lots i n the best 
part of the city, improved and unimproved. Larg e 
lots suitable for factory property with switch 
facilities. 
No investment can be more valuable than an investment i n Texas real estate. Land s are becoming 
so valuable that they are doubling themselves in 
value in less than a year's time. Fo r any investment in Texas property, write T . B . Madiso n Real 
Estat e Company, 2416 El m Street, Dallas, Texas. 
To Colored People 
FOR SALE — W e have houses from $1,000 to 
$30,000. Ou r city is the capital of Ohio and 
a great manufacturing center—plenty of work, a 
good place to locate for business. Ca n sell you • 
house for $50, $100 to $500 down, balance like 
rent. Fo r investment and speculating houses or 
business places, $1,000 to $5,000 down, balance on 
long time payment. Far m land prices from $1,000 
to $10,000 up. An y of these are in good locations. 
Writ e for furthe r information. 
THI S I S A COLORE D ENTERPRIS E 
EDWAR D A . SHANKLI N 
Rea l Estate 
1218 1/2Mt. Vernon Ave. Columbus, Ohio 
Mention TH E Crisis. TH E CRISI S 
Vol. 4, No . 6 OCTOBER . 1912 Whol e No . 24 
ALON G 
COLOR LINE 268 TH E CRISIS 
POLITICAL. 
COLORE D men are being barred from 
the councils of the Bul l Moose party 
i n Louisian a and Kentucky , as well as other 
Southern States. I n Ohio, on the other 
hand, forty-eight colored delegates are 
being sent to the State convention. 
Q J. L . Mitchell of Rhode Island, who was 
delegate to the Progressive convention at 
Chicago, is still supportin g Roosevelt, but 
declares: 
" I do not agree that Roosevelt was right 
i n his attitude i n attempting 'steam-roller 
methods, so called, i n connection with the 
contests among delegates for seats i n the 
convention. I contended that the Southern 
Negro delegates should be seated and I still 
hold to that contention. Whil e I do not 
advocate Negro politica l leaders, I hold that 
the Negro is workin g for the success of the 
party just as much as the white man is and 
that he should be on equal footing wit h the 
whites, especially i n States where mixed 
delegations were sent to the convention." 
• In the Unite d States Senate Senator Penrose of Pennsylvani a declared that George 
W . Perkin s had underwritten $3,000,000 to 
be used i n buyin g Negro delegates to the 
Chicago convention last June , away from 
Taft and in creating "fake " contests i n the 
South. 
*J Fiv e election officials have been arrested 
i n Oklahoma by Unite d States deputy 
marshals. They are charged wit h refusing 
to register Negro voters. Other arrests are 
expected. 
•J I n Arkansa s the heavy Negro vote has 
killed the proposed grandfather clause. 
<J I n Ohio the objectionable wor d "white " 
was not stricken from the constitution by 
the vote i n the late election. 
<J The State politica l convention of colored 
men has met i n Boley, Okla., to consider the 
preservation of constitutional rights at the 
polls. Delegates have been regularly apportioned among different parts of the territory 
and every organized Negro church has one 
delegate. 
SOCIAL UPLIFT. 
AN invention which promises to revise the 
signal system on various railroads of 
the land has just been patented by Perc y 
Cla y and George Washington , two colored 
men of New Orleans. 
1 Amon g the guards on Joh n D . Rocke ­
feller's estate are eighteen armed colored 
men. 
* A permit has been issued i n Jacksonville, Fla. , fo r the erection of a five-story 
masonic buildin g at the corner of Broa d and 
Duva l Streets. The buildin g wil l cost 
$10,000 and wil l contain a bank, business 
offices and lodge rooms. 
1 I n Providence, R. I., 600 youn g eolored 
women sold tags throughout the day i n order 
to pay an indebtedness of $10,000 on the 
Watchman Industria l School. There was a 
station i n each of the department stores and 
the youn g women also worked on the streets. 
q Plans for a $100,000 Y . M . C. A . to be 
erected i n Atlanta , Ga., are well on the way. 
There wil l be reception rooms, lecture rooms, 
kitchen and dinin g rooms, baths and swimmin g pool ; two floors wil l be used fo r 
dormitories; separate boys' departments wil l 
be maintained. The buildin g wil l be seven 
stories high. 
1 Strenuous effort is being made i n St. 
Louis by both colored and white people to 
lessen the friction between the races due to 
the expanding Negro population and the demand for better homes. The committee for 
social service among colored people, organized i n 1910, devotes itself entirely to social 
and industria l problems affecting colored 
people, the special object being to remove 
discriminations on account of color i n the 
work of publi c and private agencies for 
social betterment. The committee is i n no 
way attempting to offer a solution for the 
"race problem, " other than by securing for 
colored people the same forces fo r relief, 
employment, medical care, recreation, education, etc., as exist for the rest of the 
community. 
Durin g the last year this committee has 
been instructing thirty-nine people i n methods of social service, has secured admission 
of colored organizations to the new delegate 
body, the Centra l Council of Socia l Agen ­
cies, has arranged a general conference to 
discuss the social problems o f colored people. 
State provision fo r the care of delinquent 
colored girls has been advocated and a start 
made. 
A joint committee, composed of both white 
and Negro members from the social-service 
conference and the committee for social ALON G TH E 
service among Negroes, has been formed to 
study the question of housing Negroes in 
St. Louis. 
The first step wil l be the construction of 
a map showing the location of the Negro 
population and the movement of population 
i n the last ten years. A n inquiry will be 
instituted into housing conditions, including 
a comparison of rents and locations. 
A t the same time the committee will make 
a country-wide investigation of segregation 
and friction between the races, particularly 
in the border-line cities, includin g Washing ­
ton, Baltimore , Louisville , Pittsburgh, In ­
dianapolis, New York , Chicago and Kansa s 
City . This wil l form the basis for a statement of the facts for and against segregation, which wil l be published by the 
committee. 
The committee wil l act as a board of arbitration i n specific cases of friction and attempt to prevent fraud and misuse of 
Negroes and whites i n real-estate transactions. 
q A modern hospital fo r colored people is 
being planned i n Knoxville , Tenn. 
•J The census reports that in 1910 there were 
i n continental Unite d States, as a whole, 
9,827,763 Negroes, of whom 2,050,686, or 
20.9 per cent., were reported as mulattoes. 
I n 1890 there were 1,132,060 mulattoes reported, or 15.2 per cent, of all the Negroes, 
and in 1870 a total of 584,049, or 12 per 
cent. Thus the figures taken at their face 
value show that about one-fifth of all the 
Negroes i n 1910 had some admixture of 
white blood, as against about one-eighth i n 
1870. 
This report is, of course, far below the 
truth. There is little doubt but that onethird of the colored people i n the United 
States have white blood. 
ECONOMICS. 
ONE of the oldest amusement places in 
Lo s Angeles, Cal. — Lun a Park—is 
about to be purchased by colored people. 
The total investment wil l be about $70,000 
i f present arrangements are completed. 
<J The three counties with the largest amount 
o f land owned by Negroes are said to be 
Maco n County, Ala. , with 61,689 acres; 
Libert y County, Ga. , with 55,048 acres, and 
Louis a County, Va. , with 53,268 acres. 
•I Samuel F . Jones, a colored farme r of 
Delaware, has recently died, leaving real 
estate valued at $25,000. 
COLO R LIN E 269 
<1 The Alabama Penny Savings Bank , a colored institution, celebrates its twenty-second 
anniversary by the occupation of a new 
building. This modern fireproof building 
is being erected on 18th Street, between 
Thir d and Fourt h Avenues, Birmingham, 
Ala . Colored laborers are being employed 
entirely. 
q The Birmingham Age-Herald, i n a report 
concerning the colored people of Memphis, 
says that there are 500 families there owning 
homes valued at $5,000 and upward. One 
widow owns an estate of $300,000 and a 
colored letter carrier is worth $150,000. The 
colored Solvent Savings Ban k has over 
$100,000 i n deposits, and there are sixty 
colored letter carriers i n the postoffice. 
q The report to Congress on taxation i n the 
Distric t of Columbi a shows how the burden 
of taxation falls upon the colored people 
and poor whites, while the rich people 
escape. The laborer's house is taxed at 90 
per cent, of its value, while the houses of 
millionaires are taxed at about 50 per cent. 
q Hannibal, Mo. , is the seat of the largest 
colored insurance society west of the Mississippi. It is known as the Home Protective 
Association and has a membership of over 
20,000. 
q Forty-seven colored men have each taken 
up a tract of 640 acres at Brownlee, Prairi e 
County, Neb. Colored men of this section 
own 28,600 acres. 
q A factional fight has broken out between 
the colored and white branches of the longshoremen's union i n Galveston, Tex. The 
locals, it seems, demanded that equal numbers of whites and Negroes be employed i n 
cotton "jamming. " It seems that only 
Negroes were employed and the whites are 
i n bad temper. 
q One feature of Labo r Da y this year has 
been the growth of its observance as a Negro 
holiday by workingmen i n the South. I n 
Nashville , for instance, there were large 
crowds i n colored parks and parades of colored unions. Colored playhouses had special 
bills. 
EDUCATION. 
JAME S F . BOURNE , a colored druggist, 
who was appointed to the Atlanti c Cit y 
board of education by the outgoing mayor, 
has been confirmed i n his right to hold the 
office by the State authorities. 270 TH E CRISIS 
1 The General Education Boar d has given 
durin g its first ten years of existence 
$2,107,500 to higher education i n the South. 
Practicall y none of this has gone to college 
education for Negroes. Fo r industria l work 
and a few secondary schools for Negroes the 
board has appropriated $464,015. 
*J Preparations fo r the opening of the Agri ­
cultural and Industria l State Norma l School 
for Negroes, which is located out on Centennial Boulevard, Nashville , Tenn., are bein g rapidl y pushed, i n order to have the 
school ready to open this fall. 
Al l the buildings—main, academic, industrial, dormitory for women and dormitory 
fo r men—are finished. The furnishing, now 
i n progress, wil l be completed soon. 
q Rut h Mario n Peters of Dorchester, Mass., 
who is doing missionary settlement work i n 
Boston, had her first experience at Beach 
Institute, a colored school i n Savannah, 
Ga . She says: 
"A t Savannah, where I have been for the 
past two years, there is no public high school 
fo r colored people. There are not even 
enough graded schools to accommodate the 
children. Beach Institute was started by 
kind-hearted people i n 1867 to help fill this 
lack. O f the six teachers at the school five 
are Northern women. The past year we had 
150 students about evenly divided between 
the lower grades and the high school. A 
class of twenty-four was graduated Ma y 22, 
1912. On the whole, I have found colored 
children as bright as corresponding classes 
i n the Northern schools. An d they are so 
likeable that one entirely forgets their 
color. " 
•J The Unite d States Burea u of Education i n 
a monograph on mathematics i n public and 
private secondary schools has something to 
say concerning the relative mathematical 
ability of the colored and white race. 
"The general feeling i n the institutions 
covered by this report is that the difference 
between the races i n the matter of mathematics, i n so fa r as any differences exist, are 
due to conditions rather than to race 
characteristics." 
Thus another pet theory of Negrophobes 
seems about to come to grief. I n the West 
Indies the schools specialize on mental 
arithmetic, and the colored children are 
amazingly good at it. 
MEETINGS. 
IN the latter part o f August and the 
early part of September are the convocation weeks of colored America . 
<J The Nationa l Medica l Association, composed of 526 members an d representing 
3,500 colored doctors and dentists, met at 
Tuskegee, Ala . Clinic s were held, lectures 
by prominent physicians, both colored and 
white, and public-health conferences. A 
great deal of charity medical work was done 
fo r the surrounding country population. 
The next session wil l be held at Nashville , 
Tenn. The followin g officers were elected: 
J . A . Kenney , Tuskegee, Ala. , president; 
Walte r Alexander, Orange, N . J. , secretary; 
Percy Roberts, New York , assistant secretary, and J . R. Levy , Florence , S. C , 
treasurer. 
q The colored Od d Fellows met i n Atlanta , 
Ga., to attend the sixteenth session of the 
biennial movable committee. The colored 
people literally took the town, exclusive 
white parks being opened to them, sessions 
being held i n the great auditorium and 
public officials welcoming them. Permission 
was given them to parade "without guns." 
There is a great deal of interna l dissension 
i n the order. 
*d I n Chicago the Nationa l Negro Business 
League held its thirteenth annua l session 
with a very large attendance. The session 
was held at the Institutiona l Church , and 
Juliu s Rosenwald was among the speakers. 
The next meeting wil l be i n Philadelphi a in 
August, 1913. Mr . Booke r T. Washington 
was elected president; Mr . Charles Banks, 
first vice-president; the Honorabl e J . C. 
Napier, chairman of the executive committee. 
The interest of the newspapers was largely 
centered on the reports of ric h colored men. 
E . W . Green of Fayette, Miss. , said he was 
worth $80,000; Davi d Nelson of Littl e Rock, 
Ark. , $50,000; Wat t Terr y reported an in ­
come of $7,000 a month from $500,000 worth 
of real estate. 
<J The annual meeting of the national convention of Negro Baptists was held i n Houston, Tex., wit h several thousand visitors. 
q The Lott Carey Baptist convention met at 
Portsmouth, Va . 
*J The fifth annual convention of the Na ­
tional Association of Colored Nurses took 
place at Richmond , Va . Miss Mar y F . ALON G TH E 
Clar k was elected president and Miss 
Florall a Porter, corresponding secretary. 
Negro masons have met i n various States. 
The Alabama Gran d Lodge reported 24,000 
members and an income of $104,000 durin g 
the year. They are planning a home for 
indigent masons and an industrial school. 
<J The Knights of Hono r of the Worl d met 
i n Birmingham, Ala. , with representatives 
from sixteen States. 
<J The eighteenth annual session of the 
Afro-America n Council of Californi a has 
met i n Oakland, Cal . Wome n were admitted 
to membership for the first time. 
<J The thirteenth annual session of the Illi ­
nois State Federation of Colored Women's 
Clubs was held at Roc k Island, Ill. 
<J Negro fairs are beginning their annual 
meetings i n various parts of the South. 
<J The national convention of the colored 
Elk s was held i n Dayton , O. H . H . Pace 
was re-elected Gran d Exalte d Ruler. 
•J The forty-fifth annual session of the 
Order of St. Luke's met i n Richmond, Va. , 
with 2,000 delegates and visitors from nineteen States. 
<J Because of so many meetings a press 
dispatch from New Orleans says that four 
special trains loaded with colored people 
from various parts of Texas and ti e Southwest passed through the city early i n 
September. 
PERSONAL. 
ROBER T H . CHURC H of Memphis is 
dead at the age of 74. His 
wealth, which consisted of more than 350 
dwellings i n the city, is estimated at over 
$1,000,000. Mr . Church began lif e on a 
cotton plantation and he was the father of 
Mrs. Mar y Church Terrell. 
q Mrs. I. B . Birkin s was left $10,000 i n the 
will o f J . W . Creech of Herrington , Kan . 
Mrs. Birkin s was an orphan colored child 
and was reared by the Creech family . 
<J Joh n J . Mills, a thrifty colored farme r of 
Chester, S. C , won the annual contest by 
bringin g i n the first bale of cotton. 
<J Mr . Joseph Mannin g o f Alabama , who 
has a wide acquaintance among colored people, has charge o f the colored bureau of the 
Taft campaign committee. 
COLO R LIN E 271 
<J Alfre d J . Morshan is the first Negro 
graduate of Lebanon University, where 
Negroes were formerly not admitted. H e 
also happens to be the five-thousandth 
graduate of the school. 
<I The first colored lawyer, Robert N . 
Stevens, has been admitted to the Berkshire 
County bar of Massachusetts. 
Joh n Livingston, a colored playmate of 
Mar k Twain , died i n Oregon City , Ore. H e 
left an estate of $15,000. 
• Dr. Solomon P . Hoo d has been appointed 
chief organizer of the emancipation celebration exhibition for the State of New Jersey. 
* A n angry and terrified bull ran amuck i n 
the business district of Savannah, attacking 
a street car, wrecking a barber shop, an 
express office and the mailing room at the 
Unio n Station. It narrowly missed killin g 
a number of persons, but was finally overtaken, roped and thrown by a little colored 
boy riding on a mule. 
< Stonewall Jackson, the crack colored 
sprinter of Southern California , is being 
sought after by the colleges of that section. 
The Daily Times of Lo s Angeles says every 
college wants him "and i f anyone of them 
has ever drawn the color line it wil l undraw 
it i f he knocks at the door. H e is a prize 
worth going after, for he showed i n the 
national interscholastic meet at Chicago that 
he was the best high-school sprinter i n the 
country. " 
* Governor Foss of Massachusetts has 
nominated Joshua A . Crawford , a colored 
lawyer, to be clerk of the Boston Juvenile 
Court. I f confirmed by the council he wil l 
succeed another colored man, Charles W . M . 
Williams. The governor has three times 
nominated Willia m L . Reed, for the place, 
but the council rejected the nomination. 
* One of the last things done by Congress 
before adjournment was the passage of a 
pension bill including a pension for Rebecca 
Struthers, an old colored woman of Parkersburg, W . Va. , for whom a bil l had been 
introduced by Senator Watson. The bill has 
been signed by the President and is now a 
law. 
<J Madiso n White , a Negro, has been granted 
a lif e pension by the Louisvill e and Nashvill e Railroa d after having served the company as porter for more than fifty years. 272 TH E CRISIS 
MUSIC AN D ART. 
THE thir d annua l music festival, under 
the auspices of the Atlant a Colored 
Musi c Festiva l Association, was given 
August 15 and 16 at Atlanta , Ga . 
The festival opened wit h the pageant "U p 
to Freedom, " depicting three stages of progress—paganism, slavery and freedom. 
The Atlant a Journal says of the produc ­
tion : "It was interesting because it was the 
first performance of the kin d i n the history 
of the world ; and it was significant because 
it took place in the South, where the Negro 
was sold into slavery and where he must 
work out his destiny as a free man. A s a 
dramatic production, it was a brilliant idea 
rather crudely worked out. * * * It 
could be made magnificently impressive. 
There is plenty of the 'human interest' element i n the evolution of the Negro ; the accompaniment of Negro voices i n characteristic Negro melody gives a peculiarly appealin g operatic touch, and the story has a 
natura l setting that is ful l of color and 
charm. Al l things considered, the performance was good. It was a credit to the author 
and to the performers. The singing was 
very fine. The Fis k Jubilee Mal e Quartette 
and Mme . Anit a Patti Brown , who has a 
soprano voice of wonderful tone and power, 
were the features." 
A n organ recital was given Frida y afternoon by Mr . Ro y W . Tibbs. a recent graduate of the Oberlin Conservatory of Music , 
who presented a program of high merit. 
A t the closing concert Mr . Harr y T. 
Burleigh , the distinguished baritone composer of New York , was heard i n numbers 
from the composers Ponchielli, ColeridgeTaylor, Massenet, Cyri l Scott, Sidney Home r 
and Wil l Cook, wit h requested numbers of 
his own compositions. 
Miss Lul u Ver e Childers, contralto, of 
Washington , D . C , who directed the choral 
work, contributed much to the success of the 
festival. 
^ Accordin g to a native musician of India , 
named Iraya t Khan , now i n London , the 
oldest musical instrument i n the worl d is the 
venna, the invention of a musician livin g i n 
the days of Akba r the Great. 
This instrument, together with two others, 
the seeta and the disturba, wil l be introduced 
at a concert soon to be given i n London . 
•J Miss Kitt y Cheatham, the America n 
singer, has lately given interesting and varied 
programs in the Littl e Theatre, London, 
Eng. , under the patronage of H . R. H . Prin ­
cess Victori a of Schleswig-Holstein. 
He r greatest success was scored i n the old 
Negro songs, especially "Swin g Low , Sweet 
Chariot, " and "Whe n I Come. " 
^ The annual operatic festival has taken 
place at the Deutsche Landestheater at 
Prague. One of the six operas presented 
was Meyerbeer's "L'Africaine, " the scene of 
which is lai d i n Portuga l and Africa , and the 
principa l character that of Selika , a slave 
maiden. 
< A musicale was given on Jul y 5 at Wash ­
ington, D . C , by the Apoll o Glee Clu b and 
the Haekle y Chora l Club , of the Pianofort e 
School, of which Mr . J . Hilar y Taylo r is 
director. 
^ Durin g the summer months at Boston, 
Mass., Mme . Azali a Haekley , soprano, has 
conducted with much profit to the singers a 
number of free choral classes. Mme . Haekle y 
wil l soon be heard i n Boston i n a recital of 
French songs. 
TH E GHETTO. 
ON September 14 a test contest of the 
celebrated Baltimor e segregation law 
came up i n the courts and wil l be carried 
through the Unite d States Supreme Court i f 
necessary. Mr . Harr y Hechheimer, white, 
and W . Ashbi e Hawkins, colored, are the 
lawyers i n the ease. The Nationa l Associa ­
tion for the Advancement of Colored People 
is interested i n the matter. 
^ Difficulties on account of the movin g of 
colored residents into white neighborhoods 
have arisen durin g the month i n the Harlem 
section of New York , i n Kansa s City , Mo. , 
i n Chicago, Ill., i n Washington , D . C , and 
i n St. Louis, Mo . It is said i n St. Louis 
that in order to protect R. A . Hudli n and 
his famil y the city is spending $15 a day, or 
$450 a month, to guard his home from possible attack by whites who resent what they 
term a "Negr o invasion " i n their residential 
district. 
The guarding by policemen began early 
i n May , and i f it is continued two weeks 
longer the city wil l have spent $1,800. 
Several times the sheds i n the rear of Mr . 
Hudlin's home have been fired, and after that 
the police guard was established at the cost 
of the city. Fiv e policemen are detailed to 
guard the premises. ALON G TH E 
Twelve prominent residents of East 
Hollywood , Cal. , entered the home of Mr . 
and Mrs. C. A . Bywater, Negroes, at 1206 
Kingsle y Drive , a fashionable neighborhood, 
and ordered them to leave the house and 
the neighborhood within thirty-six hours. 
" I come from Texas, " said one of the 
leaders, "where the Nigger's have no rights. 
You've got to get out." 
<J Whit e and colored newsboys had a race 
riot at Memphis, Tenn., which it took 
eighteen policemen to quiet. 
q It is said that the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, Bennett Medica l College and 
Yenne r Medica l College, all of Chicago, wil l 
in the future refuse to matriculate colored 
students. 
*J The colored and white teachers are by 
law compelled to attend teachers' institutions 
together in West Virginia . A t the Cabell 
County Teachers' Institution, goaded to 
desperation by the annoyance ' of white 
school teachers, several of the young colored 
women made public complaint to the superintendent, saying that they were annoyed 
by being struck with paper wads and that 
their protests had been received with 
sneers. A committee was appointed to in ­
vestigate the point and the State superintendent called. The committee brought in 
a resolution deploring the incident, but after 
a bitter debate the. resolution was voted 
down. 
1 Difficulties about voting continually recur 
in the South, especially with regard to 
primar y election. A write r in the New 
Orleans States says that it is "stated that 
the names of Negroes had been discovered 
on the registration rolls in the fifth ward. 
In reference to this charge, I desire to say 
that the shoe pinches on the other foot. I 
am prepared to show that in the last Janu ­
ary primar y election one of the men who 
served in the polls as a commissioner for 
the Good Government League is reported 
in the records of the city board of health as 
a Negro. It seems to me that the part of 
wisdom should preclude people who live in 
glass houses from throwing stones, and this 
is exactly what the Goo Goos are doing when 
they are attempting to hold the regulars 
guilty of having Negroes on the registration 
rolls. " 
q I n Kentuck y the Jefferson County board 
of education has raised an interesting quesCOLO R LIN E 273 
lion as to the right of colored voters to vote 
i n an election for white school trustees. 
The matter was referred to the attorneygeneral by State Superintendent Hamlett 
and the attorney-general advises that the 
matter be settled i n court, as he is a member 
of the State board and would have to pass 
on the question i n that capacity i f brought 
before the State board. 
It is contended that colored voters are 
only allowed to vote for a colored visitor to 
schools and not for trustees, for i f they 
could vote for white trustees then the door 
would be opened for the election of Negro 
trustees. The law distinctly provides that 
only white trustees shall be elected and that 
seems to settle the matter, but it wil l probably be taken to the courts for final 
adjudication. 
q B y a bare majority the Garrison bill, 
intended to bar Negro firemen from locomotives on the Georgia Railroad , passed the 
House of Representatives, but failed to pass 
the Senate. 
The bill prescribes an educational test for 
firemen of engines on all railroads operating 
in Georgia, a test which wil l virtuall y eliminate the Negro, and it was fathered and supported by union firemen and other labor 
organizations. 
q The aldermen of Winston-Salem, N . C , 
have passed an ordinance segregating the 
Negro population i n East Winston . The 
ordinance forbids Negroes to own or occupy 
property on East Fourt h Street, between 
Depot Street and the city limits on the east. 
It also forbids the whites from occupying 
any property on Thir d Street from Depot 
Street to Ridge Avenue. The fine for the 
first day's violation is $20, and $5 for each 
subsequent day such premises are occupied. 
Whether or not a city has a right to 
segregate the whites and Negroes has never 
been decided i n Nort h Carolina . The action 
of the aldermen is based upon the action o f 
the State i n segregating the white and Negro 
schools. 
q Two cases have recently arisen i n New 
Yor k where delinquent colored girls sent to 
correctional institutions have been refused 
admittance i n those institutions. One was 
the case of Ethe l Washington, 16 years old, 
at Niagar a Falls; the other the case o f 
Lillia n Faggard , who was not crimina l i n 
any sense, but did not want to live at home. 
N o correctional institution would take her. 274 TH E CRISIS 
1 I n Kansa s City , Mo. , the hospital board 
recommended that white internes be installed 
i n the colored hospital because none 
of the five youn g colored men who took the 
examination for the four vacancies had met 
the required 75 per cent. The president of 
the board had the papers secretly re-examined and remarked by disinterested experts. 
It was seen that No . 1, who had received 
a grade of 30 per cent, on the part of the 
visiting staff, had been given 89 per cent.; 
No . 2, who had received 63 per cent., was 
graded 83 per cent.; No . 3, who had been 
given 55 per cent., was raised to 85 1/2 per 
cent., and No . 4, whose grade was 63 per 
cent., rose to 87 1/2 per cent. 
The colored men were appointed. 
^ Charges are being made i n Philadelphi a 
that colored men who pass civil-service 
examination with high average seldom get 
appointments. A s a "flagrant example " of 
the drawin g of the "color line, " colored men 
refer to the experience of W . J . Blonding , 
220 W . Coulter Street, Germantown, who 
stood fifth on the list of eligibles for water 
inspector. Eigh t appointments were made, 
Blonding, colored, being notified by letter, 
his friends say, that he had been selected 
among the others, that his salary would 
be $900 a year, and that he was expected 
to report on a certain day. 
Whe n he appeared he was told, according 
to his friends, that the "head man " was not 
in . H e made a second call, and several 
days later is said to have received a letter 
that the place to which he had been ap ­
pointed had been obtained by some one else. 
"Upo n demand for further reason for the 
action, " one of his friends declares, "he 
was told that he could not be allowed to 
fill the position, which he merited and to 
which he had been duly appointed, because 
of his color. " 
•I Pennsylvani a has a carefully devised 
method of segregating poor children and 
foreigners and colored children i n certain 
public schools away from the rich and wellto-do. This custom was changed i n Pittsburgh recently, and as a result 200 of the 
high-born children went on a strike at being 
compelled to go to school wit h foreigners 
and Negroes. They sat on the lawn all day. 
<J Miss Rache l Brow n of St. Louis is being 
threatened wit h tar and feather because she 
employs a colored lawye r to look after her 
property. 
<I Cit y Commissioner R. Braswell of Montgomery, Ala. , is not going to allow colored 
and white people to see the same prizefighting pictures hereafter. It seems that 
i n a local show, while the Johnson-Flyn n 
fight was being called out, the buildin g contained several hundred people on the lower 
floor while the galleries were reserved for 
the blacks, and there were about 500 of them. 
Whenever Johnson landed a neat one the 
colored people above roared and the feeling 
was ugly. 
"It is disgraceful, it must stop, " exclaimed 
the commissioner, "and I can assure you 
it wil l not be permitted again. Negroes 
cannot hear a matinee of this kin d i n the 
same place wit h Caucasians. " 
COURTS. 
THE effort of the white Elk s to extermi-
•*• nate the colored Elk s is still going on. 
The colored Elks, who have already spent 
a good deal of money i n litigation, declare 
that they wil l fight it to the last ditch. 
q I n Sapulpa , Okla., suit for $1,000,000 has 
been filed i n the Distric t Court here on behalf of Charles Clayton , a Negro, who some 
years ago married a Creek India n woman, 
against the Texas, Prairi e and Gul f Pip e 
Lin e Companies and B . B . Burnett, a local 
banker and guardian for Clayton's children. 
Clayto n seeks to recover title to oil lands 
i n the heart of the Glen n Poo l district which 
it is alleged belonged to his wif e and a child 
which was born ten hours previous to the 
time the Creek rolls closed and died a few 
hours later. Accordin g to a recent decision 
of the Supreme Court, the father is sole heir 
to the child's estate, also that of his wife. 
I n the past it has been held that a noncitizen could not inherit Creek property. 
Fifty-thre e producing wells are on the prop ­
erty, which is valued at $50,000,000, and 
$950,000 worth of oil has been taken from 
it, according to the suit. 
•I Two youn g white men have kille d two 
Negroes i n Montgomery, Ala . 
•I A t Brooksville , Fla. , eleven Negroes were 
rescued from three deputy sheriffs by a 
band of armed Negroes, who fired and 
slightly wounded two of the officers. A 
posse has gone i n pursuit of the Negroes 
and a serious clash is feared. 
^ Abou t a year ago J . H . Turner, a wellknown colored business man of Savannah, 
Ga. , was lured to a lonely spot i n the woods, ALON G TH E 
murdered and his automobile stolen. The 
crime was traced to two young white men. 
One of them was convicted and sentenced to 
lif e imprisonment. H e appealed and on a 
technicality the verdict was reversed and a 
new tria l ordered. A t that tria l both men 
were acquitted, although the evidence was 
conclusive. One of the justices of the 
Supreme Court said that the "evidence 
showed a shocking case of murder. " Bot h 
the Savannah morning papers score the 
verdict. The Press says: 
"T o allow men like these to go unwhipped 
of justice is an outrage upon the community, 
insult to the law and justice. The courts and 
community have suffered from this verdict, 
and yet we are powerless to do more than 
protest. This, however, we wil l continue to 
do. " 
q Fou r years ago Ir a Perryman , white, 
killed Phili p Cook, a Negro, i n Anniston , 
Ala . The case has been fought through the 
courts up to the Supreme Court of the 
Unite d States and has finally come back to 
the city court, where Perryma n is at last to 
be tried for murder. 
LYNCHINGS. 
SINC E our last issue colored men have 
been lynched and burned as follows: 
Monroe Frankli n at Russellville, Ark. , 
accused of assaulting a woman ; at Cummings, Ga. , Ed . Collins, accused of assisting 
another colored man i n assaulting a woman ; 
at Greensville, S. C , Brooks Gordon, accused of assaulting a woman ; at Humboldt, 
Tenn., Will . Cook, shot for refusing to dance 
for some youn g white men ; at Princeton, 
W . Va., Walte r Johnson, fo r attacking a 
white girl . It is acknowledged i n this latter 
case that a mistake was probably made and 
the wron g man killed . The press dispatch 
says that the girl "was not injured, although 
she is i n a hysterical condition due to 
fright. " I n Memphis two white boys burned 
a white tramp alive after pouring oil over 
his clothing. 
q The grand jur y has indicted three men for 
the lynchin g of a colored boy at 
Columbus, Ga . 
q Mob s have been chasing Negroes i n 
Gadsden, Ala. , and Chattanooga, Tenn. 
q Negroes have been killed by policemen i n 
Richmond , Va., Bessemer, Ala. , Chicago, Ill., 
Birmingham, Ala. , Louisville , Ky. , Charleston, S. C , New Yor k Cit y and St. Louis, Mo . 
COLO R LIN E 275 
FOREIGN. 
MR.. HAR DAYA L has been appointed 
professor of Indian philosophy and 
Sanskrit at Stanford University, Palo Alto , 
Cal . 
q The Britis h Foreign Office has issued as a 
"white paper " a pamphlet of over 100 pages 
containing the diplomatic correspondence 
between the Britis h and Portuguese governments dealing with the recruitment of slave 
labor for the plantations of San Thome in 
Portuguese West Africa , which threatened 
at one time to riva l the scandals in the 
rubber regions of the Congo, 
The new regulations, according to Consul 
Mackie , would leave nothing to be desired 
i f observed with a reasonable degree of impartiality and care, but the disappointing 
manner i n which the laws framed for the 
benefit of the Angola n natives had been disregarded i n the past did not encourage the 
hope that the helpless condition of these 
natives would be much improved so long as 
they were left, as at present, in complete 
ignorance of their rights. 
q General Luis Mena , who is leading the 
revolt i n Nicaragua , has for some time been 
minister of war. Fo r a long time Men a and 
President Dia z were boon companions. 
Men a is a colored man, stands six feet high, 
is the idol of his soldiers and possesses a 
breadth of view and grace of manner rare 
in a man of so few advantages. 
q Charles Young , Unite d States military 
attache i n Liberia , has been made a major 
in the United States army. This is his little 
son's picture. A BLAC K BOY WHO IS KING. 
DAUD I CHUA , the thirty-seventh kin g 
who has ascended the throne of 
Uganda , was born only seventeen years ago. 
Unde r the overlordship of the Britis h Em ­
pire, and with the advice of three native 
regents, this boy rules over 4,000,000 black 
folk i n a territory as large as New England , 
New Yor k and Pennsylvani a combined. 
ME N OF TH E 
MONT H 
His kingdom is situated in East Centra l 
Africa , in the region of the great lakes, on 
the borders of the vast and beautiful Victori a 
Nyanza . The land has had a curious history. 
Eithe r Egyptia n civilization had its earliest 
beginnings here and spread down the Nile , 
or, starting further north, spread northward 
and southward. A t any rate here i n Central 
Afric a one sees the Egyptia n type in black 
DAUD I CHUA , KIN G O F UGANDA , WIT H HI S REGENT S ME N O F TH E MONT H 277 
laces, rinds the same musical instruments and 
boats. There is much legendary history covering the thousands of years between Egyp t 
and our day which cannot be recounted here. 
The first modern kin g of Uganda , Kimera , 
ascended the throne about 1400, and was 
contemporary with Henr y 1Y . of Englan d 
and Joa n of Are . 
Since that day slavery, wa r and rapinehave swept over the land, and finally came 
Mohammedanism, white explorers and Christianity. Kin g Mutesa received Stanley and 
TH E LAT E SAMUE L COLERIDGE-TAYLO R 
HIAWATH A GWENDOLE N 
killed a white bishop, which finally resulted 
i n Englis h conquest. Bu t the conquest was 
not complete and the result was that the 
native dynasty was left i n control. I n 1897 
Mwanga , the last of the wil d kings, was 
deposed and Daud i Chua , his infant son, 
ascended the throne. The young kin g is 
receiving a modern education and seems a 
serious-minded, earnest youth. 
A GREAT MUSICIAN. 
TWO children who must be very dear to 
the hearts of colored Americ a are left 
fatherless to-day by the death of Samuel 
Coleridge-Taylor, at the early age of 37. 
The father of this distinguished Anglo -
Africa n composer was an Africa n surgeon of 
Sierr a Leone, who came to Londo n to study 
medicine and married an Englis h lady of 
excellent family . Samuel Coleridge-Taylor 
showed his remarkable musical gift at the 
age of 4, early began the study of the violi n 
and became a chorister at St. George's 
Church, Croydon, when a boy. I n 1890 he 
entered the violi n department of the Roya l 
Academy of Music , where he also studied 
composition under Sir Villiers Stanford. 
Durin g his third year at the institute he 
won the prize offered for the best composition, and i n 1894 was graduated wit h honors. 
Mr . Coleridge-Taylor, at the time of his 
death, was an associate of the Roya l College 
of Music , London ; a professor i n Trinit y 
College and Crysta l Palace, London ; conductor of the Hande l Chora l Society and the 
Rochester Chora l Society, England . A few 
months before his death Mr . Taylo r became 
associated with Mr . Lando n Ronald , principal of the Guildhall School of Music , where 
he had charge of the choral choir, the orchestr a and the opera. 
A s a composer Taylo r was versatile and 
prolific. Numbered among his works are 
songs, pianoforte and violi n pieces, wit h orchestral accompaniment, trios, quintets for 
strings and clarinet, incidental music, sym-278 TH E CRISIS 
CLE O AN D LE O 
phony, orchestral and choral works. The 
popularit y of his early work, the "Hia ­
watha " triology, served to divert attention 
from his many other beautiful conceptions. 
Likene d to Grieg, who has by his Norwegian themes created a style of his own, 
and to Brahms, who has done so much with 
the Hungaria n folk music, Mr . ColeridgeTaylor, intensely racial, found his deepest 
inspiration i n the Negro folk song. Characteristic of the melancholy beauty, barbaric 
color, charm of musical rhythm and vehement passion of the true Negro music, are 
his symphonic pianoforte selections based 
on Negro medolies from "Afric a and America, " the "Africa n Suite, " a group of pianoforte pieces, the "Africa n Romances " 
(words by Pau l L . Dunbar), the "Songs of 
Slavery, " "Three Chora l Ballads " and 
"Africa n Dances, " and a suite for violi n and 
pianoforte. 
Mr . Coleridge-Taylor's latest compositions 
recently published are : "Othello, " a suite 
for pianoforte, from the incidental music to 
Si r Herbert Tree's like-named production, 
and which the Londo n Music Times says 
should live long after Sir Herbert Tree's 
production has became historical; the 
"Hiawath a Ballet, " absolutely new music, 
and his last choral work, " A Tale of Ol d 
Japan, " which is being performed wit h great 
success throughout England . 
Mr . Coleridge-Taylor possessed a charmin g personality. H e was an unassuming, 
earnest man, sincere and enthusiastic i n his 
art. H e leaves a widow, the daughter of 
an Englis h professor of music, and two 
children, Hiawath a and Gwendolen. 
OUR YOUNGEST AGENTS . 
ONC E upon a time there lived i n a Western State a little boy and girl who 
were twins. Their father was dead and their 
widowed mother used to go twenty miles 
away to teach so as to support her three 
children, returning home once a week. No w 
Leo and Cleo might have pouted and pined 
and wished for things they di d not have; but 
instead they began to think what they could 
do to help mother. So one day i n 1911 a 
letter came to TH E CRISIS office asking i f we 
would like to have two agents i n this Western 
town, and that i f so the 9-year-old twins 
would like to try. Thus we gained the 
youngest of our agents and we have them 
yet. W e are very proud of them and so is 
their mother, we are sure. I f there are other 
little boys and girls who woul d lik e to help 
their mothers and fathers perhaps they will 
write us. 
B 
A N ORPHA N HOME. 
TWEN T Y-EIGH T years ago a white 
woman, Almir a S. Steele, came to Chattanooga, Tenn., and started a home fo r needy 
children. Since then she has cared fo r and 
TH E ORPHANS : BEFOR E ME N O F TH E MONT H 279 
MRS . STEEL E AN D TH E ORPHANS : AFTE R 
educated 1,200 colored children, gathering 
them i n from the streets, livin g with them, 
attending to them, teaching them. She has 
had no easy way. Most of the funds for 
the wor k Mrs. Steele has raised i n the North , 
although the city, until recently, appropriated ninety-one cents a week for each inmate. 
This year the city has stopped that appropriation and Mrs. Steele writes: 
" I appeal to the city, county and State 
officials as to whether it has pai d to have 
taken i n over 1,200 needy ones to feed and 
train i n my way. I dare not ask private 
individuals to take my part, for I am i n a 
very unpopula r business, and people hate 
to lose their social standing by espousing a 
cause which is looked down upon, but I do 
wonder wh y so many have voluntarily told 
me they know our children from any others 
i n town because of their gentle manners, 
good deportment and correct language. I 
certainly never asked for or expected that 
much, as I realize the work is only partly 
done. I tried long ago to keep cows for 
milk , but I lost twenty-seven i n a short time ; 
so I gave that up. I tried hens and lost 
fifty-four i n a week. 
"M y first three buildings on this site, one 
fo r boys, one fo r girls and an industria l 
building, were burned just eighteen months 
after they were dedicated. W e were offered 
the old Georgi a Avenue schoolhouse, as it 
was empty; there we were set on fire three 
times in the night. I've lost five buildings by 
fire at Summit, our country home, where we 
spent fifteen summers. The ten-acre lot 
there was donated by Mr . and Mrs. Burgess. 
Besides the loss of the first three buildings 
i n town, I have lost three other wooden 
building's by fire, and none was insured. A 
colored woman named Littl e tried many 
years ago to send me to the penitentiary for 
taking an orphan girl livin g wit h her from 
a house of ill-repute, where she was waiting 
on the white inmates. I sent the child off 
at my expense to Atlant a University. 
Through the kindness of the Rev. Dr. Bach -
man, who testified as to the child's age, because the mother had been a servant i n his 
family, and he knew the girl was old enough, 
according to law, to choose her own 
guardian, I was released from the prisoner's 
bar and the girl was put under my care." 
This is the sort of battle that is daily 
fighting i n the South, and we are glad to 
commend this tireless soldier of the common 
good, who has worked so nobly and so long 
i n a great human cause. TH E CRISIS would 
be glad to forward any contribution to Mrs. 
Steele's work. OPINIO N 
AWAKENIN G
 A ver y int erestin g article on the 
OF RACES "A wa kenin g of the Colored Races " appears i n the 
Englis h scientific review called Bedrock. 
Mr . Basi l Thomson says: 
"I n the sense that no race now exists which 
is not, i n some degree, touched by the in ­
fluence of Western civilization, the present 
day may be said to be a fresh starting point 
i n the history of mankind. Whithersoever we 
turn, the law of custom, which has governed 
the unprogressive races for countless generations, is breaking down ; the old isolation is 
vanishing before railway and steamship communication; alien laborers imported by Euro ­
pean settlers are intermarryin g with them; 
and ethnologists of the future, having no 
pure races left to examine, will have to fall 
back upon hearsay evidence in their study 
of the history of human institutions. 
"The present population of the worl d is 
believed to be about fifteen hundred millions, 
of whom seven hundred millions are nominally progressive, and eight hundred millions 
are stagnant under 
the law of custom. 
It is difficult to 
choose terms that 
even approach scientific accuracy hi 
these generalizations, 
for, as Mr . H . G. 
Wells has remarked, 
if we use the word 
'civilized,' the Lon ­
don 'hooligan' and 
the 'bowery tough' 
immediately occur to 
us; i f the terms 
'stagnant' and 'progressive,' how are we 
to class the Parsee 
gentleman and the 
Sussex farm laborer? 
The terms 'white' 
and 'colored' land us 
in worse difficulties, for there are Chinese 
many shades whiter than the Portuguese. 
Onl y in Ma y last the liquor laws of South 
Africa , which make the possession of liquor 
by persons not of Europea n descent illegal, 
were stultified by a magistrate who decided 
that a Tur k born i n Constantinople was an 
Asiatic , and not entitled to the privileges o f 
Europea n descent, and that a colored Portuguese, charged with the same offense, was 
a European. * * * 
"It is probably safe to predict that the 
rate of the more viril e races wil l decline as 
the change in their habits begins to affect 
them. It has been stated that the Europea n 
will double his numbers i n eighty years, the 
Chinese in sixty and the Africa n Negro i n 
forty ; i f this rough statement were even half 
true, and the rale of increase were maintained, the outlook for men of Europea n 
descent would not be very bright; but, makin g all deductions, it is still evident that 
the overpopulation of the globe is within 
sight unless some unforeseen agency intervenes to prevent it. 
"I n a very interesting appendix to 
an interesting book, 
Lor d Crome r has 
discussed the evidence as to intermarriage between the 
dominant and subject 
races i n classical 
limes. The real test 
by which race hatred 
is to be gauged is 
the test of intermarriage. I f two races 
live side by side for 
a century or two 
without any intermingling , one might 
say that the color 
bar is a natural and OPINIO N 281 
not an artificial sentiment. A s Lor d Crome r 
observes, it is certain that the marriage of 
Roma n citizens with foreigners was regarded 
wit h great disfavor, and the offspring of 
such marriages was considered illegitimate. 
Virgi l condemns the marriage of Anton y 
and Cleopatr a i n unmeasured terms; Roman 
society was scandalized by the relations of 
Juliu s Caesar with Cleopatra ; Titus was 
obliged to part with Queen Berenice. Al l 
these cases were due rather to the pride of 
Roman citizenship and to contempt for barbarians than to any color bar. Intermarriage did take place very frequently; the 
Roma n soldiers, who were taken prisoners 
by the Parthians in B. C. 53, married native 
wives, and though Horac e considers this a 
disgrace, he would equally have regarded it 
as disgraceful i f they had settled on the Elbe 
and married German wives, or on the Thames 
and married Britis h wives, for two lines 
earlier he couples Briton s and Parthians 
together. N o evidence has yet been found 
of any color antipathy having been a bar 
to intermarriage. Juvena l certainly regarded the black skin of the Ethiopia n as 
a physical defect, to be classed in the same 
category as bandy legs, but Juvena l bespatters all foreigners alike with his satire, irrespective of the color of their skins. * * * 
''Muc h turns upon the question whether 
race antipathy is inherent, for when two races 
are brought into contact and competition 
there can be no middle course; either race 
antipathy must disappear, or one breed of 
man must dominate and extinguish the other. 
Race hatred has seldom been dispassionately 
studied. It is felt most strongly i n the 
Unite d States and the West Indies; a little 
less than strongly i n the other British tropical colonies; in Englan d itself it is much 
weaker, and is confined generally to the educated classes who have lived in the tropics. 
In Prance , Spain , Portugal, Hollan d and 
Italy it is scarcely noticeable. One cannot 
say, however, that it is confined to races of 
Teutonic descent, for the Germans and the 
Dutch who live in the tropics scarcely seem 
to feel it. It is, moreover, a sentiment of 
modern growth. I n the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries Englishmen do not seem to 
have thought colored people their inferiors 
by reason of their color; the only race hatred 
in the middle ages was anti-Semitic, and this 
was probably due to the Crusades. The 
color bar seems to have dated only from the 
time of slavery in the West Indies, and yet 
the Romans, the Spaniards, the Portuguese 
and the Dutch, who were the great slave 
owners i n history, do not seem to have felt it. 
Shakespeare saw nothing repulsive i n the 
marriage of Desdemona with a man of color, 
or he would not have dared to invest Othello 
with a mantle of heroism; Iago's disparagement of Othello would have been far more 
pointed and bitter in its personalities i f 
color prejudice could have appealed to the 
audience. Earl y in the sixteenth century 
Sieur Paulmie r de Gonvill e of Normand y 
gave his heiress in marriage to Essomeric, 
a pure-blooded Brazilian , and no one thought 
that she was hardly treated. Histor y is full 
of romantic examples of the marriage of 
Europeans with colored women—to cite no 
more than de Bethencourt with his Guanche 
princess, Cortes with Doh a Marina , and Joh n 
Rolfe with Pocahontas; and even i n these 
days women of Anglo-Saxo n blood have 
been known to mate with Chinese, Arabs, 
Kaffirs and even Negroes, despite the active 
opposition of their relations, i t is, of course, 
well known that certain races wil l fuse less 
readily than others. East Indians, introduced for workin g the sugar plantations, 
have been livin g among the Fijian s for 
thirty years, and cases of intermarriage between them may be counted on the fingers 
of one hand, while, on the other hand, Chin ­
ese and Negroes in the same group of islands 
marry native wives and have children. 
"A t the dawn of the twentieth century we 
see the racial future of mankind through a 
glass darkly, and in our time we cannot hope 
to see it face to face. But certain features 
are already clear. A white skin cannot forever be a sort of patent of nobility. Race 
prejudice does not die so hard as one would 
think. Whe n the European finds himself 
in a state of political inferiority he is ready 
enough to drop his racial pride, and to adapt 
himself to circumstances. The Portuguese 
of the sixteenth century paid their court to 
the 'Empero r of Monomotapa,' a Bant u 
chieftain, into whose power they had fallen, 
and the English sailor of the forties, who, 
when he landed i n Fiji , called the natives 
'Niggers' with an expletive prefix, might very 
soon be found playin g body servant to a 
chief who spoke of him contemptuously as 
'my white man.' * * * 
"There is nothing as yet to encourage the 
belief that the white and the colored races 
wil l coalesce to produce an intermediate 
type, but it is a common error to believe that 282 TH E CRISIS 
intermarriage on a large scale would 
be physically disastrous. The half-caste offsprin g of such mixed marriages is supposed 
to inherit the vices of both races, and none 
of the virtues. I n so fa r as this accusation 
is true, the social ostracism i n which these 
people are condemned to live would be sufficient to account for it. Disowned by their 
fathers, unrestrained by the customs of their 
mothers' folk, it could scarcely be otherwise; 
but those who have lived with Eurasians and 
with half-castes of many races agree that 
i n aptitude they are equal to the average 
European , when they have the same education and opportunity, and that there is no 
physica l deterioration i n the offspring of 
the marriages of half-castes inter se. 
"I n Java , where the Dutc h regard them 
as their social equals, they are eligible fo r 
the highest positions i n the colony. 
"I n tropica l countries the line of caste wil l 
soon cease to be the line of color: there, as 
in temperate zones, wealth wil l create a new 
aristocracy recruited from men of every 
shade of color. I n Indi a and Chin a it is 
possible that the process may be accelerated, 
for the labor unrest and the high wages i n 
Western countries may drive manufacturers 
to transfer their capital to countries where 
labor is still cheap, plentiful and efficient. 
Eve n i n the great cities of Europ e and 
Americ a we may find men of Hind u and 
Chinese and Ara b origin controlling industry 
with their wealth, as Europeans now control 
the commerce of Indi a and China , but with 
this difference—that they wil l be wearing the 
dress and speaking the language which wil l 
have become common to the whole commercia l world, and as the aristocracy of every 
land wil l be composed of every shade of 
color, so wil l the masses of the workers. I n 
one country the majority of the workers wil l 
be black or brown, i n another white ; but 
white men wil l work shoulder by shoulder 
with black and feel no degradation. I n 
many parts of the world they do this already. 
There wil l be the same feverish pursuit of 
wealth, the same struggle between labor and 
capital, but all races wil l participate i n the 
distribution of wealth instead of a favored 
few. The world wil l then be neither so 
pleasant nor so picturesque a place to live 
in , and by the men of the coming centuries 
the Victoria n Ag e may come to be cherished 
tenderly as an age of romance, of awakening 
and of high adventure. Perhaps the historians of that day may speak of it as we 
speak of the Elizabethan, and may date the 
new starting point i n the history of mankin d 
from the decay of the law of custom." 
fS 
POLITICS •
Mr - Roosevel t
 has again explained i n the Outlook the attitude of his party toward the colored man. 
The editors of the Outlook give the explana ­
tion this rather extraordinary endorsement: 
"H e has, i n fact, taken the ground of reason and justice—the ground that i n a representative government no man is to be 
accepted as a representative unless he does 
i n fact represent the community from which 
he comes; and no representative is to be 
rejected i f he does i n fact represent such 
community. It is perfectly notorious that 
the Negro delegates who have claimed to 
represent the extreme South i n Republica n 
conventions have not trul y represented the 
community; i n the Progressive convention 
every Negro delegate accepted di d represent 
the community and came wit h the good wil l 
of his white neighbors." 
I f anyone wil l substitute i n the above 
statement "white community" fo r "community " the meaning of the editors wil l be 
perfectly clear. 
The colored members of the Progressive 
convention have sent out a circula r i n which 
they declared that: "The charge of 'lily -
whitism' against the Nationa l Progressive 
convention is false. Arkansa s elected a 
mixed delegation, with five colored delegates, 
four of whom attended the convention; Tennessee sent one, Kentuck y one, Marylan d 
two and West Virgini a two. The charge of 
'lily-whitism' was made fo r the sole and 
specific purpose of engendering politica l 
strife and embarrassment, and wit h the hope 
of alienating the colored vote. N o heed, nor 
the slightest, credence, should be given to the 
numberless unfair, distorted and malicious 
reports of a hostile press, sent out against 
the national convention of the Progressive 
party—a convention whose genuine enthusiasm, numerical strength, high-class delegates, 
brainy, experienced leaders, challenge comparison wit h any simila r body ever assembled withi n the annals of our country. " 
The reception of this situation by the 
colored press has been varied. The oldest 
colored pape r i n the country, the Christian 
Recorder, says: 
"No t only di d the Colone l do a wrong , but 
emphasized it by tryin g to explai n it, and his 
explanation i n a nutshell is this: OPINIO N 283 
" 'I n the South I want no Negro party, and 
I won't encourage a single Negro from that 
section.' I n the Nort h it is all right for 
9,000 Negroes of Rhode Island to have a 
delegate, but 600,000 Negroes in Mississipp i 
cannot have one, no, not even one. We are 
informed that the Negroes did not contest 
for all the delegates from Mississippi. They 
wanted only reasonable recognition; they 
were not tryin g to monopolize the party or 
make a Negro party. Though they represented the great bulk of Republicans and 
Progressives, they wanted only a paltry few 
delegates. Bu t Roosevelt, the people's man, 
said no—they could not even have one delegate. Does anybody believe that one or two 
delegates out of twenty in Mississippi, and 
one or two from Florid a and Alabama , could 
be interpreted as meaning that there was a 
new Negro party forming? " 
The next oldest paper, the Georgi a 
Baptist, quotes this analogy: 
"Once, while we were in Augusta , the 
August a Herald came out i n one of its issues, 
delivering itself i n no uncertain terms on the 
race question. Afte r so delivering itself, it 
declared that Negroes who subscribed to the 
Herald knew that these were its sentiments, 
and that i f they could not subscribe wit h 
this knowledge they were not wanted. Now 
the sentiments expressed by the Herald were 
substantially those entertained by the 
Chronicle, but the colored people of August a 
had the choice between a paper which openly 
declared its prejudices, as well as practiced 
them, and one which practiced them without 
openly declaring them. Considered from a 
race standpoint only, the colored people i n 
this country are similarl y placed, as regards 
their choice between the Progressive and the 
Republican party i n the present campaign. " 
The Norfol k (Va.) Journal and Guide 
says: 
"A t first the new Progressive party looked 
like the solution of the whole problem until 
Colonel Roosevelt expressed the wish that no 
colored men i n the South should have any 
part i n the birth of the new party. That i n 
itself is enough to give the 'lily-white ' enthusiastics more encouragement than they 
have received throughout the whole Taft 
administration, and Mr . Taft is the daddy 
o f all the lily-whites. " 
The Richmon d Planet adds: 
"President Taft has been criticised, but 
he is 'an angel o f light' to the colored man 
as compared to the brutal declarations of the 
brilliant Progressive candidate from Oyster 
Bay , N . Y. " 
The New Yor k Times, after an exhaustive 
correspondence, finds very little support for 
Mr . Roosevelt among the colored people of 
the country, although there is some. 
The Maco n (Ga.) News (white) says that 
"it is a rare thing for the Negro vote to be 
classified as an unknown quantity i n a 
national campaign ; but the situation is such 
this year that the Negro voters are at sea 
in spite of themselves." 
The Charleston News and Courier has its 
usual spasm: 
"The news dispatches state that the Rhode 
Island Progressive executive committee gave 
a dinner to Colonel Roosevelt on Frida y 
evening. It was not a man's meeting only. 
There were three women present; one of 
them, it is stated, being the daughter of 
ex-Governor Garvin . A t the table with 
Colonel Roosevelt, says the report, sat, 
among others, Juliu s Mitchell, of Providence, and John Matthews, of Newport, both 
Negroes. 
"The South has no objection to Mr . Roosevelt dinin g with whom he desires. H e can 
eat with his horses i f it pleases him. " 
B 
CORRUPTION. Commenting on recent revelations of corruption i n Southern politics, the Southwestern Christian 
Advocate remarks that: 
"One needs only, however, to read the 
more recent accounts of white primaries to 
note that, although the Negro has been 
barred from politics i n the South, corruption 
and buyin g of votes still prevail. Wha t shall 
we say of the white man during a recent 
campaign i n the State of Mississipp i where 
the highest and best were accused, not only 
of corrupt politica l methods, but of buying 
and selling votes, and when lyin g became an 
every-day charge? Wha t shall we say of 
the recent campaign in the State of South 
Carolina where all manner of political corruption has been alleged? Wha t shall we 
say of the status i n the city of New Orleans 
where, at the time of this writing , the full 
force of the city police is standing ready to 
quell any riot at the ballot box, for it is 
alleged that there may be irregularities and 
other corruption of the ballot? The whole 
story is amusing. It has two effects upon 
the Negro : The Negro, i n the first place, 284 TH E CRISIS 
laughs at this pharasaical boast of the white 
man of his absolute freedom from corruption. On the other hand, the Negro has a 
feeling of resentment because of the hypocrisy and downright conceit by which he has 
been politically throttled. It was not i n the 
interest of a pure ballot, per se, that the 
Negro was disfranchised; it was simpl y a 
part of the continuous and persistent program to keep the Negro under. The Negro 
is not altogether a fool. H e can see these 
inconsistencies and can puncture the loud 
boasts an d pharasaical claims of his more 
favored brothers and then deep down i n his 
heart the Negro says: 'Wha t inconsistency!' 
Bu t statesmanship and government based 
upon such deceit and unholy injustice cannot be permanent. The Negro knows this. 
The wheels of the gods grin d slowly, but 
they grind, nevertheless, and the Negro can 
afford, with praye r and patience, to abide his 
time." 
TH E BAR Seldom i f ever i n this countr
y has color discrimination 
ASSOCIATION. , 
called forth such emphatic 
and well-nigh universal disapprova l as the 
recent action of the America n Ba r Associa ­
tion ; the reason being that a clear-cut issue 
o f color unclouded by extraneous matter was 
forced. 
The Philadelphi a Ledger said on the eve 
o f the convention : 
"Just as the Progressive party began its 
exemplification of equal rights for all by 
excluding Negro citizens of the South from 
any part i n its councils, so the Ba r Association, after it has elected three Negroes, 
lives up to its name by barrin g them out. 
I f the association i n its meeting next week 
does not repudiate the wholly indefensible 
and un-America n procedure of its executive 
committee, let the America n Ba r Association 
forfeit its name as well as its title to the 
respect and confidence of all .right-thinking 
Americans. " 
The New Yor k Evening World remarks 
that: 
"Lawyers are queer animals. One would 
suppose that a class of professional men who 
depend for support and reputation largely 
upon the respect and confidence of the community would wish to be popular. Appar ­
ently they don't care whether they are popu ­
la r or not. An d the fact is that they are not. 
"The efforts of the America n Ba r Asso ­
ciation to throw out three Negro lawyers 
from its membership have met wit h no sympathy from the public . O n the other hand, 
Attorney-Genera l Wickersham's insistence 
that the standing of the colored lawyers 
should be recognized has received general 
approval. 
"I f the lawyers were as careful about some 
of their other associations as they are about 
consorting wit h dark-skinned members of 
their own profession, there might be less of 
the widespread feeling of cynica l mistrust 
that undoubtedly exists toward them. A 
little of this commendable fastidiousness 
practiced in professional matters where a 
color line marks the boundary of shadiness 
would become them fa r better than the 
present intemperate exhibition of race 
prejudice. " 
The Utica Herald-Despatch declares: 
"It does not seem probable that the Ameri ­
can Ba r Association wil l ever be able to 
live down the disgrace of its miserable mishandling of the issue and erase the blot upon 
its escutcheon." 
The Rochester Democrat says: 
"The association didn't take time to explai n its position or answer any questions 
when it passed the shameful resolution. The 
only conclusion possible is that fo r once a 
majority of the members were so conscious 
of having no case that they wouldn't even 
make a pretense of presenting it. " 
The New Yor k Evening Mail is sarcastic: 
"I f the Ba r Association would expel a 
couple of hundred of its members wit h dusky 
records, instead of three honest lawyers wit h 
dusky faces, the publi c woul d applau d its 
action. " 
Fro m the West the Chicago Tribune notes 
that: 
"There are 10,000,000 Negroes i n the 
America n republic, one-ninth of our whole 
population, and they cannot and wil l not 
be kept indefinitely i n a condition of isolation. Those who prove themselves fit fo r 
the learned professions or fit to serve 
society's needs i n any capacity should be 
given encouragement and recognition i n that 
work. The America n Ba r Association has 
set a bad precedent." 
Says the Tro y Record: 
"Throug h the adoption of the resolution 
there is a likelihood that few blacks wil l be OPINIO N 285 
admitted to the association i n the future. 
Race prejudice is less i n evidence i n this 
country than ever before. Bu t the narrowness which discriminates against estimable 
people because of their color still exists. It 
is to be hoped that the time wil l come when 
every citizen of this broad land wil l be 
treated according to his merits, not accordin g to a color which is only skin deep." 
Eve n the Southern papers are not satisfied. The Maco n Telegraph says: 
"This virtuall y shuts the doors against 
Negro lawyers while disingenuously dodging 
the color question. A straight-out resolution 
for or against admission would have been 
more just as well as more honest." 
The Louisvill e Courier-Journal speaks this 
strong, true word : 
"The three Negroes who are already members of the America n Ba r Association are 
men who have won recognition i n their 
chosen work. There is not the slightest 
evidence that they are not' creditable to the 
bar i n every way. The adoption of a resolution isolating them as undesirable is an 
indefensible insult to unoffending humanity, 
but it is even more objectionable as service 
of notice that i n so fa r as may be the door 
of hope i n the legal profession is to be 
closed to Negroes, i n violation of the spirit 
of the republic, the Constitution and the 
times. Surely lawyers should be the last to 
do that which is essentially lawless, and a 
body of lawyers made up of men from every 
State ought to be ashamed to tell the world 
that i n Americ a the Negro is still denied a 
square deal." 
m 
TH E BUSINESS The meeting of the Negro 
LEAGU E Business League i n Chicago 
has brought two important 
comments upo n its objects. Al l papers 
praise its wor k and general attitude, but the 
Chicago Evening Post says of Mr . Washing ­
ton's advice : 
"Whil e it is a very useful thing to have 
Mr . Washingto n preaching free wil l and full 
responsibility to the colored people, it would 
be a very great mistake for the white community to regard this as the last word on 
the subject. Fo r it is not true i n any sense 
whatever that the colored community is 
wholl y and entirely responsible for the vice 
and crime which appear now and then i n 
its midst. 
"Fo r one thing a good deal of the vice i n 
the 'colored belt' is white man's vice, thrust 
there by the authorities against the protest 
of the colored people. Bu t the thing runs 
deeper than that. Vic e and crime are in 
large measure the result of idleness, of 
irregula r employment, and even of regular 
employment that is underpaid and exhaustive. It would be fatuous for the white community to deny its responsibility, i n very 
large measure, for the economic conditions 
under which thousands of Negro men and 
women struggle right here i n Chicago. Trade 
unions close their doors to colored men; the 
vast majority of employments are closed 
absolutely to them; even the America n Ba r 
Association threatens to draw a social and 
semi-professional line against them. 
"Bu t these are disagreeable truths and we 
all shirk them when we can. If Dr. Wash ­
ington rather encourages us to shirk them 
by putting the emphasis where he does, there 
is another great leader of the colored people 
who does not. Professor W . E . B . D u Bois 
i n his books and his journal, TH E CRISIS, 
holds up courageously, month i n and month 
out, the other side—our side—of the picture. 
Forcefully and yet with a quiet reserve which 
is granted to few polemicists, Dr. D u Bois 
thrusts home upon the conscience of the 
America n people the consciousness that the 
colored problem cannot be solved by the 
colored man alone." 
The Chicago Public also declares that 
the advocates of protest and higher training 
among colored people "see that the Negro 
cannot gain anything more than a material 
and partia l victory by becoming more and 
more self-sufficing. Two camps of selfsufficing and self-regarding peoples wil l 
never constitute a democracy. Ever y white 
advance i n the conception of social justice 
must be shared with the Negro. The Negro 
who is graduated from a college must not 
be allowed to take Dr. Washington's advice 
to go South and start a brickyard, i f he has 
academic abilities that can be employed in 
other and more ideally fruitful ways. The 
white unions, for instance, must cease their 
suicidal and immora l policy of discouraging 
or excluding Negro members. The Negroes 
must not meet such exclusion with a selfsufficient 'Well , I shall achieve i n some other 
way.' They must insist on achieving i n that 
particular—by insisting on admission to 
every union that claims to be labor. 
"To achieve the prope r solution of this 286 TH E CRISIS 
problem, in short, simpl y means that whites 
as well as Negroes shall be guided by ideals 
as well as by opportunism, shall have the 
courage of their li p service to spiritua l 
realities, shall either admit that they do not 
believe in democracy at all but only i n the 
struggle for existence, or else pursue their 
achievement of democracy i n the only way 
possible, by the frank recognition of and 
action upon the spiritua l implications of 
democracy and self-consciousness." 
Three papers—North, East and 
JUBILEE South—unite in a demand upon 
Congress that the bill for the 
Negro semi-centennial for emancipation be 
passed. 
The Los Angeles (Cal.) Journal says: 
''Onl y one valid objection can be urged 
against the bill of Congressman Fitzgeral d 
appropriatin g $250,000 for an exposition to 
celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of Negro 
emancipation i n this country. The sum 
asked is too small for the occasion. The 
exposition should not be a paltry one. It 
should be made as near as possible complete 
in every line of labor and all-comprehensive 
in its scope; ample i n extent to show both 
what the Negro has been able to achieve in 
his fifty years of freedom and what guarantees he gives of industry and of art for 
the years to come." 
The Birmingham (Ala.) Age-Herald remarks that: 
"Surely, i n this age of appropriations for 
expositions, the sum of $250,000 should be 
voted to enable the Negroes to organize an 
exposition that wil l show what they have accomplished i n fifty years of freedom." 
A staff write r on the New Yor k Times 
declares: 
"The sum asked for is not large and the 
occasion is important. The Negroes have not 
asked for much at any time and they have 
not been treated with great liberality i n 
matters of appropriations from the public 
treasury. There is much objection to the 
appropriation of public funds for the holdin g of expositions, but such appropriations 
have been made for many expositions that 
were not more meritorious really than the 
exposition which the Negroes would now hold 
to show how they have prospered i n this 
land, and it would seem to be good policy 
and fair treatment to give them what they 
want. " 
MULATTOE S
 Th e
 figures ° f th e Unite d 
States census showing that, at 
least, one-fifth of the colored population of 
the Unite d States has white blood has 
brought varyin g comments. The Christian 
Recorder says: 
"Now . this census is very interesting for 
several reasons. First , it shows conclusively 
that race mixture is progressing more 
rapidl y i n those States where there is 
a law prohibitin g intermarriage, as i n the 
South, and less rapidl y where intermarriage 
is permitted. It is conclusive, therefore, that 
race mixture is not the result of race intermarriage. It is also shown that i n those 
States where the Negro woman and her offsprin g are not protected by laws regulating 
cohabitation and bastardy there is greatest 
increase, as i n Georgia . The whole theory 
of protection of the white race by permitting 
it to prey on the black is seen to be unsound 
by these figures. I n the very place where the 
mulatto is least wanted, i. e., i n the South, 
there the evidences of race mixture seem to 
be growing most rapidly . 
"Bu t we are convinced that these figures 
do not tell the whole story. If the definition 
of mulatto here given is adhered to, we are 
honestly convinced that at least 1,000,000 
more 'mulattoes' can be found. " 
The Manchester (Conn.) Herald thinks 
that: 
"Eventuall y the pure colored blood i n the 
Unite d States wil l become practically extinct 
and mulattoes wil l grow white. " 
Dr . Pierce Kintzing , of Baltimore , 
acknowledges that scientific tests fo r Negro 
blood are of little i f any value "beyond the 
third generation." 
m 
A t Cuba , Ala. , a Negro porter, B . Harris, 
risked his lif e to save that of Mr . Robertson, 
an old gentleman who was crossing the 
track i n front of a passenger train, and who, 
miscalculating the distance, was i n imminent 
danger of being ru n over. The engineer di d 
not see the old man until the train was on 
him. The Negro leaped to the middle of the 
track, grabbed Mr . Robertson, and threw him 
out o f the way of the train. 
Mr . Robertson was uninjured. The porter 
has been i n the service of the company for 
several years and has been warml y commended by the citizens for his heroic act. EDITORIA L 
O F CHIL D REN . 
THI S is the Children's 
Number , an d as it has 
grow n an d develope d i n 
the editor's hesitatin g 
hands, i t has i n some 
wa y come to seem a 
typica l rathe r tha n a specia l number. 
Indeed , ther e is a sense i n whic h al l 
numbers an d al l word s o f a magazin e 
o f idea s must poin t to the child—t o tha t 
vast immortalit y an d wid e sweep an d in ­
finite possibilit y whic h the chil d repre ­
sents. Suc h though t as this i t wa s tha t 
mad e me n sa y o f ol d as the y saw bab y 
faces lik e these tha t ador n ou r pages 
this month : 
"An d whosoeve r shal l offend one o f 
these littl e ones * * * i t is bette r 
fo r hi m tha t a millston e wer e hange d 
abou t his neck , an d he wer e cast int o 
the sea. " 
m 
O F TH E GIVIN G O F LIFE . 
AND ye t the mothers an d fathers 
an d the me n an d wome n o f ou r 
rac e must ofte n paus e an d ask : 
Is i t wort h while ? 
Ough t childre n be bor n to us ? 
Hav e we a righ t to mak e huma n souls 
face wha t we face to-day ? 
Th e answe r is clear : i f the grea t battle o f huma n righ t against poverty , 
against disease, against colo r prejudic e 
is to be won , i t must be wo n not i n ou r 
day , bu t i n the da y of ou r children's 
children . Ours is the bloo d an d dust of 
battle , theirs the reward s o f victory . I f 
the n the y ar e not ther e because we have 
not brough t them to the world , the n we 
have been the guiltiest facto r i n con ­
querin g ourselves. It is ou r dut y the n 
to accomplis h the immortalit y o f blac k 
bloo d i n orde r tha t the da y ma y come 
i n this dar k worl d whe n povert y shal l 
be abolished , privileg e based o n individ ­
ua l desert, an d the colo r o f a man's 
ski n be n o ba r to the outloo k o f his soul . 
m 
O F TH E SHIELDIN G ARM . 
IF the n i t is ou r dut y as honest colore d me n an d wome n battlin g fo r 
a grea t principl e to brin g no t aim ­
less rafts o f childre n to the world , bu t 
as man y as, wit h reasonabl e sacrifice , we 
ca n trai n to largest manhood , wha t i n 
its inne r essence shal l tha t trainin g be; 
particularl y i n its beginning ? Ou r 
first impuls e is to shiel d ou r childre n 
absolutely . Loo k a t these happ y littl e 
innocen t faces: fo r most o f them ther e is 
as ye t n o shadow, n o though t o f a colo r 
line . Th e worl d is beautifu l an d good, 
an d rea l lif e is joy . Bu t we kno w onl y 288 TH E CRISI S 
too wel l tha t beyon d al l the disillusion ­
men t an d hardenin g tha t lur k fo r ever y 
huma n sou l ther e is tha t extr a hurtin g 
which , eve n whe n unconscious, wit h 
fiendish refinemen t o f cruelt y waits o n 
each corne r to shado w the jo y o f ou r 
children ; i f the y ar e backwar d o r timid , 
ther e is the sneer; i f the y ar e forward , 
ther e is repression ; the problem s o f 
playmate s an d amusements ar e infinite , 
an d street an d schoo l an d churc h hav e 
al l tha t extr a hazar d o f pai n an d temp ­
tatio n tha t spells hel l to ou r babies. 
Th e first temptatio n the n is to shiel d 
the child ; to hedge i t abou t tha t i t 
ma y not kno w an d wil l no t dream. 
Then , whe n we ca n n o longe r wholl y 
shield , to indulg e an d pampe r an d cod ­
dle , as thoug h i n this dum b wa y to 
compensate . Fro m this attitud e come s 
the multitud e o f ou r spoiled , wayward , 
disappointe d children ; an d must we no t 
blame ourselves ? Fo r whil e the motiv e 
wa s pur e an d the oute r menac e un ­
doubted , is shieldin g an d indulgenc e the 
wa y to mee t it ? 
OF TH E GRIM THRUST. 
SOM E parents realizin g this, leave 
their childre n to sin k o r swi m i n 
this sea o f rac e prejudice . The y 
neithe r shiel d no r explain , bu t thrust 
the m fort h griml y int o schoo l o r street, 
an d let the m lear n as the y ma y fro m 
bruta l fact. Ou t o f this ma y come 
strengt h poise , self-dependence , an d 
out o f it, too, ma y come bewilderment , 
cringin g deceptio n an d self-distrust . It 
is, al l said , a brutal , unfai r method , an d 
i n its wa y as ba d as shieldin g an d in ­
dulgence . Wh y no t rathe r fac e the 
facts an d tel l the truth ? You r chil d 
is wise r tha n yo u think . 
m 
TH E FRAN K TRUTH. 
THE trut h lie s eve r betwee n extremes. It is wron g to introduc e 
the chil d to rac e consciousness 
prematurely . It is dangerou s to le t tha t 
consciousness gro w spontaneousl y with ­
ou t intelligen t guidance . Wit h ever y 
step o f dawnin g intelligenc e explana ­
tion—frank , fre e guidin g explanation — 
must come . Th e da y wil l daw n whe n 
mothe r must explai n gentl y bu t clearl y 
wh y the littl e girls nex t doo r do no t 
wan t to pla y wit h ' ' Niggers;' ' wha t the 
rea l cause is o f the teachers' unsym ­
patheti c attitude , an d ho w peopl e ma y 
rid e o n the back s o f stree t cars an d th e 
smoke r en d o f trains; an d stil l be people , 
honest high-minde d souls. EDITORIA L 2B9 
Remember , too, tha t i n suc h fran k 
explanatio n yo u ar e speakin g i n nin e 
cases ou t o f te n to a goo d dea l cleare r 
understandin g tha n yo u think , an d tha t 
the chil d min d ha s wha t you r tire d sou l 
ma y hav e lost fait h in—th e powe r an d 
the glory . 
TH E POWE R AN D TH E GLORY . 
OUT o f littl e unspoile d souls ris e 
u p wonderfu l resource s an d 
healin g balm . Onc e the colore d 
chil d understand s the world's attitud e 
an d the shamefu l wron g o f it, yo u have 
furnishe d i t wit h a grea t lif e motive — 
a powe r an d impuls e towar d good , whic h 
is the mightiest thin g ma n has. Ho w 
man y whit e folk s woul d giv e thei r ow n 
souls i f the y migh t graft int o their chil ­
dren's souls a great, moving , guidin g 
ideal ! 
Wit h this powe r ther e come s i n the 
transfigurin g sou l o f childhoo d the 
glory : the visio n o f accomplishment — 
the loft y ideal . Onc e le t the strengt h 
o f the motiv e work , an d i t become s the 
lif e task o f the paren t to guid e an d 
shape .the ideal ; to rais e i t fro m resentmen t an d revenge , to dignit y an d selfrespect, to breadt h an d accomplishment , 
to huma n service ; to beat back ever y 
though t o f cringin g an d surrender. 
Here , at last, we ca n spea k wit h n o 
hesitating , wit h no lac k o f faith , Fo r 
we kno w tha t as the worl d grow s bette r 
ther e wil l be realize d i n ou r children's 
live s tha t fo r whic h we fight unfalteringl y bu t vainl y now . 
m 
TH E SHIFT Y AMERICA N BAR . 
IN popula r imaginatio n the 
drawin g o f the colo r lin e 
is a solemn performanc e 
done afte r grav e deliberatio n b y perfectl y un ­
selfish men , fo r loft y 
purpos e an d fo r vast contemplativ e ends. 
I n the face o f suc h conceptio n wha t 
shal l be sai d at the trickery , lyin g an d 
chicaner y tha t has marke d the drawin g 
o f racia l line s i n the America n Ba r 
Association ? Wh y shoul d ther e be suc h 
hidin g an d deception ? Is somebod y 
ashame d o f somethin g ? Is i t a discreditable an d disreputabl e thin g to sa y to a 
ma n : "I f yo u ar e blac k yo u canno t joi n 
the America n Ba r Association? " I f i t 
is no t a nast y an d unworth y discrimina ­
tio n to sa y this, wh y not sa y it flatl y 
an d first, instea d of : 
1. Hushin g the matte r up . 290 TH E CRISIS 
2. Askin g the colore d ma n "quiet ­
ly " to resign . 
3. Seekin g to brea k la w an d pre ­
ceden t i n declarin g a membe r 
no t a member, bu t a "candi ­
date " fo r membership . 
4. Endless an d disingenuou s explanations, avowin g the broad ­
est charit y an d highest motives. 
5. Th e sendin g ou t o f ne w mem ­
bershi p blank s callin g fo r informatio n as to the "rac e an d sex " 
o f candidate s befor e the associatio n ha d authorize d suc h 
action . 
6. Th e admissio n tha t suc h blank s 
wer e sent withou t authority , bu t 
tha t the matte r woul d be dul y 
reporte d whe n i t neve r wa s 
reported . 
7. A secret bargai n whic h one o f 
the most prominen t lawyers i n 
the Unite d State s thu s describes: 
"Th e resolutio n wa s presente d 
b y ex-Presiden t an d ex-Secre ­
tar y o f Wa r Dickinson , seconde d b y a n Illinois man , favore d 
b y Wickersham , an d the n the 
previou s questio n wa s instantl y 
moved—al l evidentl y i n pursuanc e o f a prearrange d plan . 
I nee d sa y n o mor e tha n tha t 
afte r abou t fifteen minute s o f 
absolut e rio t the chairma n 
(Frase r o f Indiana , pu t int o 
the chai r b y Gregory , as I think , 
becaus e eve n Gregor y wa s no t 
willin g to do wha t wa s abou t to 
be done ) declare d the resolutio n 
adopte d an d declare d the meetin g adjourned . Wha t wa s actu ­
all y sai d o r don e i n th e interva l 
i t is impossibl e to tell . A doze n 
o r twent y me n wer e o n their 
feet constantl y yellin g fo r recognitio n b y the chair, an d the 
exclusionist gan g wa s yellin g 
'question! ' 'question! ' al l ove r 
the hall , an d i t wa s simpl y a 
mob . S o fa r as I coul d judge , 
whe n the questio n wa s finally 
pu t o n the resolution , afte r I 
ha d got recognize d fo r a poin t 
o f orde r whic h th e chai r con ­
cede d bu t gav e u s n o benefit 
of, ther e wer e abou t 50 'noes' 
i n a meetin g o f abou t 500. " 
I n the name o f civilization , wha t wer e 
450 me n so ashame d o f tha t the y coul d 
no t step int o the ligh t o f da y an d do 
frankl y an d openl y tha t whic h too k 
thre e officia l lies, tw o infraction s o f the EDITORIA L 291 
commo n law , a corrup t bargai n an d a 
"mob " to allo w the associate d ba r o f 
the natio n to accomplis h ? 
Doe s anyon e suspec t tha t here , as 
elsewhere , i n this lan d o f the free , a 
numbe r o f eminen t gentleme n wishe d 
opportunit y to do a dirt y tric k i n the 
dar k so as to stan d i n the ligh t an d yell : 
"W e giv e the blac k ma n ever y chanc e 
an d ye t loo k at him! " 
VITA L STATISTICS. 
EVER Y onc e i n a whil e 
some socia l studen t turn s 
his attentio n to the 
Negr o proble m an d announce s tha t he propose s 
to stud y it—fo r a few 
days. I n suc h cases TH E CRISIS is accustome d to suggest literatur e an d othe r 
matte r wit h the idea , no t o f influencin g 
th e student's conclusions, bu t o f im ­
pressin g the siz e o f the undertakin g to 
whic h he so lightl y turns. I n some 
cases this does good . I n the case o f Mr . 
Charle s Stelzl e i t di d n o good . Mr . 
Stelzle , wh o is "Executiv e Secretar y of 
th e Hom e Mission s Council, " announce d 
his intentio n last yea r o f lookin g blac k 
me n over. Thi s year, i n the midst o f a 
"busy life , he ha s throw n off a n essay 
whic h has been publishe d fro m Ne w 
Yor k to California , i n whic h he calml y 
announce s "tha t the deat h rat e amon g 
Negroe s is increasing , wherea s i t is decreasin g amon g whites. " This extra ­
ordinar y statement has been strew n ove r 
the Unite d State s an d i t is a flat an d 
glarin g falsehood . 
I n the Censu s o f 1890, Vita l an d 
Socia l Statistic s (Par t I, pag e 30), an d 
i n the Censu s o f 1900, Vol . III (Vita l 
Statistics, part I, pag e 69), ther e are 
the followin g figure s fo r colore d people : 
1890 1900 
Death rates in registration area. .32.40 30.2 
Death rates in registration cities. .33.08 31.1 
Death rates in registration States. .29.50 2C.2 
Her e is the clearest sort o f proo f tha t 
the Negr o deat h rat e is declinin g 
steadily . 
I f Mr . Stelzl e ha d ha d time to go a 
bi t furthe r he woul d have foun d the 
followin g figures i n the Censu s 
Mortalit y Statistic s o f 1908 (pag e 26). 
Deat h rate s o f Negroe s i n selected 
registratio n cities: 
1901-5 28.4 
1908- 26.2 
I n othe r words, because a bus y ma n 
wa s too careless to find ou t wha t he wa s 
talkin g about, a miserabl e falsehoo d is 
sprea d fro m ocean to ocean. MR . HAR E 
A STOR Y 
FOR CHILDREN 
(Adapted from the folk tales of the Banyoro Negroes in Uganda, Central Africa, as reported 
by George Wilson in Sir Harry Johnston's "Uganda Protectorate.") 
MR. HAR E an d Mr . Tortois e were , o f course , grea t friends. Well , 
one nic e war m day , whe n the sun wa s ver y hot i n the thic k 
Africa n forest, the y wen t ou t togethe r a-huntin g food , fo r 
the y wer e ver y hungry . The y walke d an d talke d an d talke d 
an d walked , whe n suddenl y Mr . Tortois e stopped . 
"Hello! " sai d Mr . Tortoise , pointin g ahead . 
"Well , I never! " answere d Mr . Hare , beginnin g to scamper, fo r ther e 
righ t befor e them arose i n the air, i n one tall , sli m column , a nic e tal l white -
an t hill . 
No w everybod y i n Afric a know s wha t swee t morsels fa t whit e ants are . 
an d yo u ca n believ e tha t Mr . Har e an d Mr . Tortois e wer e overjoye d at the 
sigh t o f the hil l an d lost littl e time gettin g to it. Carefull y the y du g a nice 
littl e hol e at the bottom of the hil l an d the n sa l dow n patientl y to awai t 
the comin g out o f the ants. 
A s Mr . Har e waite d he got so hungr y tha t he bega n to recko n tha t 
afte r al l ther e woul d be just abou t enoug h ants o n tha t hil l fo r Mr . Har e 
himself, an d it seemed a shame to giv e u p an y o f this fine foo d to a grea t 
sleep y tortoise . 
So greed y Mr . Har e bega n to look about wit h one eye, keepin g the othter 
o n the ant hill . Prett y soon Mr . Tortois e fel l soun d asleep just as Mr . Haiv . 
prickin g u p his ears, hear d some o f his friend s goin g throug h the forest. 
H e ra n quickl y to the m an d aske d the m to carr y the sleep y tortois e int o the 
tal l grass, wher e Mr . Har e kne w it woul d he har d fo r hi m to craw l out. 
"Bu t be carefu l not to hurt him, " sai d Mr . Hare . 
Whe n the tortile way . Mr . Har e 
an d ate unti l he 
die . an d the n crep t 
Tortoise , awakin g 
grass, ha d a longget out. Whe n at 
hausted , he arrive d 
ther e wa s nothin g 
wa s gone, 
friend. " sai d Mr . 
"I'l l be even wit h 
crawle d off home , 
hi m an d mad e a 
"M y dea r ol d 
"ho w gla d I a m to 
feare d yo u wer e 
escaped b y the 
toise wa s out o f 
sat dow n an d ate 
coul d hardl y wad -
off home . Poo r Mr . 
i n the tal l thic k 
har d journe y to 
last, lat e and ' exat the ant hill , lo ! 
left an d Mr . Hare 
' ' S o ho ! m y tine 
Tortois e angrily , 
yo u yet, " an d he 
Mr . Har e met 
grea t fuss, 
fellow! " he cried , 
see yo u safe ! I 
dead . I mysel f 
meres t chance . MR. HAR E 293 
Thre e spears graze d me! " an d Mr . 
Har e pointe d to a ver y smal l scratc h 
o n his soft side . 
'"Humph,' ' sai d Mr . Tortoise , 
busil y makin g his bed. 
"W e must not go to tha t an t hil l 
again.' ' sai d Mr . Hare , lickin g his 
chops. 
"Humph, " sai d Mr . Tortois e as he 
wen t to sleep. 
Now Mr . Tortois e kne w ful l wel l 
tha t earl y i n the mornin g Mr . Har e 
woul d mak e a beeline to the an t hil l 
fo r breakfast. Sur e enough , u p 
jumpe d Mr . Har e at daw n an d 
slippe d away . N o soone r wa s he out 
o f sight, however, tha n u p jumpe d 
Mr . Tortois e an d also crep t quickl y 
awa y to his friends. 
"Wai t fo r him. " he tol d them, 
"an d whe n he ha s his hea d deep i n the hole pounc e o n him.' ' 
Bu t Mr . Tortois e was kin d hearted , an d he remembere d tha t Mr . Har e ha d 
been carefu l no t to let his friend s injur e hi m whe n the y carrie d hi m to the 
jungle . S o he added : 
"Bu t don' t kil l him. " 
"Oh , bu t we lik e rabbit—w e wan t to eat him! " crie d the friends. 
"Ver y well, " sai d Mr . Tortoise , "bu t i f yo u kil l hi m quickl y he wil l 
be tough . Yo u must tak e hi m home an d mak e a bi g po t ready , half fille d 
wit h fine oi l an d salt an d nic e herbs. Pu t Mr . Har e i n it, bu t leave a hol e i n 
the cove r so tha t yo u ma y ad d col d wate r fro m time to time . Fo r i f yo u 
le t the oi l get ho t i t wil l spoi l the meat. S o be ver y carefu l an d no t let 
i t boil. " 
Th e friend s o f the tortois e di d exactl y as the y wer e told . Just as 
Mr . Har e wa s finishing the nicest breakfast imaginable , an d stoppin g between 
mouthfuls to chuckl e ove r the outwittin g o f the tortoise , he wa s suddenl y 
seize d fro m behind , an d despit e his ^37 —— • 
franti c struggle s hurrie d throug h the 
forest an d dropped , splash ! int o a bi g 
po t o f oi l an d herbs. Sal t wa s adde d 
an d the po t raise d o n sticks. Soo n the 
cracklin g o f a fire struc k the scare d ears 
o f Mr . Hare , whil e Mr . Tortoise's friend s 
sa t aroun d i n a circl e an d discusse d the 
comin g meal . 
" I certainl y d o lik e rabbit, " sai d one. 
"D o yo u thin k it as goo d as elephan t 
steak? " aske d another. 
"Oh , better—muc h better, " sai d a 
third . 
Her e Mr . Hare , fain t wit h fea r an d 
heat, wa s just abou t to giv e up , when , 
splash ! an d throug h a hol e i n the cove r 
o f the po t came a nic e das h o f col d 
water. Mr . Har e revive d an d looke d 
abou t cautiously . Thi s progra m wa s 
kep t u p fo r some hours, makin g poo r 
Mr . Har e ver y nervous, indeed , unti l at 294 TH E CRISIS 
last the patien t cook s decide d tha t their mea l wa s ready ; and indeed , th e oi l and 
herb s wer e givin g off a most temptin g smell . 
Al l the feasters washe d their hands, lai d ou t th e dishes, and , seatin g 
themselve s i n a circle , ra n their tongue s expectantl y ove r thei r lips. Th e 
po t wa s place d i n the middl e an d the cove r removed , when , presto ! ou t 
poppe d the ver y scare d an d bedraggle d Mr . Har e an d leape d int o th e jungl e 
lik e a flash leavin g a thi n trai l o f oil . 
"Dea r me! " sai d Mr . Tortoise , as Mr . Har e rushe d gaspin g int o the 
house, "whereve r hav e yo u been? " 
"Whew! " crie d Mr . Hare , "bu t I surel y ha d a narro w escape. I wa s 
nearl y murdered . I'v e been caugh t an d cooked , an d onl y b y a miracl e di d 
I escape, " an d he bega n hastil y lickin g his oil y sides. 
Mr . Tortois e wit h difficult y kep t bac k his laughte r an d watche d Mr . Har e 
lic k himself. Mr . Har e kep t o n lickin g an d Mr . Tortois e crep t nearer. 
Mr . Har e too k n o notic e an d Mr . Tortois e perceive d tha t bi t b y bi t the 
frigh t o n Mr . Hare' s oil y fac e wa s bein g replace d b y the most emphati c 
sign s o f pleasur e as Mr . Har e continue d to lic k himsel f greedily . Mr . Tortois e 
wa s interested , an d steppin g ove r quickl y he bega n to lic k th e othe r side . 
"My ! ho w delicious, " he exclaime d i n rapture , tastin g the fine oi l an d 
salt an d th e flavo r o f the herbs. 
"Ge t away! " crie d the greed y Mr . Hare . "Yo u hav e no t bee n i n the 
po t an d boiled . Kee p off! " 
Mr . Tortoise , feelin g tha t he ha d ha d a han d i n tha t oi l an d salt, bega n 
to get angry . 
"Le t me hav e you r left shoulde r to lick, " he demanded . 
" I wil l not, " sai d Mr . Hare , wh o wa s no w thoroughl y enjoyin g himself. 
Mr . Tortois e storme d ou t o f the hous e i n a grea t fur y an d almost ra n 
int o the arms o f his friends. They , too, wer e i n a towerin g rage . 
"Wha t di d yo u mean? " the y cried . "Throug h you r advic e we'v e lost 
ou r har e an d al l ou r beautifu l oi l an d salt. " 
''Dea r me! " exclaime d Mr . Tortoise , losin g i n his indignatio n al l thoughts 
o f friendship . "Thi s is very , ver y sad . No w I wil l tel l yo u wha t to do. 
Arrang e a danc e an d invit e Mr . Hare . Whe n he is dancin g to you r tom-toms 
seize hi m an d kil l him. " 
An d this shoul d hav e been the en d o f Mr . Hare . 
Bu t i t wasn't . SOME BOOKS FOR BOYS AN D GIRLS 
By JESSIE FAUSE T 
CIVILIZE D man, " sang Mr . Owen 
Meredith, "cannot live without 
cooks." That is open to argument. Certainly no one can dispute the statement that 
"civilize d man cannot live without books." 
Fo r what should we do without intellectual 
stimulus? An d where does one get that 
save i n books? That is why we begin with 
fair y tales. The Brothers Grimm, Hans 
Andersen, Arabian Nights—these are the 
first aids to the intellect. • 
Eve n more important, they are first aids, 
too, to the exercise of the imagination. Wh o 
could read o f Cinderella, of Jack, the Giant 
Killer, of those high-sounding Eastern 
names, Aladdin, Sinbad, Scheherazade without being immediately translated to the 
realm of make-believe? 
Nothin g is very strange to children because their experience is so slight; and yet 
even their serenity must receive a slight 
shock when Mother Goose presents the cow 
jumpin g over the moon. That is a matter 
requiring investigation. It would be well 
to learn more of this strange book. An d 
Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland and 
Through the Looking Glass are bound to 
stimulate the most indifferent Whit e Rabbits, 
and laconic Humpt y Dumpties are not to be 
met with every day. Wha t a blessing that 
the man who knew the little girl who knew 
them put his knowledge down i n a book! 
Ho w incomplete would life be without it! 
Most any child is bound to like , too, Stevenson's Child's Garden of Verses and 
Eugene Field's Nonsense Rhymes. The first 
one attracts by its likeness to the facts of 
life, the second because one is not sure 
whether the statements made are true or not. 
"The cow that's speckled red and white I 296 TH E CRISIS 
love with all my heart," croons the country 
child. O f course he does. Doesn't he see 
her every day? An d the little girl , looking 
out on the drear city streets i n the gray 
mist of a November afternoon, suddenly 
realizes that 
' ' The organ with the organ man 
Is singing in the rain. " 
On the other hand, why shouldn't 
' ' The owl and the pussycat go to sea 
In a beautiful pea-green boat? " 
Late r on when the struggle wit h the queer 
Lati n and Greek names becomes less pronounced Hawthorne's Wonderbook and 
the Tanglewood Tales, especially i f the illustrations are Parrish's, are much to be enjoyed. An d speaking of illustrations, 
neither child nor grown-up should miss 
Boutel de Monvel's pictures i n the child's 
story of Jean d'Arc . 
Meanwhil e the tendency to revel i n the 
fields of pure imagination grows less and 
less. Lif e as it is actually lived makes its 
appeal. Her e come Margare t Sydney's 
"Pepper Books," a charming array, and 
Frances Hodgson Burnett's "Secret Garden," 
a book with wonderful pictures. Then there 
are Vredenburg's Dickens' Children Stories 
and Pendleton's "Tim and Roy." An d 
"Swiss Family Robinson"—which might so 
easily have been real—and i f only yo u and 
I had belonged to the "Family! " 
B y now the girls are reading "Storie s fo r 
Girls. " Miss Alcott's books—a series beginnin g with "Little Women"—have no equal. 
Boarding-school books charm. Elle n Doug ­
las Deland presents the "Girls of Dudley 
School," Katharin e Ellis has her "Wideawake Girls," and Warde's "Betty Wales" 
stories seem very real indeed. An d we 
must not forget to mention Rosa Nonchette 
Carey. 
The boys are reading, too, but they are 
shooting bears and stalking Indians with the 
bold pioneer. Tomlinson's "Flintlock and 
Fife," Drysdale's "Brain and Brawn" Series, 
Ellis's Indian Series and a set of school 
books by John Prescott Earle and Edward 
Robin fulfil their idea of mental pabulum. 
Suddenly just as childhood is turnin g the 
corner comes the need for romance. Some 
children—most of them—read prose, Charles 
Major. Stanley Weyman, Anthony Hope; SOM E BOOK S FO R BOY S AN D GIRLS 297 
oh, the charm of the "Prisoner of Zenda!" 
But a small proportion turns to verse. 
Longfellow is frankl y loved; there is a little 
halt at the more translatable portions of 
Browning, and Keats and Shelley are more 
or less appreciated i n the exact proportion 
in which one has appreciated one's highschool classics. Elizabeth Barrett Brownin g 
is adored by girls, especially i n "Aurora 
Leigh.'' Bu t most enchanting of all are the 
Rubaiyat for those luck y enough to find 
Fitzgerald's translation, and Tennyson. 
Tennyson, dear master painter of chivalry 
and goodness and purit y and love ! Wha t a 
world is shown in the "Idyls of the King" 
and the "Princess." "H e cometh not," says 
"Marianna in the Moated Grange"—how the 
refrain haunts one! The beautiful "Lady of 
Shalott" fills her readers with that sadness 
which is more delicious than joy. An d 
"Maud''—for the girls. Late r on girls learn 
that life is a little sad, that mere womanhood is not always appreciated; but in 
"Maud" — 
"Queen rose of the rosebud garden of girls' ' 
sings Maud's lover. Eve n i f one isn't a 
queen rose, one may belong to the rosebud 
garden by the mere virtue of being a girl . 
An d again— 298 TH E 
"Sh e is coming, my own, my sweet; 
M y dust would hear her and heat, 
Had I lain for a century dead, 
Would start and tremble under her feet, 
An d blossom in purple and red. " 
How the beautiful words thrill! 
"Of making many books there is no end." 
Much remains to be said of the books which 
the more mature boy and girl would enjoy. 
Lack of space confines us to ten chosen at 
random. Anne Douglass Sedgwick's "Tante," 
Margaret Deland's "Iron Woman," Barrie's 
"Sentimental Tommy," any of Dickens' 
CRISIS 
Novels, King's "Inner Shrine," Perceval 
Gibbon's "Flower o' the Peach," Kenneth 
Grahame's "Olympians," "Frau," by John' 
Ellis, and Alice Brown's "Thyrza." 
The only fitting comment to make on 
these books is to say that after one has read 
them he will wish he had not—in order to 
have the pleasure of reading them all over. 
HISTORIC DAY S IN OCTOBE R 
1. Convention of colored men at Raleigh, 
N . C , 1866. 
2. Alexander T. Augusta, the first colored man commissioned in the medical 
department of the United States army, appointed surgeon of the Seventeenth Regiment, United States Colored Volunteers, 
1863. 
6. Slavery completely abolished in Cuba, 
1886. 
7. William Still, Negro anti-slavery 
worker and author, born, 1821. 
8. Many natives in South Africa enfranchised, 1887. 
9. Black soldiers from Hayti aided the 
American troops in the attack on Savannah, 
Ga., 1779. 
10. Robert Gould Shaw, colonel of the 
Fifty-fourth Massachusetts Regiment, born, 
1837. 
12. St. Thomas Church, Philadelphia, 
first Episcopalian congregation consisting of 
Negroes, organized, 1794. 
13. Free-school system inaugurated in 
Georgia, 1870. 
16. John Brown attacked Harper's 
Ferry, 1859. 
17. Oge and Chavannes, colored men of 
Santo Domingo, demanded of the French 
national convention political rights for their 
people, 1790. 
18. Free colored people of Santo 
Domingo petitioned the people of France 
for equal rights, 1789. 
19. William W . Patton, former president 
of Howard University, born, 1821. 
21. William Lloyd Garrison mobbed in 
Boston, 1835. 
Vermont ratified the Fifteenth Amendment, 1869. 
24. New York authorized the enlistment 
of colored troops for service in the second 
war with England, 1814. 
25. William Goodell, author of "The 
American Slave Code," born, 1792. 
28. Levi Coffin, organizer of the "Underground Railroad," born, 1798. 
L. M . HERSHAW . NATIONA L ASSOCIATION 
FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE 
BRANCHES. 
THE Indianapolis branch, with a member-
* ship of over fifty, has been admitted. 
The president is Mrs. Mary E . Cable. 
On July 18 Miss Ovington addressed the 
Northeastern Federation of Women's Clubs, 
convening at Jersey City, on the work of the 
National Association. 
BALTIMORE. 
COUNSE L for the association reports 
^ that the hearing on the Baltimore 
segregation ordinance which was set for 
August 26 has been again postponed. The 
new date set is September 14. Mr. Marchant, the deputy State attorney, requested 
this postponement, alleging as one of his 
reasons his inability to argue so important a 
matter without time for full preparation. 
m 
VIRGINIA CHRISTIAN. 
THE board of directors desire to express 
their deep appreciation to the members 
of the association for their gratifying response to the circular letter requesting aid 
in the Virginia Christian case. Letters and 
contributions poured in from all parts of 
the country. The balance on hand after 
meeting the expenses of the case is $117. 
This, with the consent of the donors, will 
be applied to the legal redress fund and 
kept for future emergencies of similar character. A circular letter of appreciation 
giving a statement of the proposed disposition of the balance of the fund and accompanied by a sample copy of TH E CRISIS, 
which contains an account of the case, has 
been sent to everyone contributing. 
Mr . Thomas Ewing, Jr., of the well-known 
legal firm of Ewing & Ewing, one of the 
board of directors, at his own expense engaged the services of Mr . Dodson, an attorney of Norfolk, Va., in the case. Mr . 
Dodson, after carefully reviewing the legal 
history of the case and interviewing many 
of the same people who had been seen already by the association's representative, 
came to the conclusion that the crime was 
not premeditated. He spent over an hour 
trying to persuade the governor to commute 
the girl's sentence. 
m 
TH E BAR ASSOCIATION. 
A S noted in another part of this issue the 
American Bar Association has succeeded for the present in drawing the color 
line. One of the three gentlemen under 
discussion, Mr . William R. Morris of Minneapolis, resigned immediately upon learning 
the action of the Bar Association. The work 
of our organization in connection with this 
matter has already been reviewed in previous 
numbers of TH E CRISIS. The board of directors feel that especial mention should be 
made of the splendid campaign carried on 
by the Boston branch. Under date of 
August 8 a circular letter was sent to all 
the Massachusetts members of the American 
Bar Association, explaining the situation 
and requesting their immediate reply to inquiries contained on an enclosed postcard. 
Of the 420 cards sent out 224 were returned. 
An analysis of the latter showed 220 of the 
Massachusetts members who did not approve 
of the attempt to exclude Mr . William H . 
Lewis from membership, 218 who did not 
approve of the attempt to introduce race or 
color as a qualification of membership, and 
twelve who expected to attend the meeting at 
Milwaukee. Al l but four were opposed to 
drawing the race or color line and all but 
six were opposed to the exclusion of colored 
members. It was a great blow to the association that Mr . Moorfield Storey was too 
ill to attend the meeting. Hon. Albert E . 
Pillsbury and Judge Harvey H . Baker went 
to Milwaukee expressly to fight the introduction of the color line. A PLEA FOR TH E SURVIVA L OF TH E PRO ­
TECTORATE S OF SOUT H AFRIC A 
By FRANCES HOGGAN , M. D., of London. England 
THE Protectorates of South 
Afric a are a substantial 
monument to Great Bri ­
tain's civilizin g power. No 
doubt much still remains to 
be done, and some things 
had better have been left 
undone. Earl y dealings with the Basuto, for 
instance, as well as with other natives with 
whom we had treaties, one cannot contemplate with equanimity, or always feel proud 
of Englis h diplomatic methods of dealing 
wit h oversea dependencies. Still , taken i n 
the mass, Englis h influence and government 
have conduced greatly to the well being of 
South Africa n natives, and nowhere is this 
more conclusively evident than i n the Pro ­
tectorates. One turns wit h genuine pleasure 
from the Transvaal, Orange Rive r Colony 
and Rhodesia (white men's country) to the 
immense stretches of Bechuanaland and the 
beautiful mountains and fertile valleys of 
Basutoland, where one has the welcome feelin g that here at least the black man has a 
home, and that the country, for all purposes 
of livin g i n and cultivating, belongs to him. 
Britis h rule extends over these two and the 
Swaziland Protectorate. Government officials are very much to the fore i n the 
residency towns, the tryin g of all murder 
cases and the more important civil cases 
being i n the hands of the Englis h commissioners, assistant commissioners and magistrates, having been relinquished by Kham a 
voluntarily, and by some of the other native 
chiefs under pressure. Chiefs, however, still 
retain a good deal of power, and all the 
internal matters of the tribe are i n their 
hands to be administered according to triba l 
custom and usage. The chief has government pa y like any other official when 
employed to collect the hut tax ; he is i n 
constant communication with the representatives of the Englis h government i n the Pro ­
tectorate, and receives from them much 
useful help and counsel, and occasionally 
something very like an order, but couched 
i n friendly and courteous terms. Where , as 
is frequently the case, the administrator is 
i n close touch and sympathy wit h the chiefs, 
the system works admirably, and it woul d be 
difficult to devise a better mode of bringin g 
the advantages of Western civilization to the 
natives of Africa . Paterna l government is 
the government best understood by natives, 
and the sovereignty of a white paramount 
chief is readily submitted to and loyall y 
accepted. The pathetic remonstrances contained i n the petitions addressed to the government by the native chiefs i n both 
Bechuanaland and Basutoland when South 
Africa n Unio n was under consideration, 
their saddened references to their obedience 
and loyalty to their white father, and desire 
to continue under his rule, testify to their 
disinclination for passing under any other 
jurisdiction. The time must come, i n the 
natural order of events, when the Protectorates wil l be handed over to the control of 
the "elder brother," as the Unio n of South 
Afric a was designated i n a publi c reply to 
the petition of chiefs anxious to have the 
existing Protectorate relations maintained. 
The prospect presented to them filled them 
with dismay, and the Basuto are equally 
averse to any new regime. 
The distinction one is at once aware of in 
the Protectorates is that the white man is 
there for the benefit and protection of the 
blacks, to promote their welfare, to stimulate 
them to progress, and generally to further 
their interests; whereas, outside the Protectorates, the feeling is at once forced on one 
that the white man is the owner and master 
of the country, and that the blacks are only 
there on sufferance, to wor k fo r him, and 
to build u p the industries of the land 
primaril y for his advantage and interest. 
I n the great Bechuanaland Protectorate 
triba l lif e is the rule and the powe r of the 
chief is a very real thing. The chiefs are 
commonly men of strong character, accustomed to govern, and assisted by headmen o f 
recognized position i n the tribe. These 
headmen are sometimes, as when the chief is 
young and the headman of mature age and 
experience, of a high type of min d and wise, 
in counsel, and the chief's authority is always 
exercised withi n certain well-known limits 
and is not a pure despotism. TH E CUBA N REVOLUTIO N 301 
Khama , the grand old chief so well known 
i n connection with his opposition to the 
liquor traffic, who has this year celebrated 
in the presence of a representative of the 
Englis h government the jubilee of his baptism, deferred on account of the death of 
Edwar d VII. , is a fine example of a strong, 
wise and humane native ruler. There are 
many other chiefs, heathen, Christian or 
wavering, who possess commanding qualities, 
and enjoy the respect and affection of their 
subjects and the consideration of white 
officials. 
The internal rule of these chiefs is effective 
and only i n well-prescribed circumstances are 
they under the guidance and control of 
Englis h government officials, the more enlightened of whom are welcomed and consulted by the chiefs as friends whose wisdom 
and wider experience are highly appreciated. 
To be present at some of these consultations 
is a privilege but seldom enjoyed by 
travelers. It gives an insight of great value 
into the mental lif e and alibre of the Bantu , 
and enables one i n some degree to understand their nature and the triba l outlook 
on life, that of the communist as opposed 
to that of the individualist.* 
The triba l system is such a consistent 
whole, and it has so molded the whole nature 
of the Bantu ; it is so much part and parcel 
of their psychical life , that any rapi d change 
is to be deprecated even toward ethically 
higher standards. I n the transition period 
the older sanctions of life and conduct fall 
to the ground, leaving a moral blank. It is 
those natives who are i n the chaotic whirl 
of change from the old to the new who 
constitute the dangerous class of whom so 
much of late years has been heard. I n the 
Protectorates this class is not a large one 
and is easily controlled. Wher e it tends to 
become a grave peril to the community is 
especially i n the Transvaa l and Rhodesia, i n 
the neighborhood of the mines, and where 
natives are exasperated by gallin g restrictions and disabilities. 
A s is always the case, it is the verge of 
civilization, where contact with whites of 
low morality debases the natives that the 
most unsatisfactory race relations are found. 
In all parts of South Afric a where the 
underlying idea of the governing classes is 
the good of white men and only incidentally, 
as a necessary asset of the country and its development, the good of the natives, friction 
of an acute kin d must occur. Where, on the 
other hand, the white ruler aims at development, and the conditions of a happy, 
prosperous and progressively civilized life 
for the natives are realized, good feeling 
prevails, and the advantages of white 
supremacy are not disputed. So satisfactory 
are the general relations between governing 
and governed i n the Protectorates that it 
would be a disaster for them to be incorporated with South Afric a before time has 
been allowed for the growth of a more 
liberal policy toward natives generally, and 
until guarantees can be devised for the 
special recognition of the existing rights and 
privileges of the Protectorate natives. Their 
faith i n their white "Father " and his administrators is so touching and complete 
that we are bound by all motives of loyalty 
to duty and good faith toward the dependent 
tribes not to betray their trust. 
A Japanese gentleman I once met told me 
that the Englis h resembled the Japanese in 
their possession of the quality of faithfulness. Japanese devotion to duty has been 
splendidly proved on the field of battle. 
Ma y ours be equally well proved on the 
battlefield of race (a fa r more difficult field 
i n which to gain laurels) i n South Africa , to 
our lasting glory and the well being of all 
the Protectorates under our fostering care! 
*See Dudley Kidd's "Kaffi r Socialism." 
TH E CUBA N REVOLUTIO N 
WIT H the colored population 
of the Provinc e of Oriente 
reduced by 3,000, including 
the leaders Estenoz and 
Ivonnet, the prisons of 
Santiago filled to their 
capacity, and" the names of 
conspirators stricken from the roll of the 
Veterans of Cuban Independence, the ill -
advised uprising of the Independent Colored 
Part y has been completely crushed by the 
Cuban government and the net result of the 
movement has been to broaden the attenuated line between the races. 
The object of the revolutionists was to 
intimidate the government into repealing the 302 TH E CRISIS 
Moru a law against the formation of political 
parties on racia l lines. This law, which 
owes its name to the late Moru a Delgado, 
Secretary of Wa r and President of the 
Senate, was in reality designed to protect 
the interests of his people. The Negro population, which now numbers little more than 
one-fourth the total population of Cuba , is 
constantly decreasing proportionately with 
the increase of European immigration. Obviously a political party always i n the 
minority could never hope to exercise great 
influence upon the government, and the existence of a separate colored party would only 
tend to the formation of exclusively white 
parties which would deprive the Negroes of 
all the privileges which they now enjoy. 
O f the eighty members of the Cuban 
Hous e of Representatives, some twelve are 
professedly of Negro blood, and the senate 
now includes one colored member. These men 
have been elected purely on their own merits 
by mixed constituencies. To them and to 
other men of color are open any offices to 
which their ability and their influence entitle 
them. N o member of the Hous e of Representatives is more highly regarded by his colleagues than is Campos Marquetti or Juan 
Gualberto Gomez, now the Libera l candidate 
for the presidency of the assembly of 
Havan a Province. I n Cuba , as perhaps i n 
no other country, the Emancipatio n Procla ­
mation has brought real freedom and opportunity to the erstwhile slave. 
If Estenoz had any motive other than that 
of personal discontent and unsatisfied ambition, it was the supposition that the repeal 
of the Moru a law, by America n intervention, 
if necessary, would advance the status of the 
Negro more rapidl y than he has progressed 
i n the thirty years of complete emancipation. 
Estenoz could not have familiarized himself 
with the condition of the Negro i n the South 
when he visited the Unite d States. If he 
were now livin g he would not only be disillusioned by the action of the Progressive 
party, but he would have the additional assurance of Mr . Roosevelt i n a recent speech 
on "The Marc h of Ou r Flag, " that "i f we 
were i n control in Cub a the Negroes would 
be kept withi n bounds, socially and politic ­
ally"—t o which a write r i n Pearson's Magazine adds: "O n intervening again we must 
remain there (in Cuba ) until we have accomplished a task as thorough as that of 
Englan d i n Egypt. " 
Fortunately fo r Cuba , the majority of the 
colored people, and a large number, even of 
the Independents, were entirely opposed to 
the extreme action of Estenoz. I n suppressing the rebellion the Libera l government had 
the warm support of their Conservative opponents and of the representative colored 
men. The speedy and severe campaign has 
brought untold suffering upon the people of 
Oriente, but it is to be hoped that the passage of a general pardon act wil l restore 
to the families that have not been bereft of 
their breadwinners the hundreds of prisoners 
who became the victims of a misguided 
reformer. JAME S B . CLARKE . 
TH E BURDE N 
"DID YO U SEND M Y LETTE R OPEN? " 
OUR readers wil l remember the horrible 
lynching picture published i n our 
January , 1912, number. W e tried to get 
details of this affair, but the utmost we have 
been able to extract is the followin g letter 
from a colored minister: 
"Andalusia , Ala . 
"Dea r Si r 
yours Received you ask me O f the Ma n that 
was lync h yas Pettegru A negro was lench 
without Bein g loud 5 minits to tell the or to 
Pro v him sealf enisen or No t Wit h about 
67 white men Wel l Ar m H e was shot to Deth 
the last Word s I Hr d him said god nose I 
did not Do it sense then 2 Whit e men was 
charge with Bein g Concerning i n it after 
killin g him he was Dru g O n the ground with 
his Feets tide to the Hin e Buggi e Axe l and 
Bodd y Dragin g the ground. H e was carried 
near one Mil e Roun d the town he was a 
man near 26 yeas old. H e Di d No t fear a 
man for Hi s color Dont care what nomber 
of lettrs yo u get this is the Feolig y (? ) 
truth. Di d yo u cent M y letter open Enne y 
Perticklers cend Redes (registered) lettr. 
"W e cant tell what we Want r tell i n this 
town " (N o signature.) TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Publishers Page 
Prizes 
We publish this month pictures of 115 children and we leave lying on our 
desk over a hundred others which we would like to publish but space fails 
this time; besides many came too late. Some of the left-overs are so interesting 
that we may publish them later. 
TH E FIRS T PRIZ E in our contest, TH E CRISIS cup, goes to the babies 
on the cover, who live in California. 
TH E SECON D PRIZE , two years' subscription, goes to the baby on 
page 267, who lives in Washington, D. C. 
TH E THIR D PRIZE , one year's subscription, goes to the baby at the 
top of page 295. who also lives in Washington, D. C. 
Our Second Birth Month 
November will bring the Second Anniversary Number of TH E CRISIS, 
marking the end of the second year of its existence and the beginning of the 
third year. The feature of this number will be a review of the history of 
colored magazines in the United States. Mr . Charles Edward Stowe will 
contribute an article on the religion of slavery. 
Christmas 
Richard Brown is at work on our Christmas cover. Our circulation man 
says 25,000 copies for Christmas, but we can hardly believe him. There will be a 
Christmas card, of course. 
Power in Advertising 
Newspaper and magazine advertising is as much a source of convenience 
to the reader as a benefit to the advertiser. No advertised article is salable 
unless it either saves time and labor or affords comfort and pleasure. 
Our Advertising Department selects and solicits our advertisements with 
extreme care, looking always to the trustworthiness of the proposition and its 
possible adaptability to the needs and requirements of our readers. 
By keeping our advertising pages up to their present high standard, we will 
in the near future make them a convenient department store for fireside 
shopping. 
We can only judge your appreciation of our efforts to give you clean 
advertising by the number of replies received by the advertisers. Look over 
the half-a-hundred advertisements in this issue and see if there is not one 
which offers something of interest to you. 
Business Matters 
ADVERTISING—Addres s all inquiries to Albo n L . Holsey. Advertising Manager . 
CIRCULATION—Til e present circulation of TH E CRISIS) is 22,000 copies per month, in 
every State i n the Unio n and i n 26 foreign lands. Onr circulation books are open to interested 
parties. 
AGENTS—TH E CRISI S has at present a staff of 469 agents. Only agents who can furnish 
first-class references are desired. 
LETTERS—Addres s business letters to W . E . B . Du Bois, Manager . Draw all checks to 
TH E CRISIS , 26 Vese y Street, New Yor k City . 304 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Suffrage Conditions in Democratic and Republican 
States Compared By JOSEPH C. MANNING of Alabama 
It is i n justice to themselves that the America n people, durin g the present 
demagogic agitation, when so much is being said about the rule of the people, should 
enter into a calm and dispassionate consideration of certain suffrage conditions i n 
this country that really should appeal to the thoughtfulness and to the sense of 
fairness of all the voters of the Unite d States for righteous adjustment. 
Let those of the America n people who may have been led into thinkin g that 
the Republican party is not the party of the people, is without popula r support, 
and who have been taught that the Democratic party is the party of the people, 
having the support of the masses of the people, let these misinformed America n 
voters go into the consideration of facts that are incontrovertible and then determine 
for themselves whether the Democratic party or the Republica n party is the part y having 
the support of the masses of the people. 
The so-called rock-ribbed Democratic States of the South are the mainstay and 
stronghold of the national Democratic party. Wha t of the voting strength backing 
up the democracy i n the dozen Southern States which gave their electoral votes to 
the Democratic presidential ticket i n 1908? The combined vote of Alabama , Arkansas, 
Florida , Georgia, Louisiana , Mississippi, Nort h Carolina , Oklahoma , South Carolina . 
Tennessee, Texas and Virgini a for the Democratic electoral tickets i n 1908 was 
1,146,263. There are 5,953,621 males of voting age i n these dozen States, and of 
this number 4,066,067 are white and 1,887,554 are colored. It wil l be seen that 
2,919,804 white males of voting age di d not vote the Democratic ticket i n support 
of this Southern democracy, and that the 1,877,554 colored male citizenship of voting 
age is even a greater number than the Democratic vote of 1,146,263. The combined 
vote polled by the Democratic delegations i n Congress from these States, i n 1910, was 
but 879,676. Havin g a male citizenship i n these dozen States numbering 5,953,623 
persons of voting age, while only 1,146,263 ballots dominate i n a presidential contest 
and but 879,676 dominate i n congressional elections, these figures, of themselves, are 
severe enough arraignment of the politica l party under which such an intolerable 
condition has become possible. These bald facts refute, lay bare, any pretense or 
pretext that the Democratic party is a party of the masses of the people. 
I n the national election i n 1908 the State of Alabama had eleven votes i n the 
electoral college. The vote polled for the Brya n electors was 74,374. Minnesota , a 
Republican State, i n 1908, had eleven electoral votes. The vote fo r Taft i n this 
State was 195,843. The Alabama delegation i n Congress was elected i n 1910 on 
81,400 ballots, while the vote cast fo r the delegation i n Congress from Minnesota , i n 
1910, was 183,373. The whole vote cast for all candidates for Congress i n Alabama , 
i n 1910, was 96,313, while the whole vote cast for all candidates for Congress in 
Minnesota, in 1910, was 266,145. 
Mississipp i bad ten electoral votes i n 1908. The vote for the Brya n electors 
was 60,287. Kansa s had ten electors i n 1908, and 197,216 votes were polled i n that 
State for the Taft electors. The delegation i n Congress from Mississipp i had a 
combined vote i n 1910 of 23,865, while the Kansa s delegation i n Congress had a 
combined vote of 161,880. The whole vote for all Congress candidates i n Mississipp i 
was 23,865, while the whole vote for all Congress candidates i n Kansa s was 293,234. 
South Carolina had nine electoral votes i n 1908 and polled a vote of 62,288 for 
Bryan . The State of Washingto n had five electoral votes and polled 106,062 ballots 
for Taft. Vermont had four electoral votes and polled 39,552 ballots for Taft. 
Washington and Vermont, both Republica n States i n 1908, gave Taft a combined 
vote of 145,614. South Carolin a elected the entire Congress delegation on 30,005 
ballots i n 1910, while the combined vote of Washingto n and Vermon t for the TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 305 
Congress delegations from these States was 115,427. These two States polled 
180,286 votes for all Congress candidates and South Carolin a polled 30,005 votes 
for all Congress candidates. 
The first Arkansa s congressional district elected R. B . Mason, a Democrat, to 
Congress in 1910 on a total vote of 2,803. The first Iowa district sent C. A . Kennedy, 
a Republican, to Congress on a vote of 15,602. The first Georgi a district elected 
C. G . Edwards, a Democrat, on 2,019 ballots. The first Kansa s district elected 
D . R. Anthony , a Republican, on 21,852 ballots. The third Louisiana district gave 
R. F . Broussard, Democrat, 4,011 votes. The third Pennsylvani a district elected 
J . H . Moor e on 23,726 ballots. The eighth Mississipp i district elected J . W . Collier, 
Democrat, on 1,739 votes. The eighth Ohio Congressional district elected F . B . 
Willis. Republican, on 21,030 votes. 
The vote polled for B . L . French, representative i n Congress from Idaho, was 
46,401. The eleven members of the Georgi a delegation i n Congress polled a combined 
vole i n 1910 of 45,867. The whole vote cast for all the members of Congress from 
Louisiana i n 1910 was 45,183. 
Congressman Stephens of the seventh Californi a district was elected to Congress 
i n 1910 on a total of 36,435 ballots. A t the same time there were seven Democratic 
Congressmen from Arkansa s elected on a combined vote of 31,828. The Democratic 
delegation from Florid a had a combined vote of 30,995. I n the nineteenth Illinois 
district Congressman McKinle y received 23,107 votes, while eight members of 
Congress came up from the Democratic State of Mississipp i on a combined vote 
aggregating but 23,865. Whe n a district in New Yor k State was electing Congressman Payn e on 21,121 ballots there were six congressional districts i n the Southern 
States that polled a combined vote of 13,764 for the six successful Congress candidates. Ten members of Congress from the South have a combined vote of 
26,826 ballots. 
It is absurd for Southern Democrats, or for the national Democratic party, of 
which the Southern democracy is a part of the machine, to make any acclaim for 
popula r government i n the face of these twelve Democratic States i n the South with 
5,953,621 male citizens of voting age being dominated by a Democratic vote aggregating only 1,146,263. It is ridiculous for the democracy to talk about the rule of the 
people, whereas 4,066,067 whites and 1,887,544 blacks of voting age i n these so-called 
rock-ribbed Democratic States are being governed by a minority party that has 
reduced the electorate to but 1,146,263 Democratic voters, while the whole vote polled 
for all electoral candidates i n these States i n 1908 aggregated only 1,802,510. 
Pit y those who would exchange the suffrage conditions in those States of the 
North , where the Republican party has been the dominant party, for the conditions 
i n the States of the South where the Democratic party has maintained its power 
through fixing the hold of a Bourbon political despotism upon the masses of the people. 
The attitude of the Democratic party as to voting rights is shown by the 
conditions i n those States of the South constituting the backbone of the national 
Democratic party, while i n no Republican State has there been instituted intrigue and 
subterfuge i n the forms of law to thwart the rule of the people or to eliminate from 
the suffrage any class because of color, as is the case i n the States of the South. 
Whe n the disfranchisement of colored voters was undertaken in Marylan d by 
certain amendments to the constitution of the State, President Taft wrote in a 
letter to a leading Republican of Marylan d as follows: "The whole law ought to 
be condemned. It is not drawn i n the spirit of justice and equality, having regard 
fo r the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments, and I sincerely hope that no Republican 
who desires equality of treatment to the black and white races wil l vote for it. " 
Colone l Roosevelt, the third-term candidate for President, announced his 
acquiescence i n the suffrage conditions i n the South and i n a letter to the president 
o f the Virgini a Ba r Association, which letter was made public following the presidential election i n 1908, made it quite clear that he did not favor any interference 
wit h those laws i n the South designed to eliminate colored voters. I n the article 
(Continued on page 308) 306 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Subject: Make Friends of Thine Enemies 
Th e greatest boon which civilization has conferred upon 
free men is the privilege to have a voice in the government and 
conduct of their own affairs. Th e symbol of that privilege is the 
ballot. Th e legislatures of the several States determine the 
methods of acquiring, holding, selling and taxation of property, 
both real and personal. These legislatures are elected by the 
people who possess the right to cast a ballot. Th e legislatures 
of the several States define and prescribe the civil rights of the 
people within their jurisdiction. Chie f among these rights is the 
right to obtain an education; the right of the people to be 
secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures; the right, when accused of crime, 
to have a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury; the right 
to freedom of speech and the free and unabridged expression 
and practice of their religious beliefs are guaranteed by the 
Constitution of the United States, which is the supreme law of 
the land. An d if Mr . Roosevelt's policies triumph the Constitution of the United States will be subject to amendment and 
repeal by any temporary majority of the people enjoying the 
right to cast a ballot. Th e ballot then is the bulwark of our 
property, our liberties and our lives. 
Th e bulk of the Negroes in the United States reside in the 
States of the South. Here they are practically disfranchised and 
have no voice whatever in the shaping of laws which affect 
their most vital interests. What, then, is the crying need of the 
Negro to-day? Th e right to cast a vote for the protection of his 
property and life and the welfare of his posterity. 
How Can He Obtain That Right? 
For forty-two years the Negro has supported the Republican 
party in the hope that the party which stood sponsor for his 
freedom would stand as the guardian of his constitutional rights. 
Wit h the exception of eight years that party has been, for the 
greater part of the time, in nearly absolute control of all departments of the government. Instead of gaining in the momentous TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 307 
struggle which he is making for his rights, the Negro has steadily 
lost ground from year to year. To-da y the Republican party, 
after a fair trial, stands before the world, confessedly unable to 
secure for the black man the enforcement of the laws which the 
founders made nearly a half century ago. It is clear then that 
the Democratic party, which dominates the Southern States, is 
the one party which has the power to restore to the Negro the 
right of suffrage. 
Since the great majority of educated Negroes are satisfied 
that the race has paid off in full and with compound interest 
whatever debt of gratitude it owed the Republican party, their 
chief concern is the fear that should the Democrats come into 
power some greater misfortune will befall them. Th e decisive 
argument against this fear can be found in the record of the 
Democratic Congress which adjourned last August. Here was 
a Congress overwhelmingly Democratic, the first of its kind since 
1894. In all its lengthy session but two speeches were made 
containing a trace of Negro hatred and not a single bill against 
Negroes was reported from any committee. O n the contrary, this 
Congress passed the greatest of all pension bills, which included, 
among its beneficiaries, thousands of old Negro soldiers. But the 
act for which this Congress will be forever remembered is the 
formation by its Congressional Campaign Committee of the 
National Colored Democratic League, the first bona fide national 
political organization of colored men ever formed in this country. 
This fact sets' at rest for all time the argument that the Democratic party does not want the Negro. It has met us half way. 
Having lost nearly everything, we have but little to lose, but 
much to gain. Th e invitation is offered. Reason and intelligence 
command us to lay aside our prejudices and fears and reach out 
for the friendship and support of the people who are to-day 
oppressing us because of our political hostility toward them. 
ALEXANDE R WALTERS , President. 
Bishop A. M. E. Zion Church. ROBER T N . WOOD , 
Chairman Executive Committee. 
NATIONAL COLORED DEMOCRATIC LEAGU E 
"There never was a gentleman born in Virginia who 
was an enemy of the Negro."—JOHN B. SYPHAX . 
(Adv.) 308 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Suffrag e Condition s i n Democrati c an d Republica n State s Compare d 
(Continued from page 305) 
embracing the letter of Colone l Roosevelt, written October 27, 1908, but not given 
out for publication until after the November election following, the Washingto n Post 
said, by way of introduction, that "President Roosevelt is satisfied wit h the balloting 
privileges accorded the Negro by the laws of the Southern States." This view wil l 
hardly please colored citizens i n this country when they know that scarcely more than 
3,000 colored citizens are permitted to register fo r voting i n a State like Alabama , 
for example, whereas there are 213,923 colored male citizens of voting age i n this State. 
(Adv.) 
The Meeting Place of Business and Proficiency 
A large corporation advertised i n TH E CRISIS for a general manager with 
capital. The wording of their advertisement eliminated all inquirers save those 
with capital and experience. They write: 
' ' We believe that one of the parties is really interested in 
our proposition and will close with him in a few days.' ' 
They ' ' closed' ' with him and have since advertised for other high-grade help. 
HEL P WANTE D 
AGENTS ! 
Become partners i n our business 
through our profit-sharing plan. 
Sell "BRANDT' S AUTOMATI C 
STROPPER.' ' It hones and 
sharpens your razor better than 
an expert barber. Work s automatically for old-style razors and 
safety blades. Anyone can use it. 
Guaranteed for life. Ou r profitsharing plan and our premiums make this the greatest 
agency proposition. Writ e quick for prices and territory. 
E . V . BRAND T MFG . CO. , 4 2 Hudso n St., New Yor k 
We Wil l Star t You in a 
Paying Business for $10.00 
W e are importers and manufacturers of 
natural human hair and all kinds of human 
hair goods. 
O n an investment of $10.00 we wil l ship 
yo u enough goods to clear from $20.00 
to $30.00. and show yo u how to conduct 
a profitable business. 
Hairdressin g taught by capable instructors. Terms from $5.00 to $50.00. Positions guaranteed our graduates. Address 
C S. STARK , Manufacturer 
54 Oakwood Avenue Orange, N. J. 
Don't Slave for Wages 
Be your own boss. We show you how. 
Particulars free. 
JACKSO N SPECIALT Y CO . 
Box 22A East Lynn, Mass. 
AGENTS—Represen t reliable house, 400 per 
sent, profit. Selling GORDON' 8 Photo Pillow 
Tops. Hig h grade work. Eas y sales. Bi g money. 
Samples and catalogue free. 
Luthe r Gordon Co. 206 N . Fift h Ave., Chicago, Ill. 
WINNE R POLIS H 
TH E CHAMPIO N 
WINDO W CLEANE R 
Also unexcelled for cleaning Gold and Silve r 
Plated Ware , Germa n Silver , Brass, Copper, Tin , 
Steel, or any material where a brilliant lustre is 
required. 
B y Mail , 10c. postpaid. AGENT S WANTE D 
H . E . CLAR K 
309 East 119th Street, New York City 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PE R MONT H acting as 
AGENT S for the sale of our properties in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . 
Th e real comin g country where there are 
opportunities and openings for all. Writ e 
us to-day, giving your age and experience, 
and we wil l offer yo u a FIN E PROPOSI ­
TIO N WHIC H WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVES REALT Y CO. 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ames Bldg. Muskogee, Okla. 
AGENTS —Bi g money. Johnson-Flyn n 
fight and other copyrighted Negr o pictures. Portraits. Pillo w Tops. Catalog 
FREE . 30 days' credit. 
PEOPLE S PORTRAI T CO . 
Station U , Chicago, Ill. 
WANTED —Reliabl e men wit h references 
to handle the best Stock Investment on 
the market. Any good solicitor can earn 
from $50 to $100 per month. 
Ou r reference: Th e Ban k of Moun d 
Bayou . 
TH E S. I. & E . CORPORATIO N 
Mound Bayou, Miss. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 309 
SECOND-HAN D TYPEWRITER S 
Remingtons, Densmores, 
Jewetts , $11.50 each ; 
Franklins, Postals, Ham ­
monds, $9 each. Bargains in 
Underwoods, Smiths and all 
others. Al l guaranteed. 
Supplies. 
Standard Typewriter 
Exchange 
23B Par k Row, New Yor k 
REGALI A 
A RAC E ENTERPRIS E 
Manufacturing Badges, Banners and Supplies for all Fraternal and Church Societies. 
Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L . Jones, Pres. 
N. E . Cor. 8th and Plum Streets 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
PATENT S 
L . H . LATIME R 
MECHANICA L AN D ELECTRICA L ENGINEE R 
and 
SOLICITO R O P PATENT S 
55 Joh n Street New Yor k 
Inventions Perfected, Models and Experimental Machine s Designed and Constructed 
Technica l Translations. 
Telephone 343 Joh n Room 604 
MUTUAL TEACHERS' 
AGENCY 
Recommends teachers for schools; secures 
employment for teachers. Blanks and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N. W . Washington, D. C. 
ARCHITECT S 
WIGINGTO N & BEL L 
Architects 
Karbach Block Omaha, Neb. 
A PLAC E T O STO P 
The CENTREVILLE 
Neatly Furnished Rooms 
Hot and Cold Baths 
322-324 West 52d Street, New York 
Mrs. Hercules Young 
SITUATION S WANTE D 
Young Lady, just completed three 
years' commercial course, desires position 
as stenographer. Address 42 Cheever 
Street, Hamilton, Ontario. 
UNDERTAKER S 
Telephone Columbus 8985 Open Al l Night 
RODNEY DAD E & BROS. 
Undertaker s and Embalmer s 
Notary Publi c 
Funera l Parlo r and Chapel Free. 
Licensed Lad y Embalme r Prompt Service 
266 West 53d Street New York , N . Y . 
Between Broadwa y and 8th Avenue 
P. and A . Phone, 4771 F . 
JOH N B . DAVI S 
Funera l Director 
Shipping to All Parts a Specialty 
Carriages for Receptions 
Funeral Parlor and Chapel Free 
2154 Wylie Avenue Pittsburgh, Pa. 
INVESTMENT S 
Invest You r Money 
in Mound Bayou 
We are promoting and financing The 
People's Brick Company, one of the 
most-needed and best-paying enterprises in the town. 
OU R REFERENCE : TH E 
BAN K O F MOUN D BAYOU , 
O R AN Y CITIZEN . 
YOU R MONE Y will earn 7 per 
cent, from the time it is invested, and 
much more in the very near future. 
For complete information address 
The S.I. & E. Corporation 
MOUN D BAYOU , MISS. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 310 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
PERSONA L CARD S 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUD E E . CURTI S 
Surgeon Dentist 
188 West 135th Street, New York City 
Telephone 4885 Morningside 
DR. D. W. ONLE Y 
Surgeon Dentist 
S. W . Cor . 133d St. and Leno x Ave., New Yor k 
Office Hours: 9 to 12 a. m., 1 to 9 p. m. 
Sundays b y Appointment 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
5 Beekman Street (Templ e Court) 
New Yor k Cit y 
Te l 6222 Cortlandt Cabl e Address, Judowet 
FREDERIC K L . McGHE E 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Unio n Block, Fourt h and Cedar Streets 
St. Paul, Minn . 
General Practic e Notary Publi c 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Buildin g 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
Real Estate and Probat e Matter s a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Notar y Publi c 
Office: Room 502, Eberl y Block, Columbus, O. 
B. S. SMIT H 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnu t Street 
Philadelphia, Pa . 
Tel . 2026 For t Hil l Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorne y and Counsellor-at-Law 
34 SCHOO L STREE T Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbi e Hawkin s George W . F . McMeche n 
HAWKIN S & McMEOHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore , Md . 
Mention 
PAMPHLET S 
Published and sold by 
Th e Nationa l Associatio n fo r the 
Advancemen t o f Colore d Peopl e 
1. African Civilization: By M . D. Maclean. Pric e 2 cents. 
2. The Brain of the American Negro: 
B y Burt G. Wilder. Pric e 20 cents. 
3. Social Control: B y Jane Addams, of 
Hul l House . Pric e 1 cent. 
4. The Negro as a Soldier: By Briga ­
dier-Genera l Burt, U . S. A . Pric e 5 cents. 
5. Leaving It to the South: A n experience and some conclusions by Charles 
Edwar d Russell. Pric e 5 cents. 
6. Views of a Southern Woman: B y 
Adelene Moffat. Pric e 2 cents. 
7. Disfranchisement: B y Joh n Hayne s 
Holmes. Pric e 5 cents. 
8. Contribution of the Negro to Human 
Civilization: B y Dr. A . F. Chamberlain . 
Pric e 15 cents. 
9. Disfranchisement: B y W. E . B. 
D u Bois. Pric e 10 cents. 
Address 
The Crisis Book Department 
26 VESE Y STREE T NE W YOR K 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.0 0 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C . R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD, OHIO 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
TH B CRISIS . TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPL E 
O FFICES : 2 6 Vesey Street, Ne w York . Incorporated Ma y 25 , 191 1 
OFFICER S 
National President—Mr. Moorfleld Storey, Boston, 
Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Rev. John Haynes Holmes, New York. 
Mr , John E. Milholland, New York. 
Bishop Alexander Walters, New York. 
Rev. Garnet R. Waller, Baltimore, Md. 
Miss Mary White Ovington, Brooklyn, Ν. Y. 
Chairman of the Board of Directors— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard, New York. 
Treasurer—Mr. Walter E . Sachs, New York. 
Director of Publicity and Research— 
Dr. W. Ε. B. Du Bois, New York. 
Secretary—Miss May Childs Nerney, Brooklyn, Ν. Y. 
Assistant Secretary—Miss Martha Gruening, New 
York. 
This year we shall attack segregation laws, investigate lynching, 
defend the Negro in his civil rights, protest unceasingly against 
race discrimination. 
We want 2,000 members January 1, 1913. Watch the clock! 
OUR MEMBERSHIP 
CLOCK 
September 
JOIN US 
MEMBERSHI MEMBERSHIP BLANK P BLANK 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D PEOPLE . 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in Class 
paying $ a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name „ _ 
Address 
Class 1. Life Members, paying $500. 
Class 2. Donors, paying $100 per year. 
Class 3. Sustaining Members, paying $25 
per year. 
Class 4. Contributing Members, paying $10, 
$5 or $2 per year. 
Class 5. Associate Members, paying $1 per 
year. 
The subscription to TH E CRISIS is $1 extra, except to members paying $5 or more, who 
signify their wish that $1 of their dues be considered a CRISIS subscription. 
Al l members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the Annual 
Conference of the Association. 
PLEAS E MAK E CHECK S PAYABL E TO NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T 
OF COLORE D PEOPLE , 26 VESE Y STREET , NEW YOR K CITY. 
Mentio n T H E CRISIS. "HAL F A MA N 
The Status of the Negro in New York 
B y 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Wit h a forewor d by Dr . Fran z Boa s of Columbi a Universit y 
Chapte r I. How the colore d people wo n their civi l and politica l rights. 
Chapters II. and.III. Th e Negr o tenement and the life of the poor. 
Chapters IV . and V . Ho w the colore d man earns his living , wit h a full description of the professions; the ministry , the stage. 
Chapte r VI . Th e colore d woman , her discouragements and successes. 
Chapte r VII . A vivi d description of the life of the well-to -d o Negroes. 
Chapte r VIII . Th e Negr o in politic s in Ne w York . 
Chapte r IX . Th e author's personal views on the race question. 
Pric e $1.00; b y mail , $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
This book is for sale in the Boo k Departmen t of Th e Crisis, 26 Vese y St., Ν. Y . 
PRINTIN G IS AR T 
It is not expensive machinery and high-grade paper stock alone, 
but it is those things plus correct type formations and artistic blending 
of colors with textures combined with superior workmanship. 
Progressive business men appreciate the business-building qualities 
of stationery, catalogues and printed things produced in our shop. 
Mr . Condé Nast, of Vogue, Dr . W . Ε. B. D u Bois, of TH E 
CRISIS, and Prof. J . E . Spingarn are among our satisfied patrons. 
Write for samples and quotations. 
ROBERT N . WOOD, Printing and Engraving 
20 2 EAS T 99th STREE T NE W YOR K 
'Phone 6667 Lenox 
Mention T H E CRISIS. 