THE CRISIS 
A RECOR D OF THE DARKE R RACES 
The NE W YEA R 
JANUARY , 191 2 
Volume 3 : : Numbe r 3 
John Henry Adams 
DOLLAR A YEAR TE N CENTS A COPY Some Things Yo u Should Know 
Atou t TH E CRISIS Advertisers 
tfl A s an advertising medium TH E CRISIS is now past the experimental 
stage and our advertising columns represent actual result-getting values, 
because, in correspondence with our advertisers, we find that our readers 
are very responsive. 
f$ This confidence you have in the printed promises of our advertisers is 
the best evidence that you appreciate our determined efforts to keep our 
advertising columns clean and gives us the power to encourage the growth 
and extend the usefulness of every honest business. 
ifl By refusing all advertisements which include impossible propositions 
and exaggerated statements, we will keep our standard high and make 
our advertising columns a real service to our readers and not a medium 
for unscrupulous schemers and fakers. 
tj Recently a full-page advertisement came to us, which was an investment proposition. The idea was a good one and we hastened to investigate the integrity and business experience of the prospective advertiser. 
W e found that the prospective advertiser was honest and had saved a 
few hundred dollars, but his former activities had been directed along lines 
that did not give sufficient experience to justify his judicious investment 
of other people's money in an untried proposition. W e therefore refused 
to sell him space. TH E CRISIS offers its columns and prestige to any 
investment backed by an established business, managed by honest, conservative, experienced men, but we will never invite our readers to invest in 
mere ideas and experiments. 
•J We have such confidence in our advertisers that we offer to reimburse 
our readers for any loss they sustain through their failure to keep promises 
made in TH E CRISIS. 
C]J While we are not the pioneer magazine to exclude fake advertisements from its columns, we are the first of the so-called "colored papers" 
to take this stand and offer to make good its readers' losses. 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY , Advertising Manager TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored. People, at 
20 Vesey Street, New York City. 
W . B . BURGHARD T D U BOIS . Editor OSWAL D GARRISON'VILLAR D J. MAX BARBER 
M.D. MaClean, Managing Editor Contributing CHARLES^EDWAR D RUSSEL L FRAN K M . TURNER , Circulation Manager Editors ) W S BRAITHWAIT E 
ALBO N L. HOLSEY . Advertising Manager ( KELL Y MILLE R 
CONTENT S FOR JANUARY , 1912 
COVE R PICTURE . By John Henry Adams. 
PAG E 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 95 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 102 
OPINIO N 104 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 109 
EDITORIA L 113 
HER E I N TH E TIM E O F TH E WINTE R MORN . Poem by William Moore 116 
TH E DOUGLAS S HOSPITA L O F PHILADELPHI A 118 
HISTORI C DAY S IN JANUARY . By L . M . Hershaw 120 
TH E BURDEN . 121 
TH E VISIO N O F A LYNCHER . Poem by Leslie Pinckney Hill 122 
WHA T T O REA D 123 
CIRCULATION , 16,000 COPIE S 
Agents wanted who can furnish references. 
Entered as second-class matter in the post office at New Yor k City. 92 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SON OFF T O 
Wilberforce University 
The only school in the country for 
Negro Yout h which has a Militar y Department equipped by the National 
Government, and. commanded by a detailed 
United States Arm y Officer. 
DEPARTMENT S 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L TECHNICA L 
COMMERCIA L THEOLOGICA L 
CLASSICA L MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Bankin g taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank. Twelve 
Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, 
Te n Buildings. Healthful surroundings, 
exceptional community. Maintained in 
part by the State of Ohio which supplies 
facilities for the thorough training of 
teachers. 
Fal l term began September 19th, 1911. 
Writ e for Catalog. 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH , President 
WM . A . JOINER , Superintendent, C. N . 
I. Department. 
Address all communications to 
BO X 36 WILBERFORCE , OHI O 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
The courses of study include Hig h School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWARD T. WARE 
ATLANTA , G A 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work 
Offers full courses in the following departments : College, Normal, Hig h School, Gramma r 
School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expense s very reasonable. 
Opportunit y for Self-help. 
Fall Term Opened Sept. 27, 1911. 
Fo r information address 
Presiden t R . W . MeGranaha n 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological 
seminaries. 
A n Academy, with manual training, giving 
a preparation for life or for college. 
Th e positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of 
class work, its fine new buildings and wellequipped laboratories and library , prepare a 
faithful student for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORGE RICE HOVEY . President 
American Church Institute 
for Negroes 
SI X SCHOOL S 
The Bishop Payne Divinit y School, Petersburgh, Va. , Warden , the Reverend 0. B . Bryan , 
D.D. ; St. Augustine's School, Raleigh, N . C., for 
normal and collegiate training, the Reverend A . 
B. Hunter , Principal; the St. Paul Norma l and 
Industrial School, Lawrenceville , Va. , the R«T -
erend James S. RusBelh Principal; St. Athanasius' School, Brunswick, Ga. , Mr . A . N . Perry , 
Principal; St. Mark's School. Birmingham , Ala. , 
the Reverend C. W . Brooks, Principal; the 
Vicksbur g Industrial School, Vicksburg , Miss., 
the Reverend W . H . Marshall , Principal . Fo r 
information apply to the principa l at any school 
or to the Reverend Samue l H . Bishop, General 
Agent, 416 Lafayette Street, New Yor k City . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 93 
HAL F A MA N 
The Status of the Negro in New Yor k 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a Foreword by Dr. Franz Boas, of Columbia University 
"M y , father has always lived in the 
South." a young colored man once said to 
me, and has attained success there; but 
when I ceased to be a boy he advised me 
to live in the North, where my manhood 
would be respected. H e himself cannot 
continually endure his position of inferiority, and in the summer he comes North to 
be a man. No, " correcting himself, "to 
be HAL F A MAN . A Negro is wholly a 
man only in Europe."—From the Author's 
"Introduction.*' 
Miss Ovington'a description of the status 
of the Negro in New Yor k City is based on 
a most painstaking inquiry into his social 
and economic conditions, and brings out in 
the most forceful way the difficulties under 
which the race is laboring, even in the large 
cosmopolitan population of New York . It 
is a refutation of the claims that the Negro 
has equal opportunity with the whites, and 
that his failure to advance more rapidly 
than he has, is due to innate inability.— 
From Dr. Boas' "Foreword." 
12mo, cloth. Price $1.00 net. By mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS , GREE N & CO - Publishers , NE W YOR K 
The above book may be purchased through any bookseller or will be mailed by 
TH E CRISIS on receipt of the price and postage. 
The A Nove l 
Quest 
o f th e 
Silver 
Fleece 
by 
W . E . BURG H ARD T 
D U BOI S 
Drawings by 
H . S. D E LA Y 
Here is a story of the darker world 
La the South and in Washington, D. C. 
It is dramatic i n style and absorbing 
in interest and expresses the feeling 
of colored people about themselves 
and their own problems; at the same 
time it shows how both black folk 
and white are caught in the power of 
Kin g Cotton. 
A T AL L BOOKSTORES 
PRIC E $1.35 NE T 
A . C . McCLUR G & CO . 
New Yor k Chicago San Francisco 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
15 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A. G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
PUBLICATION S 
A . M . E. Book Concern Philadelphia, Pa. 
TH E POEM S O F PHILLI S WHEATLEY . 
Reprint of first edition 1773; a valuable book. 
Price , $1.00. 
TH E NEGR O PROBLEM . A n analysis: Wha t 
It Is Not and Wha t It la ; by R. R. Wright, Jr . 
In pamphlet form, 15 cents. 
TH E COLORE D REGULARS . B y T . G. 
Steward, Chaplain U . S. A. , retired. Price , $1.50. 
EVOLUTIO N AN D LIFE . B y Algernon B . 
Jackson, Surgeon-in-chief Merc y Hospital. Price , 
75 cents. 
TH E NEGR O I N PENNSYLVANIA . A Study 
in Economi c History ; B y R. R . Wright, Jr. , 
Sometime Research Fellow in Sociology in the 
University of Pennsylvania. Price , Paper, $2.00; 
Cloth, $2.50. 
Address 
A . M . E . BOO K CONCER N 
631 Pine Street, Philadelphia, Pa . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 94 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Papers on Interracia l Problems 
Communicated to the 
FIRST UNIVERSA L RACE S CONGRES S 
Held at the University of London, July 26-29, 1911 
Published by the World Peace Foundation, 29A Beacon Street, Boston, Mass. 
530 pages, mailin g price, $2.40 
T
H E Universa l Races Congress, held in London, Jul y 26-29, 1911, was the most important conference ever held upon the mutual relations and duties of various races and 
peoples. It can only be compared with the great Parliament of Religions at Chicago 
in 1893, which, in another hut a related field marked an epoch. The Londo n Races Congress has focused the mind of the world upon the necessity of mutual respect, good understanding and real cooperation between the different races of men. Lor d Weardale , the 
president of the congress, properly viewed it as an event in the great movement for international justice and peace, for the wars of our time spring repeatedly from racial antagonisms and misunderstandings and the exploitation of weaker peoples by stronger—and the 
work will be read as eagerly by the members of the peace societies and the Mohonk Conferences as by the members of the Indian Rights Association and the Association for the Advance ­
ment of Colored People, The large volume of more than five hundred pages contains not 
only all the papers presented to the congress, but a complete list of the officers of the congress 
and the hundreds of persons in all countries (there are nearly two hundred from the United 
States alone) who were interested in its promotion. The list of the papers included in the 
volume will best indicate its scope, variety and unique significance, and this list will be sent 
to any person applying to the Worl d Peace Foundation, 29 A Beacon Street, Boston, Mass. 
Among the addresses in the volume of special interest to the readers of Th e Crisis 
Magazine are the following: 
' 'The Worl d Position of the Negro and 
Negroid," Si r Harr y H . Johnston. 
"Nativ e Races of South Africa, " J . Tengo 
Jabavu, Kingwilliamstown, South Africa . 
"Th e Negro Race in the United States of 
America, " Dr . W . E . B. D u Bois. 
' 'The West Africa n Problem,' ' Pastor 
Mojol a Agbebi, D. D., Director of the Nige r 
Delta Mission. 
"Th e Negro Problem in Relation to Whit e 
Women, " France s Hoggan, M . D. , London. 
TH E LIF E AN D WORK S O F 
Pau l Laurenc e Dunba r 
Containing his complete poetical works, his best short 
stories, numerous anecdotes and a complete biography of 
the famous poet. 
EXTRAC T FRO M INTRODUCTION . 
I think I should scarcely trouble the reader with a special appeal 
in behalf of this book if it had not specially appealed to me for 
reasons apart from the author's race, origin and condition. The 
world is too old now and I find myself too much of its mood to care 
for the work of a poet because he is black; because his father and 
mother were slaves; because he was, before and after he began to 
write poems, an elevator boy. These facts would certainly attract 
me to him as a man if I knew him to have a literary ambition, but 
when it came to his literary art, I must judge it irrespective of these 
facts, and enjoy or endure it for what it was in itself. 
—Willia m Dean Howells. 
Profusely illustrated with over half a hundred full-page 
photo and half-tone engravings. 
Cloth $2 Half Morocco $2.75 Full Morocco $3.75 
SALE S AGEN T 
J . G . GUILE S 
214 A St. Antoine Street Montreal, Can. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S 
Volume Three JANUARY , 1912 Number Three 
ALON G 
COLO R LIN E 
EDUCATION . 
Th e Southern Educationa l Associatio n 
met i n Houston , Tex., early in December. One of the subjects taken up was 
the education of the Negro. Th e prin ­
cipal address on that subject was made 
by W . S. Sutton, dean of the department 
of education i n the Universit y of Texas. 
H e emphasized the "education" of the 
Negro in slavery and the amount whic h 
the white Southerner is supposed to have 
paid for colored schools. H e laid down 
the followin g principles: Tha t the Negr o 
was essentially human and could be educated; that Negroe s should be the chief 
agents for their own education; that professional education of teachers was 
especially needed; that the education of 
Negroe s should be compulsory, and that 
there should be a spirit of co-operation 
among all wh o want to help Negr o 
education. 
Ther e • were about 1,200 educators 
present, but Negroe s were not expected, 
and, of course, no Negr o was on. the 
program. Th e resolutions adopted concerning Negr o education were considerably below Sutton's advice. The y were 
as follows: 
"W e affirm our contention that the 
welfare of the white people of the Southern States requires the proper education 
and training of the youth of the Negro . 
Unde r present conditions the efforts of 
the Southern people should be more 
largely and immediately directed to the 
training of the Negr o youth in the practical industries, whic h directly affect his 
physica l welfare, such as agriculture, 
stock and poultry raising, cookin g and 
the arts and thrift and economy. Instruction in hygiene and sanitation is of 
paramount importance. Unless the 
Negr o home is made clean and sanitary 
and efforts made to prevent contagion 
and eliminate disease from the cities and 
towns, all efforts educationally wil l be 
futile." 
It is thus manifest that the most 
advanced section of Southern public 
opinion has at present only reached the 
place where they can advise the education of black people for the benefit of 
white people. 
<I Th e president of Howar d Universit y 
has pointed out that the Unite d States 
Government gave last year $1,430,000 to 
Indian education and $100,000 to Negr o 
education. 
•I The parlous condition of Negr o education is revealed from time to time. In 
Norfolk , Va. , for instance, the common 
council voted down an appropriation for 
a sorely needed Negr o school and were 
only brought finally to appropriate the 
money by the threat of a law suit. 
<I In the commo n council of Richmond , 
Va. , the school board recommended an 
advance in the pay of elementary school 
teachers, but this was finally pruned 
down to a proposition for increasing the 
pay of white school teachers. 
•I One community in Alabama with 400 
colored school children receives $100 a 
year from the educational fund of 
Alabama . 
•J W . D . Weatherford, a white Southern 
international secretary of the Y . M . C. 
A. , said in a recent speech: "Wha t is 
greatly needed is more and better schools 
for the Negro. In the country districts 
85 per cent, of the schools that are provided for the Negr o are huts that are 96 THE CRISIS 
unworth y of the name schoolhouse. Wit h 
no glass windows and unsanitary conditions their opportunities to procure an 
education are greatly retarded. Give them 
better, schools and better training and 
it wil l be of more benefit to the nation 
than anything else. Give them a 
chance." 
ECONOMICS . 
A colored man is claimin g a large part 
of the city of Wilmington , N . C , through 
legitimate descent from Colonia l ancestors. It seems that his grandmother, a 
white woman, is the source of his claim. 
<J Moun d Bayou , a Negr o town in Mississippi, has instituted a telephone exchange. 
<J A Negr o corporation has bought a 
large estate, consisting of about 600 
acres on the Mississipp i River, for whic h 
they are paying $17,500. 
•J Negr o bricklayers are buildin g a new 
extension to the capitol of Alabama at 
Montgomery . 
<I Albert J. White , a colored contractor, 
has contracted for buildin g the largest 
paper mil l in Southern Michigan . 
<J Th e presiding elder of the Housto n 
district, Texas, in the M . E . Church , 
announces that every one of his pastors 
owns a home. 
($ Calhoun colored school, in the black 
belt of Alabama , reports that in sixteen 
years the colored settlers round about 
have bought over 3,300 acres and paid 
$26,793 for the land. Als o 638 additional 
acres are being bought, for whic h $2,023 
has been paid, and $6,165 has been paid 
as rent on the farm by people wh o did 
not purchase. In addition to this, $6,582 
has been paid for new homes, makin g a 
grand total of $41,563. 
•I Th e white chauffeurs in Ne w Yor k 
and many other places are seeking to 
drive colored men out of the business, 
their excuse being that the colored men 
wor k for lowe r wages and do menial 
work. One colored chauffeur says: "The y 
certainly did give us a rough deal when 
we tried to stable in white garages. The y 
woul d put mothballs in our gasolene 
tanks, short-circuit our ignition system 
and throw the carbureter out of adjustment. One man put emery into my gasolene tank. Several times next day the 
car shut down and didn't run until I had 
taken out four ounces of emery." One 
colored chauffeur was assaulted and 
beaten. 
<I Continua l efforts are being made by 
dissatisfied members to wreck the Vir ­
ginia Orde r of Tru e Reformers. 
Th e importation of America n Negr o 
miners is threatening trouble in Winni ­
peg, Canada. 
<I Th e report on the colored people of 
Huntington , W . Va. , by J. W . Scott says 
that the 3,000 colored people of that 
city have purchased real estate in the 
past ten years amountin g to $262,650. 
Ther e are ten colored persons in the city 
whose combined properties wil l amount 
to $100,000. Altogethe r there are 190 
property holders, and the valuation of 
their real estate holdings amounts to 
$382,650. 
<I A colored fraternal order in Albany , 
Ga., is about to build a $50,000 temple. 
<& Th e Ne w Orleans Times-Democra t 
has the followin g note from Mississippi : 
"It is stated that the Negroe s in the 
boll-weevil territory are in better shape 
financially and every other way than they 
have been since they were set free. The y 
have learned to produce what they need 
to eat on their own farms, makin g cotton a secondary crop, and are independent of the supply merchant. N o doubt 
the same is true of thousands of white 
farmers. Fo r the first time in their lives 
they have been thrown on their own 
resources, and it was 'sink or swim' wit h 
many of them, for the reason that the 
merchants could not afford to furnish 
them, as they did before the advent of 
the weevil. " 
(| A n unknown safe blowe r has robbed 
a colored bank of $1,099 at Birmingham. 
Ala . 
POLITICS . 
Th e Natche z (Miss.) News had the followin g announcement on election day: 
"To-day's general election in Mississippi, 
as has been the case for the past twenty 
years, or ever since the elimination of 
the Negr o from politica l affairs, wil l be 
a mere ratification of the Democrati c 
nominees." 
<J W . T. Andrews, of South Carolina , a 
colored editor, in a letter to Senator 
Bourne , says: "I n the presidential election of 1908 the States of Alabama , 
Arkansas, Florida , Georgia , Louisiana , 
Mississippi, Nort h Carolina , South Caro ­
lina, Texa s and Virginia , in which the 
Negr o has been disfranchised in open 
and flagrant violation of the Constitution 
of the Unite d States, elected 106 members of the Electora l College upon a 
total vote of 1,329,767, whil e the two 
States of Ohi o and Colorad o cast a vote 
of 1,385,465 for only twenty-eight electors, it thus appearing that in the South, 
where the Negr o is disfranchised, in the 
election of Congressmen 4,000 white 
voters in South Carolin a are equal to 
50,000 white voters in Indiana and 3,000 
in Mississipp i are equal to 47.489 in Ore -ALONG THE 
gon, and in electing a President 12,000 
white voters in ten States which have 
disfranchised Negroe s are equal to 49,000 
in two States whic h have fair and equal 
election laws honestly enforced." 
<I Th e Maco n (Ga.) Telegraph says that 
55,000 Georgi a Negroe s voted for McKin -
ley, but that since the disfranchisement 
law there are only 12,000 Negr o voters 
registered. 
<I Th e Socialists of Ne w Yor k are askin g for money to forward their propaganda among colored people. 
<J Edwar d D . Mallery , a colored man, 
has been nominated as candidate for 
commo n council on the Republican ticket 
at Brockton , Mass. 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
A monument has been erected to the 
late F . W . Starks, supreme chancellor of 
the colored Knights of Pythias, at 
Charlestown, W . Va . Th e monument cost 
$2,700. 
IJ Thoma s Nelso n Page has published a 
letter of Genera l Le e urgin g the enlistin g of slaves as soldiers during the Civi l 
War. Genera l Le e said: " I do not think 
our white population can supply the 
necessities of a lon g wa r without overtaxin g its capacity and imposin g great 
suffering upon our people. In my opinion Negroes, under proper circumstances, 
wil l make efficient soldiers. Unde r good 
officers and good instructors I do not 
see wh y they should not become soldiers. 
The y possess all the physica l qualifications, and their habits of obedience constitute a good foundation for discipline. " 
This letter was written Februar y 18, 
1865, whe n it was evident that the Con ­
federacy was in extremis. Genera l Le e 
also recommended that the Negroe s wh o 
enlisted wit h the consent of their owners 
be manumitted. Th e Confederate Con ­
gress, i n the Marc h following, adopted 
Genera l Lee's suggestions to the extent 
of authorizing the enlistment of Negroes, 
but neglected to adopt his suggestion as 
to emancipation. 
<J A colored woma n has given a half 
acre of ground to the colored Y . W . 
C. A . near Kansa s City . 
<I Th e Douglass Hospita l of Kansa s 
Cit y has been recently remodeled, and is 
now open again to the public. 
1$ Ne w theatres for colored people are 
planned in Winston-Salem, N . C. ; Indianapolis, Ind., and Ne w Yor k City . 
<I In St. Louis, Mo. , the colored women 
have raised $2,200 for a Y . W . C. A . and 
enrolled 700 members. Th e branch wil l 
open formally January 1. 
COLOR LINE 97 
TH E CHURCH . 
Th e new St. John's Congregationa l 
Churc h in Springfield, Mass., was dedicated recently. Dr. Phili p Moxo n 
preached the sermon. Th e pastor is the 
Rev. W . N . DeBerry , who has raised 
nearly all of the $25,000 which the church 
cost. 
A $10,000 A . M . E . church has just 
been completed at L a Mott, Pa . It was 
built entirely by colored mechanics after 
the plans of a colored architect. 
<| Th e Northern and Southern Presbyte ­
rian Churches, the Unite d Presbyterian 
Churc h and the Dutc h and German 
Reformed Churches are seeking to consolidate their missionary wor k among 
colored people of the South. 
•J Agitatio n inside the Methodist Episcopal Churc h concerning its colored 
membership still continues. Bishop 
Moor e is urgin g two colored bishops for 
the colored work. H e says in a recent 
article: "I n our domestic wor k we 
have nineteen conferences and one mission composed of colored members, 
numbering altogether about 300,454 communicants. A t the last general conference there were twenty effective general 
superintendents or one for every 174,299 
members. Accordin g to their ratio, the 
colored members woul d be entitled to 
two (i. e., one and two-thirds) general 
superintendents." 
<J Ther e are two colored sisterhoods 
in the Unite d States, namely, the 
Oblates of Providence, founded in 1829, 
whose motherhouse is in Baltimore , 
Md. , and the Sisters of the Hol y Family , 
founded in 1842, whose motherhouse is 
in Ne w Orleans, La . 
<I A new Negr o Catholi c church has 
been dedicated at Littl e Rock , Ark . 
PERSONAL . 
Mr . A . L e Ro y Locke , Rhode s scholar 
and student at the Universit y of Berlin , 
is visiting in this country. 
<I General Anteno r Firmi n died in exile 
at St. Thomas, D . W . I. Firmi n was a 
leader of the advanced party of the Hai ­
tians, and together with Frederick Doug ­
lass did much to keep the Unite d States 
from acquiring a coaling station in Haiti . 
H e was a gentleman of fine presence and 
scholarly attainments. 
<J Rev. Dr. Augustus Shepard, of Durham, N . C , has recently died. H e was 
a pastor of great influence and his 
funeral was solemnized wit h an impressive procession of representative men. 
«I Mr . H . T. Kealing , of Wester n Uni ­
versity, Quindaro, Kan. , made a telling 
address before the Kansa s State Teach -98 THE CRISIS 
ers' Association , consisting of white and 
colored teachers, at their forty-ninth 
annual session. 
<I Afte r some delay whic h has not been 
altogether explained, the usual banquet 
has been tendered the Honorabl e W . H . 
Lewis, at Washington , D . C , the colored 
Assistant Unite d States Attorney . Mr . L . 
M . Hershaw was toastmaster. 
Q Th e Honorabl e James N . Johnson, 
Unite d States -Consul to Nicaragua , 
together wit h his wife, is in Americ a on 
leave of absence. 
ART . 
Th e esteemed youn g Russian violinist, 
Efram Zimbalist, chose for his Ne w Yor k 
and Bosto n recitals "Tallahassie, " a fantasie on Negr o melodies, by Cyri l Scott. 
Scott is an Englis h composer of the 
extreme impressionistic school. 
<I O n Novembe r 16, at the second concert of the series given by the Bosto n 
Symphon y Orchestr a in Cambridge , 
Mass., the orchestral piece, "Comed y 
Overture on Negr o Themes, " by H . F . 
Gilbert, appeared on the program. This 
fine overture was one of the surprises of 
the symphony concerts last spring. It 
is based on motives from traditional 
Negr o songs and dances. 
<J The latest achievement of Mr . Samuel 
Coleridge-Taylo r is the choral work, " A 
Tal e of Ol d Japan," the poem by Alfre d 
Noyes, set to music for soli, chorus and 
orchestra. The cantata was given for 
the first time on Octobe r 25, by the Lon ­
don (England ) Chora l Society at Queen's 
Hall . 
Othe r performances are immediately 
announced for this season by the Crysta l 
Palace Orchestra l Society, Waterloo , 
Liverpoo l Chora l Society, the Claughton 
St. Ceceli a and the Lichfiel d Musica l 
Society. 
<J Mme . Estell e Pinckne y Clough , soprano, appeared in concert in Greendale, 
Norwich , Conn., and in Springfield, 
Mass., during the month of December. 
<I Musica l Americ a states that in 
Novembe r Mr . Harr y T. Burleig h appeared at a concert given by the 
Women's Club , of Ne w Britain , Conn., 
and scored a pronounced success. 
fj Mr . Harr y A . Williams, tenor, of 
Cleveland, O., has been appointed 
director of the voca l department of the 
Washingto n Conservatory of Music , 
Washington , D . C. Mr . William s was 
a pupil of Shrigha in Londo n and of 
Dell e Sedie in Paris. H e is an artist of 
skill and a ripened musician wit h distinctive qualities for teaching. 
<I Th e Washingto n Conservator y of 
Music , of Washington , D . C , has 
announced a course of artists' recitals for 
the season of 1911-1912. 
Mr . Carl R. Diton , pianist, of Philadelphia, Pa., wh o returned recently from 
study in Germany , was engaged for the 
first recital, whic h took place Decembe r 
11. H e was assisted by Mrs. Anni e Hazelton Lee , soprano, of Baltimore , Md . This 
conservatory, under the directorship of 
Mrs. Harrie t Gibbs-Marshall , is givin g 
valuable aid in developing a taste for the 
best music and is becomin g an art influence in the Distric t of Columbia . 
CJ Mr . George Vaughn , cornetist, has 
returned to Ne w Yor k from a concert 
tour wit h an orchestra. H e is an expert 
cornetist and has substituted wit h the 
Ne w Yor k Symphon y Orchestra , Walte r 
Damrosch , conductor. Mr . Vaugh n is 
also a student of the art of painting and 
has a collection of artistic canvases to 
his credit. 
•J A beautiful small "Dunbar " calendar, 
wit h extracts from the poet's writings, 
has been published by Mrs. Dunbar. Its 
sale wil l help "Neighborhoo d House, " a 
social settlement in Wilmington , Del . 
<I A sister of Henr y O. Tanne r has published an album of reproductions of his 
chief paintings. 
€J Colore d art students of Greater Ne w 
Yor k have held an excellent exhibit of 
their work. Amon g the chief exhibitors 
were J. C. De Villis, Ernest Braxto n and 
Robert H . Lewis. 
•J Th e Interstate Literar y Associatio n of 
Kansa s and the West wil l offer prizes 
for writing , music and painting at its 
Decembe r meeting. 
•J Th e Athenaeum says of a recent 
exhibition of antiquities in Londo n that 
they "afford a clear idea of the scope and 
nature of Ethiopia n art, whic h it is now 
plain must have been largely indigenous, 
and owed less than was supposed to 
Egyptia n influence. Th e pottery here 
shown is of a ware perfectly different 
from anything in Egypt , and it is notable 
that all the larger vessels are evidently 
modeled from gourds and other vegetable forms, instead of, as in the earlier 
Egyptia n types, from baskets and ivories. 
Their construction displays high technical skill, and a youn g Negro's head in 
sandstone, if it is indeed of native work, 
shows that the Ethiopian s were in sculpture far superior to the Egyptian s of any 
but the earliest dynasties. Some neolithic implements, axes, and the like, of 
polished stone, show, too, that their civilization was of considerable antiquity, 
and some beautifully shaped arrow heads, 
either of glass or translucent stones, are 
longer, narrowe r and mor e delicate than 
any yet found in Egypt. " ALON G THE 
TH E GHETTO . 
Th e Nationa l Single Ta x League met 
at Chicago and arranged a dinner at the 
Hote l L a Salle. The y found, however, 
that Negr o guests woul d not be welcome, 
and immediately took the meeting to 
another hotel. Joseph Fels, the million ­
aire patron of the league, said: "Ther e 
wil l be no compromis e here. I am a Jew 
and know something of race exclusion. 
W e wil l either call off the banquet or go 
some place where the colored men may 
sit wit h us at our own table as equals. 
This organization stands for the equality 
of all men. " 
<J Senator Money , of Mississippi, attended a dinner of the Wester n Eco ­
nomi c Society at the Auditorium Hote l 
of Chicago and found colored members 
at the table. H e made a hurried 
departure. 
•J Th e only colored fireman in the Ne w 
Yor k Fir e Department has been retired 
on a pension of $700. 
<J Ther e has been the usual number of 
protests against Negr o residents in certain districts. 
I n Denver, Col. , a colored dentist contracted for a residence on Vin e Street 
and great pressure is being brought to 
bear upon the contractor not to fulfil 
his engagement. 
I n Middleburg , N . Y. , an apartment 
house for colored families is being protested against. 
In South Park, Mo. , the buyin g of 
town lots by Negr o residents is causing 
a stir. 
Efforts in the Harle m district of Ne w 
Yor k Cit y to restrict Negr o residents 
have proven ineffective. A dead line was 
ordered at 136th Street, but the Negroes 
have already reached 139th Street and 
further, and there is fresh agitation. 
<5 I n Sneedville, a little town in East 
Tennessee, the disturbing fact has 
become known that colored and white 
children are attending the local school 
together. 
One of the indefensible things that 
often happens in communities which have 
separate colored schools is the placing of 
the colored school in the worst districts 
of the town, morall y and physically. Th e 
colored people at Bato n Rouge , La. , for 
instance, are protesting to the school 
board because their school is in the 
heart of the "Re d Light " district. 
<I A prominent colored physician, Dr. C. 
V . Roman , editor of the Medica l Journal, and Mr . Ira T. Bryant, secretary of 
the A . M . E . Sunday Schoo l Union , were 
recently injured in a wreck near Mem ­
phis. The y were given no relief for 
seven hours, and finally, when they asked 
for passes back to Memphis, one of the 
trainmen wrote out this pass: "Take two 
'niggers' to Memphis. " 
COLOR LINE 99 
•J In Abilene , Tex., sixty persons, representing a wealth of $3,000,000, signed 
a bond for $1,000 in behalf of Mrs. Luc y 
Matheson, who recently shot and killed 
her husband at the home of Stella Ramsey, a colored woman. 
Bankers, merchants and rich cattlemen were among the signers, including 
her father, mother and grandfather. A 
party of miners started from Mingu s 
to Abilene for the purpose of doing 
violence to the colored woman, but they 
were met and persuaded to return. A 
strong guard, however, is maintained at 
the jail where Mrs. Ramsey is held. 
Mrs. Matheson went to the colored 
woman's home, stepped on the front 
porch, whipped out her revolver and 
fired through a screened window six 
times. One bullet went through her 
husband's head, killin g him instantly. 
<] The Warre n colored church at Pittsburgh purchased a plot of ground on 
Center Avenue costing $10,250. O n this 
they built an unusually beautiful church. 
This and the adjoining plot were under 
a mortgage. The real estate company, 
in order to get rid of the colored people, let the interest on the adjoining 
plot of land, whic h they still held, remain unpaid. Th e mortgage thereupon 
lapsed, and the colored church was 
asked to raise $6,000 in thirty days or 
lose the property. The y raised the 
money. 
*I Edwar d Shipley, of the Brow n Uni ­
versity football team, left college because 
he considered himself insulted by his 
mates. Th e matter was quickly looked 
into by the authorities and Shipley 
returned to the team. 
•J Purdue Universit y has tried to sto.p a 
colored boy from playing on the Iowa 
football team, but has not succeeded. 
<J In Witchita , Kan. , the new superintendent is tryin g to establish separate 
schools for the races. 
t$ Th e Camden (New Jersey) Hig h 
School authorities wil l pay no attention, 
it is said, to the protest filed by members 
of the senior class against Herbert Pri -
mas, a colored student, being permitted 
to compete in the oratorical contest for 
the Wilbu r F . Rose prizes of gold. Pri -
mas is one of the six members of the 
class wh o have qualified for the finals, 
and objection had been raised to him 
because of his color. 
Mrs. Laur a Morgan , a colored woman 
of Brookfield, Ill., is suing the village 
for $10,000. She alleges that the Vil ­
lage Boar d of Trustees entered her home 
late at night two years ago, ejected her 
and put her in jail and tore down the 
house on the pretense that it did not 
conform to the building ordinance. She 
says the real reason is race prejudice. 100 THE CRISIS 
f& Th e Ne w Orleans Picayune has this 
note: "Some of the Shreveport lawyers 
are exercised over the report that a local 
Negro, Charle s Roberson, is seeking a 
law examination, wit h a view of practicing before the local bar, whic h is composed exclusively of white men. Several loca l attorneys are understood to 
have signed the Negro's application for 
a certificate. Owin g to the unusual situation, the Ba r Associatio n held a lengthy 
meeting this mornin g behind closed 
doors. Wha t transpired was withheld 
from the public, but some of the interested citizens are pretty certain that Rob ­
erson wil l likel y change his min d about 
applying for the 'exam.' " 
<I Ther e is continued opposition to the 
location of Negr o eleemosynary institutions. I n a suburb of Chicago residents 
are objecting to a home for colored 
children. In Waco , Tex., and Salem, 
Ore., the whites do not want Negr o 
churches built. In Bessemer, Ala. , whites 
are protesting against a $50,000 Masoni c 
Home . I n Lo s Angeles, Cal. , there is 
trouble about a colored children's home. 
COURTS . 
Hok e Smith, of Georgia , found himself 
outside the line of politica l promotion on 
account of his opposition to "free silver." 
H e thereupon used the Southern expediency of vilifyin g the Negr o to get back 
into politica l life, and finally has reached 
the goal of his ambition by becoming 
Unite d States Senator. O n retiring from 
the office of Governor, he has attempted 
to make some expiation for his wretched 
conduct by clemency toward colored convicts. H e declares that fully 500 Negr o 
convicts in the penitentiary ought to be 
released because of unjust convictions. 
<I Th e iniquitous contract labor law of 
another Southern State, Georgia , is being 
attacked in the courts. A colored girl 
of fourteen signed a contract to pick cotton and was alleged to have received $7 
advance in wages. She refused to continue at work and was fined $75 and costs 
or twelve months in the chain gang. He r 
mother is now suing for her release in 
the Unite d States Distric t Court. 
f$ I n Green County, Ga., a white boy 
and a colored boy got into a fight and 
the white boy was struck on the head 
with a stone. A mob thereupon chased 
the colored boy to his home and the boy 
shot one of them. H e was thereupon 
convicted of murde r by the court, but 
recently the Supreme Court has reversed 
the decision, the judge declaring "it 
woul d be folly to speak of the equality of 
all men before the law if we should 
allow this conviction to stand. W e 
would have to write racial exception into 
the" section of the code whic h provides 
that it shall be justifiable to shoot and 
even kil l to prevent forcible attack and 
invasion upon the property of habitation. " 
t$ A colored man has been awarded 
$5,000 for injury to eyesight in a Nort h 
Carolin a court. 
<J Th e Tennessee Court of Appeals has 
enjoined colored persons from using the 
name "Knights of Pythias " or badges or 
symbols of the order. 
<I Mr . W . Ashbi e Hawkins, of Baltimore , 
has arraigned the Baltimore , Chesapeake 
and Atlanti c Railwa y before the Publi c 
Service Commissio n for discrimination 
against public passengers. 
<I Dr. W . Ross, of Denver, Col. , brought 
suit against a theatre for refusing to sell 
him orchestra seats. Whe n the case was 
brought before the Count y Court he was 
refused redress. Later, however, when 
his wife was ordered to the rear in a 
moving-pictur e theatre. Mr . Ross secured 
a judgment of $500 against the proprietors. 
•5 A Circuit Court of Ohi o has just rendered a decision whic h is of interest. Mr . 
Harr y E . Davis instituted a suit against 
the Eucli d Avenu e Garden Theatr e for 
their refusal to sell tickets to a performance. Th e Ohi o Civi l Rights Ac t provides both a civil and a crimina l remedy 
for discrimination in the places of public 
accommodation and amusement wit h the 
additional proviso "that a judgment in 
favor of the party aggrieved of punishment upon an indictment shall be a .bar 
to either prosecution respectively. " 
Unde r this statute the ticket agent was 
arrested and convicted in police court, 
whil e a civil action was instituted against 
the principa l in the Commo n Pleas Court. 
It was contended by the defendant that 
the conviction of the agent was a bar to 
the prosecution of the civil action against 
the principal. Th e Commo n Pleas Court 
entertained this view and directed a verdict for the defendant. 
Th e plaintiff prosecuted error to the 
Circuit Court, where the judgment was 
reversed and case remanded. Th e Circuit Court decided distinctly that the 
conviction of the agent criminall y did 
not operate as a bar to the prosecution 
of civil action against principal. 
<I In the Passaic (N . J.) Distric t Court 
Judge Cabell gave a judgment of $500 
and costs to Mrs. Minerv a Miller, wh o 
sued a Paterson showhouse for tryin g 
to make her pay 25 cents because she 
was a colored woman . Th e case is said 
to be one of the most dramatic ever tried 
in Passaic. 
^ W . T. Shepard, owne r of one of the 
largest lumbe r mills in Alabama , has ALONG THE 
been arrested for peonage on complaint 
of a colored man named Orr. Orr, it 
is said, swore out the warrants for 
the arrest of Shepard after makin g his 
escape from the mill , comin g at once to 
Montgomery , where he gave the information leading to the arrest to Unite d 
States Distric t Attorne y Warre n S. 
Reese. 
Accordin g to the story of the Negro , 
he was operating a soft-drink stand in 
Fole y when Windham, wit h Shepard accompanyin g him, asked him to go to 
wor k at the mill , whereupon, he says, 
Windha m beat him severely in Shepard's 
presence and made him agree to wor k 
at the mill . Or r stayed at the mil l about 
four hours, according to his statement, 
and then made his escape. 
This alleged offense is said to have 
been committed withi n the past week, but 
the Negr o also told of another simila r 
one whic h took place in a small town 
near Foley . H e claimed he was operatin g a dray line there when certain white 
men beat him up and took his license 
away from him, destroying it and demandin g that he leave the place. 
Th e preliminary hearing of the case 
wil l be before Unite d States Commissioner Tutwile r at Dothan, and if the two 
men are bound over, the tria l wil l be held 
in Montgomery , as being nearest to the 
place where the offense was committed. 
President Shepard is one of the bestknow n lumbermen in the State, his mil l 
being recognized as second in size in 
Alabama . 
LYNCHING . 
Miss Celi a Thomas, wh o shot a youn g 
white man wh o invaded her home, has 
been convicted of murder and sentenced 
to life imprisonment at Marietta , Ga . 
<J Th e followin g lynchings have taken 
place since our last record: 
A t Mansfield, Okla. , a Negr o has been 
lynched and a small race wa r precipitated. Th e Negr o was accused of killin g 
a white man. 
A t Valliant, Okla. , a Negr o accused of 
attacking a girl was lynched. H e refused 
to give his name. 
A t Lockhart, Miss. , a Negr o accused of 
beating a prominent white citizen is supposed to have been lynched. 
<J Tw o astonishing versions of the same 
crime come from Tennessee. Th e first 
dispatch said that two colored men and 
a woma n were burned to death by a mob 
of white land tenants wh o object to the 
occupancy of land by Negroes, near 
Savannah, Tenn . Th e three Negroes were 
traveling to a gin with a load of seed 
cotton. The y were waylaid and tied to 
the wagonload of cotton, it is said, 
and the mob, after building a fire beneath 
COLOR LINE 101 
the wagon, stood guard until the 
Negroes were cremated. 
Th e next dispatch said that the victims 
were Ben Pettigrew and his two youn g 
daughters. Tha t Pettigrew was an honest and trustworthy man, and was driving a load of cotton from his farm to 
Savannah. O n the road a few miles from 
his place four white men appeared and 
shot him to death as he sat in the seat 
of his wagon. The n they dragged his 
two daughters from the top of the load 
and hanged them to a nearby tree. Whil e 
their bodies dangled from a limb the 
slayers drove the load of cotton under 
them and set fire to it. 
<J A most extraordinary case of lynchin g 
is reported from Georgia . 
Th e first dispatch said that T. W . 
Walker, a colored man, kille d C. S. Hol -
linshead, a wealthy planter, of Washing ­
ton, Ga., for no apparent reason. A 
Northern colored paper published a circumstantial account, declaring that the 
real reason was that the white man had 
brutally attacked the colored man's wife. 
Th e white people attempted to lync h 
Walker, but were so drunk that Walke r 
escaped. A colored editor in Atlant a 
published the charge against Hollinshea d 
and was immediately arrested for libel. 
Th e Georgi a law declares that the truth 
is libel if it incites to violence. Mean ­
time Walke r was caught again after the 
time for his execution had expired. H e 
again escaped. H e was captured a second time and immediately resentenced to 
instant execution. Before he could be 
taken from the courtroom a brother of 
Hollinshea d shot him. Whil e severely 
wounded he was hanged. Th e court 
announced that the brother woul d not be 
prosecuted and Pinkerto n detectives are 
at present persecuting the Chicago paper. 
<J A mob in Gatesville, Tex., has burned 
a colored schoolhouse because a colored 
man stabbed a white man. 
<I A Negr o farmer in Florid a has killed 
a white man wh o disputed his claim to a 
farm. 
<J Whit e people in Conway , S. C., have 
driven out a colored preacher who owned 
several hundred acres of land and was 
one of the leaders in the community. 
The y charged him wit h arousing prejudice against white people. 
AFRICA . 
Tripoli , over whic h Turke y and Italy 
are fighting, has about 1,000,000 inhabitants, consisting of Arabs, Moors, Jews, 
Negroes and a few Europeans. Th e 
yearly exports are wort h about $2,000,-
000. Th e city of Tripol i has 25,000 in ­
habitants and the religion of the country 
is Mohammedanism. HI S EXCELLENC Y 
GENERA L CINCINNATTU S L E CONT E 
President of the Republi c of Hayti . 
C. H . TURNER . 
Mr . C. H . Turne r of St. Louis, was 
recently elected a membe r of the Acad ­
emy of Science in that city, an honor 
that woul d not be bestowed on a colored 
man in Missouri if it were not excepCHARLE S H . TURNER , Ph.D . 
tionally well deserved. Mr . Turne r has, 
ndeed, been a research student in biology 
ever since receiving his first degree, and 
has contributed valuable papers to the 
leading scientific journals. 
H e was born in Cincinnati, O., in 
1867, and attended the public schools of 
that city. H e received the bachelor's 
degree in 1891 from the Universit y of 
Cincinnati and the degree of master of 
science from the same institution in 1892 
In 1907 he received from the Universit y 
of Chicago the degree of doctor of 
philosophy, magna cum laude. His professional career has been as follows: 
1891-1892, assistant in biology, Universitv of Cincinnati; 1892-1905, head of the 
science department and professor of 
biology at Clar k Univerity , South Atlan ­
ta, Ga.: 1905-1906, principa l of College 
Hil l School, Cleveland, Tenn.; 1906-1907, 
graduate student, Universit y of Chicago ; 
1907-1908, instructor in biology and chemME N O F TH E 
MONT H MEN OF THE MONTH 103 
istry, Haine s Norma l School; since 1908, 
instructor in biology, Sumner Hig h 
School, St. Louis, Mo . 
Th e election to the St. Louis Academy 
is not the first honor to fall to Mr . 
Turner. In 1907 he was a delegate to 
the Seventh International Zoologica l 
Congress, where, in addition to reading a 
paper, service was rendered as one of the 
assistant secretaries of the section of anima l behavior. H e is also an honorary 
membe r of the Illinois Academy of 
Science and a member of the Entomolo ­
gica l Society of America . Th e Academy 
of Science of St. Louis, it may be added, 
was organized in 1856 for the purpose of 
stimulatin g scientific research in that section of the country. It now owns its own 
building, whic h contains, in addition to 
assembly rooms and office rooms, a good 
research library and the beginning of a 
museum. Th e society publishes a journal 
and enrolls amon g its members the leadin g scientists of that portion of the State. 
It has honorary members in all parts of 
the world . 
DR. L . A. LEWIS . 
O n Apri l 3 of this year the Cit y Boar d 
of Healt h of Indianapolis conducted a 
competitive examination to select in ­
ternes for the city hospital during the 
ensuing year. Ther e were fifteen applicants, one of them colored. Th e colored 
man made the highest record, reaching 
over 92 per cent. In the month of August 
there was another examination, this time 
for licenses to practice medicine in the 
State, and there were 107 applicants, 
again wit h only the one colored man. 
Agai n he stood at the head of the list, 
with 947 points out of a possible 1,000. 
Th e man next to him had 904. 
Th e youn g colored man was Lawrenc e 
EDWAR D WILMO T BLYDE N 
L A WHENC E ALDRIDG E LEWI S 
Aldridg e Lewis, a native of Greenville, 
Miss., where he was born in 1888. H e 
went through the public schools of his 
town, and in 1902 entered Knoxvill e Col ­
lege. H e was going through the collegiate department when his family left 
that part of the country "through one 
of those very frequent happenings in 
our South which necessitates a change 
of residence," says Mr . Lewis. Th e 
young man thereupon decided to carry 
out his great desire to study medicine 
and entered the medical department of 
the Universit y of Indiana in 1907. Tha t 
he improved his time there is sufficiently 
evident. W e wish Dr. Lewis all the 
success he so' well deserves. 
EDWAR D WILMO T BLYDEN . 
Dr. Edwar d Wilmo t Blyden , who is 
the leading representative of his race in 
West Africa , and who celebrates his 
eightieth birthday this year, was born 
in the Danish West Indies. H e lived a 
while in the Unite d States, but went to 
Liberi a in 1851. H e held many positions 
of honor and trust, being secretary of 
state, secretary of the interior and min ­
ister to England . Afterward he moved 
to Sierra Leone. His chief fame has 
come from his scholarship and his writings. "Christianity, Islam and the 
Negr o Race " is his best-known work. 
Dr. Blyde n is an Arabi c scholar of distinction and is a firm believer in "Afric a 
for the Africans. " TH E CENSUS . 
Th e census figures, whic h show large 
increase amon g Negr o American s but a 
smaller rate of increase than amon g 
whites, have formed the text of numerous editorials. Th e general feeling is 
that they expose so thoroughly the fallacy of the "Negr o domination bugaboo" 
that the arguments for disfranchisement 
and oppression have lost weight. Th e 
Bosto n Travelle r advises "Southern 
negrophobes " to study the figures and 
profit thereby. Th e Baltimor e News 
says: "Thoug h the voter may forget the 
exact figures, he should tuck away in his 
memory the definite lesson these statistics teach. Th e old bugaboo wil l creep 
up again, of course. Bu t it should never 
again be allowed to overshadow the 
issues, to divert attention from whic h it 
is so constantly brought forward. Still 
less should it be accepted as a reason for 
permitting the Wilso n ballot law to 
remain longer in force." 
Th e Philadelphi a Publi c Ledge r observes: "Th e Negr o 'bugaboo' very generally has lost or is losin g its terrors. 
South of us it still does yeoman service 
as a politica l slogan. It is Democracy's 
standard shibboleth in Maryland , for 
instance, and Tuesday's results woul d 
indicate that even there, what Charle s J. 
Bonaparte ridicules as the 'perennial cry 
of Nigger! Nigger! Nigger!' has lost its 
effect on a majority of the electorate. 
Wha t Negr o problem there is is scientific 
and economic. Just now it has chiefly to 
do wit h providin g more widely opened 
doors of industrial opportunity, so that 
wage earners among them may secure 
better homes, in more fit environment, 
for these ten millions of Americans. 
Give n opportunity, the Negr o himself 
wil l solve whatever problem there is. " 
Moreover, according to the Munci e 
(Ind.) Star, "the South seems on the 
eve of large influx of inhabitants from 
Europe and from the North . Th e bugaboo of Negr o domination has seen its 
best days. Before long the South wil l 
be able to discuss politica l principles on 
their merits and vote accordingly, as is 
done at the North. " 
Some papers explain the decrease in 
the Negr o birth rate. "Th e probable 
explanation, " says the Bosto n Tran ­
script, "is that as the Negroe s find 
themselves mor e and mor e dependent on 
themselves for support, the same economi c reasons that affect higher races 
are not without influence i n checkin g the 
growt h of families. Th e Negroe s are 
still a primitive people in many of their 
ways of life and thought, but amon g 
them are to be found cultivated men and 
wome n who, after the manne r of their 
kin d of all races, are sensible of their 
responsibility to their progeny. Al l of 
whic h goes to show that causes in part 
economic and in part natural are at wor k 
to relegate the color problem to the 
category of questions time may be left 
to solve. " 
Th e Buffalo Express says Negroe s 
have never dominated the South numerically and never will . "The y never have 
sought to dominate politically, nor woul d 
it be possible for them to do so even if 
they were allowed the full citizen rights 
to which they are entitled. Th e most 
they could do woul d be to control a few 
sections where they congregate by themselves and where very few white people 
live or woul d care to live. This woul d 
be merely the exercise of local self-rule 
whic h ought to be freely granted to all 
America n communities. " 
Th e Roanoke Worl d thinks some people wil l be disappointed that the decrease 
is not greater. 
"Several months ago a well-known professor announced that the Negr o problem woul d settle itself. H e said that 
the excess of the race's death rate over 
birth rate gave assurance that in the 
course of a certain number of years 
Americ a woul d be free from its most distressing burden. Whe n the professor 
reads the report of the Unite d States 
Census Bureau showin g a substantial 
increase of Negr o population he wil l be 
sorely astounded. Eve r since the Civi l 
Wa r theories simila r to his have made 
their appearance. Th e professor, and 
others wh o have thought like him, wil l 
have fo overhaul their views. Seeing 
that the staying qualities of the black 
race are much in evidence, they must 
study out some other remedy. The y 
must go to schools of segregation, exportation, annihilation and education, each 
of whic h has strong and earnest advocates." 
Th e Danvill e (Va.) Registe r strikes 
a new note in hopin g that "as the OPINION 105 
Negroe s become fewer in proportion to 
the whole population they gradually 
become less and less assertive and 
offensive and more submissive to authority and measure up more and more 
nearly to the standard of the whites in 
intelligence, in subservience to authority 
and in industry and frugality, " whil e the 
America n Economist thinks that if the 
Negr o question were eliminated in the 
South "there is no doubt that there 
woul d be a great increase in the vote for 
a protective tariff." 
TH E LYNCHIN G PROTEST . 
Th e meeting called by the Nationa l 
Associatio n to protest against lynchin g 
was widel y reported by the press and 
was commented on by a number of 
Southern newspapers. Ther e is, as usual, 
a tendency on their part to observe that 
people in glass houses should not throw 
stones, and to assume that the association exists to find fault wit h the South 
and neglects to protest against injustice 
in Ne w York . Says the Charlott e (N . C.) 
Observer: "Th e conditions in the South 
are bad, very bad, but they are better 
than they were some years ago, and the 
conditions were brought about by the 
Nort h when it was saving the South 
before. Tha t does not excuse the South, 
of course, for the crimes that have been 
committed in the South ; but it ought to 
make the Nort h rather careful in going 
into another battle to the further injury 
of the Negro . ' A little whil e ago,' said 
the grim-visaged Holmes, 'the crimes are 
confined to the Southern States; now no 
commonwealt h from Pennsylvani a to 
Orego n and from Massachusetts to Mississippi is free from the crime of lynch ­
ing.' • If this be true, and there is no 
doubt that it is true, the investigation 
that is proposed by the N . A . A . of C. P . 
should not be made sectional in its purposes but national in scope. It woul d 
probably be found that lynchin g in 
Massachusetts is not very different from 
lynchin g in Mississipp i in its causes, and 
that it is to be condemned wherever it 
occurs and should be put down by the 
strong hand of the law. " 
Th e Meridia n (Miss.) Dispatch : "A s 
a rule lynchings are wron g and ought to 
be ended. Ther e may be occasions 
where the unwritten law justifies it, but 
the law-abiding Negr o has nothing to 
fear either in the South or other sections 
and it is not true that 'the America n people are the most lawless people in the 
civilized world. " 
Th e Raleig h (N . C.) News-Observe r 
adds; "Lynchin g is a crime and a blot 
whereve r it is permitted. Th e best 
Southern sentiment as to lynchin g was 
expressed the other day when Governo r 
Gilchrist, of Florida , took extraordinary 
measures to prevent a lynchin g in his 
State. Ther e is no sectionalism in lynch ­
ing bad Negroes, Illinois and Pennsylvania having shown more brutality and 
barbarism in their last lynchings and 
burnings than any Southern State." 
Th e Charlott e (N . C.) News thinks 
that "it is rather strange that the members of the Associatio n for the Advance ­
ment of Colore d People managed to 
overlook the iniquities of Gotham in 
their salvation crusade. A few lynchings 
occur in the South and both races 
deplore them—that is, the better class of 
both races. But in New Yor k crimes of 
simila r depravity are daily incidents. 
Her e is a lot of purblind sectional 
reformers prodding the South about its 
lynchin g record, while in the city of 
Ne w Yor k crimes far more cowardly are 
committed daily under their very noses. 
Scarcely a day passes that some blackhand outrage is not reported. Scarcely a 
day passes that some unprotected woma n 
is not set upon by ruffians and beaten or 
killed. Th e crimina l record of Ne w Yor k 
has reached such an appalling stage, 
heinous crimes have been so frequent, 
that the best element of the city has 
become aroused, and yet the members of 
the Associatio n for the Advancement of 
Colore d People fail to detect vice outside 
of Dixie. " 
This sentiment is echoed by the Jacksonville (Fla.) Times-Union , "Lynch ­
ing is wron g and lynchin g is all too common in the South, but lynchin g is only 
a form of lawlessness, and lawlessness 
is commo n all over the country. It is as 
just to charge that Ne w Yor k is particularly wicked because her dear crime of 
smuggling is practiced by her richest and 
most reputable citizens as it is to charge 
that the South is especially bad because 
her badness too commonl y runs to lynching. An d it is fair to say that the burglar is not worse because his wickedness 
runs to cracking cribs than the official 
who may violate another law as frequently and as flagrantly." 
KIN G CHARLES ' HEAD . 
Th e "T u quoque" or "You'r e another" form of argument, which we used 
to find so unanswerable in our childhood, is still a favorite with a large 
number of Southern logicians. This 
month they dwell on it with an insistence which , even for them, is unusual. 
It all comes about because the Rev. 
J. Cortlan d Meyers of Bosto n made a 
speech in whic h he said that Boston isn't 
as kind to the black man as it should 
be. H e added that the Negr o was havin g i n some respects a worse time in 
the Nort h than in the South. So sooner 
said than a triumphant shout rolled 
northward from the other side of Maso n 
and Dixon's line. Fro m a large number 
of comments we choose two or three. 106 THE CRISIS 
Th e Charleston News and Courier, 
always an entertaining sheet, outdoes itself. T o the News and Courie r miscegenation is what Kin g Charles' head 
was to Mr . Dick—i t intrudes into every 
question. Mr . Meyers may not have 
know n it, but he was really talkin g 
about miscegenation when he made that 
speech, as the Charleston paper goes on 
to prove. "Wh y is it," it asks, "that 
Boston wil l not have the Negr o in white 
neighborhoods? Wh y is it that Altoon a 
and Coatesville and Ne w Yor k want to 
get ri d of the Negr o or put him in a section by himself? As k Professor Boas, 
the distinguished anthropologist, who 
avers that miscegenation is the solution 
of the problem, and that it wil l not be 
disastrous because the woma n in the 
case is always a Negress, an argument 
so senseless, we may observe, that it 
shakes one's faith in anthropology itself. 
W e do not mean that it is senseless because his fact is wrong , for it is not, 
but because a mongre l race is a mongre l 
race whether all the black blood comes 
from one sex or not. As k the editor of 
the Ne w Yor k Evenin g Post and his 
Negr o assistant, and some of the other 
persons who advocate miscegenation. 
The y know, just as the people of Bosto n 
know. Whe n a Negr o is a graduate of 
Harvard , where does he look for a wife? 
Whe n a Negr o is a champion pugilist 
of the world , where does he look for 
a wife? Wher e are the eyes of all these 
Negr o Northerners turned? Th e white 
fathers of white girls in the Nort h can 
answer the question. The y kno w wh y 
they want Negroes confined to one section. "I n the South, " concludes the 
News and Courier, "it is different. Th e 
Negr o is not wheedled into believing 
that he is an acceptable suitor for white 
girls. " 
However, the Maco n Telegraph thinks 
the News and Courie r "verges toward 
extravagance." It thinks that there are 
not a great many marriages between the 
races in the Nort h and fancies that 
among white fathers in that section "not 
one in ten thousand" is expecting from 
Negroe s propositions for his daughter's 
hand. A s to Professor Boa s and the editor of the Evenin g Post, wh y pay attention to "the neglected vaporings of a 
few cranks? " 
Th e Athens (Ga.) Banne r joins in 
to observe that it agrees in the main 
wit h the Telegraph. Th e News and 
Courie r is "needlessly exercised over a 
few idle vaporings. " Th e Banne r thinks 
Northerners look on the Negr o "as other 
people do"—here the editor is not quite 
so specific as we could wish—but it is 
surprised that they use the black man 
"for politica l purposes." It concludes: 
"Wh y can't the people of the Nort h acknowledge the facts and say to the worl d 
that the South understands the problem 
better than any other section, handles it 
better, and gives the Negr o a better 
chance than any other people in the 
worl d give him? " 
O f course none of the editors of these 
journals have read either Professor 
Boas' book, whic h states in a purely 
scientific wa y that the results of marriage between different races is not likel y 
to be physically undesirable, or the Eve ­
nin g Post, whic h never said anythin g 
about the matter. But that is the great 
advantage of editing the News and 
Courie r and simila r papers—you don't 
have to go through the vulga r process of 
knowin g what you're talkin g about. 
TH E CHIL D AN D TH E ESSAY . 
Mr . Eugene Woo d writes in the socialist daily Call : "It may be," he says, 
"that I don't understand the race 
problem in Americ a very well. I 
kno w that I don't understand it as well 
as some, for they have told me that 
nobody could understand the Negr o as 
well as they do wh o have been brought 
up wit h them. But I wouldn't want to 
understand a thin g so well that I could 
never learn anythin g about it from anybody. . Again , I am not a membe r of 
the race that makes the problem. I am 
a white man, and so cannot understand 
how it feels to be made to take a back 
seat in the street car whil e some 
drunken, pimple-faced loafer can have 
the best seat. I ought to be proud of 
being a white man, and so I am, when 
I consider the wonderful things the 
white man has done. But when I consider the way the white man has acted 
toward the Negr o I feel kin d of sheepish and hangdog. 
"Le t me be ever so bi g feeling, I 
want to crawl off somewhere when I 
think of something I read in the newspaper about a prize competition in a 
city in that part of this country, which, 
now that the bad place has gone out 
of business, is the only locality now 
known where burnin g human beings 
alive is the custom of the country. Th e 
children of -the public schools were to 
writ e essays, but not to sign them wit h 
their own names. In that wa y the 
judges woul d be perfectly fair and decide the merits of each essay, regardless of family connection. On e essay 
was easily first. It undoubtedly should 
have the prize, so the judges said. But, 
come to find out, it was a little Negr o 
girl had written it. Oh , then, of course, 
she couldn't have the prize. So they 
gave it to the second best essay, makin g 
sure first that it was a white child wh o 
wrote it. 
"Now , I can't feel very proud of my 
race for that low-down , contemptible 
trick. I can't help thinkin g how that 
little Negr o girl must have felt. J can't OPINION 107 
help thinkin g how her people must have 
felt, how proud of her, and how bitter 
at the mean, sneaking whelps that woul d 
cheat a child out of the honor that was 
rightl y hers. Whe n the only way we 
whites can hold our own is by stealing 
from the children, we're in a bad way, 
I must say. 
"Bu t there's more than mere injustice 
in the cruelties and insults that the 
white man has heaped upon the Negro. 
There's fear. I'll say that again in case 
yo u didn't get the .full benefit of it. 
There 's fear! Di d yo u get it that time? 
"Let's see, how lon g -is it since the 
Negr o was emancipated? Well , call it 
fifty years. Fift y years ago the Negr o 
in the Southern States was a human 
being held forcibly in the condition of 
a beast. Ye t in the fifty years since 
then, look how the Negr o has arisen. 
Neve r was anything like it in the history 
of the world. " 
A COLORE D REGIMENT . 
Th e Twenty-fourt h Regiment of 
Infantry has been ordered to the Philip ­
pines from the barracks in Ne w Yor k 
State where they have been stationed for 
five years. Th e local paper, the Watertown Times, pays them a warm tribute. "The y came soon after the Brownsvill e affair," it says, "and there was naturally some nervousness over their coming. A Negr o regiment had never been 
quartered at Madiso n Barracks. O n the 
departure of the Twenty-fourth, after 
nearly five years of residence amongst 
us, it can be said that no regiment ever 
stationed at Madiso n Barracks has given 
so tittle trouble or behaved itself so 
well. 
"Th e Negr o soldier has great pride in 
his uniform and great pride in his regiment. It is not a temporary occupation 
wit h him, but a life business. ' Therefore, 
it is a veteran regiment, slowly taking 
raw recruits whic h are generally most 
responsible for violations of discipline, 
and the veterans are all well-disciplined 
men. The y have minded their own business, and their white neighbors have 
minded theirs, and there has been only 
one case of friction, in the early days, 
whic h was doubtless based on a false 
rumor and from which investigation 
entirely exonerated the regiment. 
"Th e Twenty-fourt h has a proud record in Cuba and the Philippine s as being 
one of the best fighting regiments in the 
army. Its men have carried themselves 
well whil e here, with becoming dignity 
as soldiers, and their lon g service has 
taken out all the traditional Negr o irresponsibility from them. The y are selfcontrolled, self-respecting, brave and 
honorable men, and have so behaved 
themselves during their stay in this section as to wi n the respect of the white 
population. Th e experiment has been an 
entire success. A Negr o regiment has 
been able to live in peace and harmony 
and be reflecte d in a Norther n post." 
EDUCATIO N IN TH E SOUTH . 
The Southern Educationa l Association 
which held its annual meeting in Houston, Texas, sent out a preliminary manifesto in the course of which it says: 
"Hundred s of thousands of boys and 
girls who live in the mountains of the 
South have no educational advantages. 
The y can and must be trained into good 
productive citizens. 
"Thousands of Southern children are 
wearing their lives away in factories, 
where they are denied the inalienable 
rights of the young—air, sunlight, play 
and training. 
"There are millions of Negroes in the 
South who are ignorant, superstitious, 
disease-breeding, unproducing and so a 
menace to society. Th e present state of 
Negr o education promises to continue 
this deplorable condition. If it is so 
continued, the whites wil l suffer even 
more than the Negroes. Th e meager 
and often misdirected education which 
the Negroes are getting is admittedly 
opposed to their own interests and to 
the welfare of the section in which they 
reside. W e may differ concerning the 
character of training that should be given 
the Negro, but we all realize that the 
condition is bad, that the question is a 
serious one and that only harm can result from our ignoring it. Th e Negr o 
must be better educated—in the true 
meaning of the term. It is folly to argue 
otherwise. H e must be trained for his 
environment—must be taught how to liv e 
morall y and hygienically. His education 
should be industrial and not literary and 
cultural. " 
TH E BLAC K MAN' S VALUE . 
Th e Indianapolis News, like many 
other papers, thinks the Oklahoma attempt to make the State altogether a 
white man's country is likely to result 
in disaster. "The Negr o unfortunately 
has generally attracted attention as part 
of the white man's load. H e gains the 
notoriety in his worst role. An d in 
that role we see the individua l rather 
than the race. It suffers in reputation 
exactly as America n citizens do in the 
eyes of a worl d which only sees and 
measures us by the one grafter in 
thousands of good officials. . Whe n we 
look at the Negr o in a fairer and 
broader sense we find that he is a 
great economic factor under the conditions that have been created in this 
country. Withou t him the South woul d 
be seriously crippled; for the lack of 
him in larger numbers we in the Nort h 108 THE CRISIS 
have to open our ports to the lowest 
types of Souther n Europeans. Canad a 
recently had the question of Negr o im ­
migratio n before parliament. Wha t if 
that parliament had decided to go into 
our Southern States and promot e immi ­
gratio n of Negroe s to the extent of one 
millio n to develop her waste places? 
Th e South woul d have been thrown 
into a pani c and we migh t have lodged, 
as a nation, protest against such an 
invasion and tamperin g wit h our economi c balance. O r if the Negroe s themselves should withdraw from any 
Norther n city, wha t woul d be the 
effect?" 
Th e Antoni o (Tex.) Express thinks 
that Oklahom a is makin g financial disaster for herself by her efforts to drive 
out Negroes. "Fo r Oklahom a to con ­
tinue her seeming present polic y of banishin g the black ma n from her territor y 
is attempting somethin g whic h heretofore has been unheard of i n the cotton 
belt. Fo r years farm labor has been 
growin g mor e scarce, and wages have 
been growin g higher. Ha s Oklahom a a 
white-man solution for a conditio n whic h 
must result in a farmin g State if ultimately the black man shall be driven 
beyond its borders? " 
An d the Ne w Yor k Commercia l adds: 
"Th e South cannot do withou t her Ne ­
groes. N o other race of laborers under 
the sun can produce the results that the 
Negroe s do in that great region. Th e experiment has failed time and again. " 
<J Th e Atlant a Constitutio n prints a 
letter from Mrs. Ann a M . Tate , a colored woman , and comments: "Strength 
and pathos blend in the communicatio n 
in whic h she outlines the conditions 
makin g for criminalit y and disintegra ­
tion amon g her race, and pleads wit h 
the whit e people for aid in neutralizin g 
both. Punishment, as meted out to the 
youn g Negr o in the form of stockade 
sentences, is, accordin g to her, simpl y 
openin g the door to the penitentiary. 
It brands the victim. It makes him 
callous. It is apt to place his feet 
permanently in the path of outlawry , a 
penalty for whic h our whit e society 
must, in the lon g run, pay the cost. 
In amusements that refresh and that 
uplift, she declares, the Negr o is fatally 
deficient. O f trainin g that wil l fit him 
to be of use to himself and to the white 
race there is an appallin g scarcity. She 
says the great body of respectable Ne ­
groes are fast driftin g into a condition 
of despair over a situation that opens 
to their children no door of hope, and 
that seems to beckon ever downwar d 
and not upward. 
"Hundred s of thousands of Negroe s 
feel as does this Negr o woman . The y 
see racial deterioration setting in. The y 
feel the walls closin g around them. 
The y have not the resources o r the 
initiative to help themselves, to push 
the walls back. Th e ministers of At ­
lanta ought to read the communicatio n 
through . Th e outright and entirely candid word s of this Negr o woma n ought 
to brin g home to them a sense of 
persona l responsibilit y whic h wil l hasten 
their efforts to loosen a definite and. 
above all, a persistent propaganda. " 
q Th e St. Luk e Herald , colored , tells a 
little fable: " A friend of ours had a cat 
and a dog. Fo r month s the do g worried , 
chased and fought the cat. Th e cat was 
in continua l terror of the do g and spent 
hours daily, up trees, on the fence an d 
on the shed roo f tryin g to keep out of 
the dog's reach. No t lon g ago, as the 
cat was hurry-scurrying , wit h the do g 
yelpin g in hot pursuit, a funny incident 
happened. Suddenl y the muc h persecuted cat whirle d around and faced the dog. 
Wit h bristlin g back, distended eyes and 
outstretched claws she stood her groun d 
and faced her pursuer. Th e do g almost 
ran over himself in his attempt to stop. 
Th e cat stood her groun d and defied him 
by loo k and demeanor; and the do g wh o 
had been chasing her for months, wh o 
had worrie d and tormented her day in 
and day out, slunk cowardl y away. 
"Most of our trouble s are magnified; 
the cat had magnified the do g in her 
fear and in her flight; but whe n she 
ceased to run from him, turned about 
and faced him, looked him in the eye 
wit h defiance and was ready to fight him 
—her troubles- took feet and walke d 
away. " 
*j In the Nationa l Review of London , 
for October, Mr . A . Mauric e Lo w comments on the Coatesvill e outrage : "A n 
affair of unparalleled atrocity, that reveals the savage and undisciplined, 
character of the America n and the contempt in whic h he holds law. * * * 
Th e law woul d have dealt wit h him 
justly, but that defiance of authority 
whic h is the basis of America n character, the hatred of the Negro , and the 
knowledg e that there is little risk in 
lynchin g a Negr o swept all restraint 
aside." 
<J Ex-Governo r W . J. Northe n of 
Georgi a made a plea for the education 
of the Negro . Mr . Northe n is not very 
radica l on the question, but he thinks the 
black man is. hardl y getting fair treatment. In the course of his address he 
said: "Durin g my recent canvass over 
the State, in the interest of law and 
order, I was amazed to find scores and 
hundreds of men wh o believed the Negr o 
to be a brute, without responsibility to 
God , and his slaughter nothin g mor e 
than the killin g of a dog. " B y a most unfortunate omission the 
paragraph reporting Mr . Joh n Hayne s 
Holmes' splendid address on lynchin g at 
the Ethica l Cultur e meeting house was 
not printed in our last issue. 
Mr . Holme s said among other things: 
HOLME S O N LYNCHING . 
"Th e trouble is, my friends, that today, exactly as sixty or seventy years 
ago, the America n people, and mainly the 
people of the South, refuse to believe 
that the black man is to be regarded and 
treated as a man. Th e fact is that the 
spirit whic h made the institution of 
slavery possible still remains in the 
minds of thousands and thousands of 
white men and wome n of the Nort h as 
well as of the South. W e still believe 
that the black man is an inferior sort 
of man, but we refuse to dignify him 
wit h the name of man at all, and that 
being the case lynchin g is as inevitable 
as the shooting of a dog runnin g along 
the street when the cry of 'mad dog' is 
lifted through the air. 
"Tak e the Oklahoma lynching. Th e 
only thing that I could think of as I 
glanced at this picture was a photograph 
I had seen of huntsmen returning with 
the anima l whic h had been shot, proud 
of the achievement of their marksmenship. I believe that the same spirit which 
makes possible the photograph • of the 
men gathered around the moose or the 
deer whic h has been shot makes possible 
the photograph of the Negr o shot to 
death in Oklahoma . In both cases the 
huntsmen are proud that they have shot 
an animal, and therefore they stand before the camera in order that the evidence of the story may be sure. In 
other words, this is another expression 
of the lawlessness of the America n 
people. 
"I n this same period whic h is disgraced 
by this evil crime, we find that laws have 
been passed refusing the ballot to the 
black man. W e find Ji m Cro w .cars; we 
find laws prohibitin g Negr o men and 
women entering public libraries, museums, parks and theatres. W e find the 
denial to the black man and woma n of 
the right of education. W e find in this 
same period the spirit of antagonism 
everywhere, and lynchin g is only one of 
the half dozen or dozen symptoms of 
the old disease which well-nigh destroyed 
our Republi c in the days before the war. 
"Now , that being a diagnosis of the 
case—lynching, burning and Ji m Crow 
cars being but an expression of the conviction of many of our so-called civilized 
fellow citizens that the Negr o is not even 
a man—that being a diagnosis of the 
case, the remedy is perfectly simple. Th e 
remedy, to my mind, is not the remedy 
of teaching the America n people to be 
a law-abiding people, although that may 
contribute to the result. It is not restoring in the minds of the America n 
people a sense of justice. Th e only 
remedy whic h wil l really wor k the cure, 
the only thing which wil l really restore 
the black man to his place of equality 
and privilege wit h his white brethren, is 
the renewal in the same spirit of the same 
battle that was fought successfully fifty 
years ago for the freedom of the black 
man from the chains of slavery. In other 
words, I believe that the time has come 
when that great battle must be begun 
again, that the hour has struck when the 
Nort h must do its duty. Th e time has 
come when we must once again go up 
and down the length and breadth of this 
great Republi c and preach to the four 
winds of heaven and to the souls of all 
who wil l listen, and to those wh o wil l 
not listen, that the Negr o is a man, a 
child of God , dowered with all the rights, 
powers, capacities and abilities of any 
man upon the earth; that he is entitled 
to everything that Go d has given the 
sons of earth, and to all the privileges 
that are showered by this Republi c upon 
the great body of its citizenship. Th e 
time has come once again in these North ­
ern States when the brave, silent and 
lonely man must wor k by day and sleep 
by night in his little printing office, turning out day after day the pages of 'The 
Liberator,' to be scattered over the country. Th e time has come when up and 
down the land there must go, like 
Wendel l Phillips, the silver-tongued orator wh o would speak in behalf of justice, 
liberty and truth, and pour out the vials 
of his perfect and divine wrath upon 
the heads of all who refuse to give-justice 
to their fellows. Th e time has come 
when the America n pulpit must be sanctified by the holy presence of such a man 
as Theodor e Parker. Parke r said that 
the pulpit of his church could be con-110 THE CRISIS 
This Space For Writing Messages 
Printed in Germany 
This is the way we do them down here. The last lynch
A 15715 
Will put you on our regular mailing list. Expect one a month on the average. 
Rev. John H . Holmes, 
Pastor Unitarian Church 
New York City. 
A REPL Y T O ME . HOLME S FRO M ALABAM A 
This side for the Address only. THE N. A. A. C. P. 111 
secrated to no higher thing than the 
liberation of the black man. W e must 
proclaim to our Southern brothers that 
we propose some day or other that the 
advantages we lost shall be redeemed, 
that public institutions shall be opened to 
all wh o are men ; that we shall declare, 
upon the amendments that now stand in 
our Constitution, that the right of ballot 
shall be exercised by every man, be he 
black or white ; that we shall declare 
that all men are free and equal, black or 
white, ric h or poor, high or low, of whatever race or class or nation of men ; that 
we are all brothers and shall be treated 
alike. 
"This whol e crime of lynching , to my 
mind , can never be solved by half-way 
measures. Me n must have strength and 
courage. Poets must sing. Prophets 
must speak. A n Emancipatio n Proclama ­
tion must be written. Chains and fetters 
must be broken asunder. Again , as so 
many, many times before, the battle for 
liberty must be fought over and over 
and over until the promised vision of the 
poet shall indeed be seen, and men of all 
colors, of all classes, of all conditions, 
shall come from the East and from the 
West, from the Nort h and from the 
South, and they shall all sit down 
together around the one board as members and brothers of the one great king ­
dom of the livin g God. " 
A s a result of this meeting an antilynchin g fund is being raised and an 
investigator is already in the field. W e 
promise our readers to print in the February C RISI S one of the most astonishing 
stories yet come > to light in relation to 
the murde r of untried black criminals. 
*J O n the night of Novembe r 29 there 
was held in historic Plymout h Church , 
Brooklyn , on the platform made famous 
by Henr y War d Beecher, a meeting commemoratin g the one hundredth anniversary of the birth of Wendel l Phillips. 
Ther e was stirring singing of abolition 
songs, an introductory speech by Dr. 
Newel l Dwigh t Hillis, wh o presided, an 
appeal for the Nationa l Association for 
the Advancemen t of Colore d People by 
Joh n Hayne s Holmes, and then the 
speakers of the evening. 
Charle s Edwar d Russell gave a most 
impressive oration, whic h linked the 
cause of abolition of yesterday to the 
burnin g social and economic questions 
of the day. 
Th e Rev. Reverd y Ransom was at his 
best, and we cannot forbear from quoting 
some of his words: 
RANSO M O N PHILLIPS . 
"On e of the chief distinctions Wendel l 
Phillip s justly earned and so well 
deserved was to be called an 'agitator.' 
"'Agitation. ' said he, 'is an old wor d 
wit h a new meaning. Sir Robert Pee l 
defined it to be "the marshaling of the 
conscience of a nation to mold its laws. " 
Its means are reason and argument; no 
appeal to arms. Eterna l vigilance is the 
price of liberty; powe r is ever stealing 
from the many to the few. Onl y by continual oversight can the Democra t in 
office be prevented from hardening into a 
despot; only by unintermitted agitation 
can a people be kept sufficiently awake to 
principle not to let liberty be smothered 
in material prosperity. Republic s exist 
only on the terms of being constantly 
agitated. Never, to our latest posterity, 
can we do without prophets like Garrison, 
to stir up the monotony of wealth and 
reawake the people to the great ideas 
that are constantly fading out of our 
minds—to trouble the waters that there 
may be health in their flow.' 
**** * 
"I voice the sentiments of millions of 
our race when I take the liberty to use 
the rostrum of Plymout h Churc h as a 
megaphone to-night to say to the Ameri ­
can people that the Negr o wants neither 
the money nor the sympathy of those 
wh o do not believe in his equality of 
manhood and who do not accord to him 
the same politica l rights, the same educational advantages, and the same freedom 
in every pathway of opportunity. H e is 
neither ungrateful nor unresponsive, but 
having been so often plundered and 
betrayed, he prefers to stand and mark 
time rather than follow the leadership 
of men, organizations or parties, the 
genuineness of whos e credentials he has 
not thoroughly examined and the unrightness of whose motives has not been 
clearly disclosed. Th e traitors within the 
ranks of our race are known . The y have 
neither our confidence nor our hearts. 
Wha t standing they have is due to the 
powerful support which is given them by 
misguided men of great wealth, by politicians, who for personal or partisan 
advantage woul d use them to profit by 
the vanishing remnants of the Negro's 
politica l power, and by a newspaper press 
whose approving voice is the mouthpiece 
of a decadent public opinion, which would 
let the Negr o question 'work itself out' 
under the baneful influence of the many 
degrading forms of Jim Crowism. 
* * » * * 
"I n the face of this systematic campaign, the Nort h has stood by wit h its 
old antebellum attitude of concession 
and compromise, while the South, 
through these means and an obligin g 
Unite d States Supreme Court, has regained practically all it lost upon the field 
of battle. Unde r slavery the South 
counted three-fifths of the blacks in the 
enumeration for representation in Con ­
gress, now it counts them all ; but by 
unconstitutional methods excludes them 
from the franchise. It has thus, under 
freedom, increased its proportion of representation in Congress over the Nort h 
by two-fifths of the number it held under 
slavery. 112 THE CRISIS 
"This question of the South's method 
of dealing wit h the Negr o has come to be 
as sacred as was the question of slavery 
in the days of Mr . Phillips. T o demand 
the enforcement of the Fifteenth Amend ­
ment to-day is to be branded as 'an 
enemy of both races,' 'a fanatic,' 'a mischievous agitator.' T o all outside interference the South says: 'Leave the Negr o 
to us, we understand hi m and know best 
how to deal wit h him, both for his own 
good and the peace and welfare of the 
South.' President Taft, wh o has boldly 
committed himself to the doctrine of race 
discrimination, pipes his grand diapason 
in harmon y wit h this sentiment by 
declaring that the Negr o 'ought to come 
and is comin g more and more under the 
guardianship of the South!' 
"Wit h far more justification we reply 
on behalf of the Negro : Leave the 
Southern white people to us. W e have 
lived among them for two and a half 
centuries, we both know and understand 
them. W e have nursed their children; 
built their homes, and for more than 
two hundred years we have fed and 
clothed them. Whe n they took up arms 
to destroy the Unio n in order to bind us 
in perpetual chains, we did not fire their 
cities wit h the torch, nor rise in violence 
against them, but protected their property, iheir helpless women and children. 
Leave them to us. W e have imbibed, 
not the ideals of feudalism, but of 
democracy; we are American s filled wit h 
the spirit of the twentieth century. Leave 
them to us, and we wil l make the free 
public school universal throughout the 
South and open alike to all. without 
regard to race, creed or color. W e wil l 
make free speech as safe in Mississipp i 
as it is in Massachusetts; we wil l abolish 
lynchin g and usher in a reign of law, 
of courts and juries, instead of the shot 
gun, the faggot and the mob. W e wil l 
abolish peonage, elevate and protect 
labor and make capital secure. Leave 
them to us, our chivalry shall kno w no 
color line, but all womanhoo d shall be 
protected and defended, and all citizens, 
regardless of race or color, shall be permitted to participate in the government 
under whic h they live. Leave them to 
us, and we wil l make them kno w their 
place and keep it, under the Constitution 
as amended. W e wil l remove the last 
vestige of Ji m Crowism under the forms 
of law, and make the places of public 
necessity, convenience, recreation, and 
amusement open alike to all without 
respect to race or color. W e wil l make 
intelligence, character and worth, in ­
stead of race and color, the sole test of 
recognition and preferment for all. Thu s 
as Nort h and South divided over the 
Negro, so woul d the Negr o unite them 
in the only bond of union that can 
stand the test of time—fraternity, justice, righteousness." 
Th e full text of Mr . Ransom's speech 
is on sale at this office. 
q Th e Ne w Yor k loca l of the N . A . A. ' 
C. P . has opened headquarters at 268 l/2 
West 135th Street, where all are welcome. It has telephone connection and 
a stenographer, and it is hoped that persons needing advice, defense or informa ­
tion wil l make free use of the office. 
•I Th e Minneapolis Sunday Forum , an 
organization of colored men, has joined 
our organization and paid its fee. 
OU R NE W YOR K LOCA L BRANC H 
<J Th e Lectur e Bureau of our association is busy wit h its work . Lecturers 
have been furnished lately as follows: 
Cornel l University . 
Columbi a University . 
Socialist Local , No . 7, Ne w Yor k City . 
Cherr y Baptist Church , Philadelphia . 
Bethany Baptist Church , Newark . 
Lexingto n Avenu e Y . W . C. . A. , 
Brooklyn . 
Conference of Socia l Workers among 
Negroes. 
<I In Bosto n the Phillip s centenary was 
celebrated by our association at Par k 
Street Churc h on Novembe r 28. Judge 
Wendel l Phillip s Stafford was the chief 
speaker, and Mr . F . J. Garriso n furnished a most interesting souvenir program wit h portraits and quotations. It 
may be obtained at this office for ten 
cents. 
<I Chicago has contributed a considerable sum to our anti-lynchin g crusade 
and is plannin g for a great meeting in 
January. EDITORIA L 
I A M RESOLVED . 
I am resolved in this New Year to 
play the man—to stand straight, 
look the world squarely in the eye, 
and walk to my work with no 
shuffle or slouch. 
I am resolved to be satisfied with no 
treatment which ignores my manhood and my right to be counted as 
one among men. 
I am resolved to be quiet and law 
abiding, but to refuse to cringe in 
body or in soul, to resent deliberate 
insult, and to assert my just rights 
in the face of wanton aggression. 
I am resolved to defend and assert the 
absolute equality of the Negro race 
with any and all other human races 
and its divine right to equal and just 
treatment. 
I am resolved to be ready at all times 
and in all places to bear witness 
with pen, voice, money and deed 
against the horrible crime of lynching, the shame of "Jim Crow" legislation, the injustice of all color discrimination, the wrong of disfranchisement for race or sex, the 
iniquity of war under any circumstances and the deep damnation of 
present methods of distributing the 
world's work and wealth. 
I am resolved to defend the poor and 
the weak of every race and hue, and 
especially to guard my mother, my 
wife, my daughter and all my 
darker sisters from the insults and 
aggressions of white men and black, 
with the last strength of my body 
and the last suffering of my soul. 
For all these things, I am resolved 
unflinchingly to stand, and if this 
resolve cost me pain, poverty, slander and even life itself, I will 
remember the Word of the Prophet, 
how he sang: 
"Though Love repine and Reason 
chafe, 
There came a Voice , without reply, 
'Tis man's Perdition to be safe 
When for the Trut h he ought to 
die!" 
CRIM E AN D LYNCHING . 
A FAVORIT E argument with 
shallow thinkers is: Stop 
crime and lynching will cease, 
cease. Such a statement is both historically and logically false. Historically, lynching leads to lynching, burning to burning; and lynching for great 
crimes to lynching for trivial offenses. 
Moreover, lynching as practised today in the United States is not the 
result of crime—it is a cause of crime, 
on account of the flagrant, awful injustice it inflicts in so many cases on innocent men. Take, for instance, the 
story of the lynching in Florida , as 
told by Governor Gilchrist. He says, 
in answer to a correspondent: 
"A s to the 'black brute who received 
his deserts,' I would state that I examined the evidence in this case. A 
certain man, accompanied by three 
others—all white—drove from a quarter to a half mile from the main road 
through the place of an old Negro, 
using an old road. This old Negro had 
five sons and sons-in-law living in his 
immediate vicinity. That morning 
there had been some lawsuit with one 
of these Negroes, the case having been 
tried at Mickosukie. The Negroes 
had returned to their home. This certain man and party drove through the 
old Negro's place. The old Negro 
opened the gate so they could drive 
through his place, going toward the 
public road. This certain man and the 
others got out of their buggies and re-114 THE CRISIS 
turned to the gate. This man had a 
pistol in his hand, and commenced 
talking to the old darkey, more or less 
threatening him. Al l the evidence 
shows, and what I have heard of him, 
through white people, shows that he 
was a harmless old darkey. The old 
Negro ran. Shots were fired at him. 
Knowin g there had been a lawsuit 
that day, and doubtless seeing this man 
and party driving through the field, 
this old Negro's sons and sons-in-law, 
on hearing the report of shots, naturally came to his house. Th e old Negro 
had a son who was sick and lying—my 
recollection is—on the porch. This 
man was talking to the sick son in 
front of the porch with his pistol in 
his hand, raising his arm up and down 
apparently as though he was going to 
shoot him. It appears, however, that 
it was probably not the intention of 
this man to shoot this darkey. In running up to the house, one of the old 
man's sons or sons-in-law, seeing this 
man with the pistol in his hand, and 
his arm up, shot this man in the side 
under the arm. He died instantly. 
This occurred within a few feet of the 
cabin of the old Negro. The old 
Negro and his five sons and sons-inlaw were taken to jail and were sent 
to Lake City for safe keeping. A party 
of lynchers, with a forged telegram 
from the Governor, secured the Ne ­
groes from the jail under pretext of 
taking them to Jacksonville, claiming 
they were protecting them from a 
lynching party. The Negroes were 
bound, taken out on the edge of the 
town and shot to death." 
Wha t now must be the feeling of the 
Negroes thereabouts? Ar e they appalled at their own wickedness? Do 
they see that the wages of sin is 
death? Not they. They despise the 
white man's justice, hate him, and 
whenever they hear of Negro "crime" 
in the future they will say: "It's a 
white man's lie. " 
Not only this, but these people 
know how criminals are made and they 
pity rather than condemn them. Take, 
for instance, the cries throughout the 
South against "vagrants." It means 
the call for the State enslavement of 
any man who does not work for a 
white man at the white man's price. 
The most outrageous laws and arrests are made under the excuse of 
vagrancy. In Atlanta, on October 15, 
thirty-seven laborers were arrested at 
night in their lodging house as "va ­
grants." In Texas five laborers were 
arrested as vagrants and proved their 
hard, steady jobs. "But, " remarks the 
Galveston Tribune chirpily: 
"The State chose to prosecute under 
a different portion of the law, alleging loitering about houses of ill-fame. 
The court explained, as he has done 
before, that a person can be a vagrant 
yet be steadily employed, the law 
being general in its effect and covering many points upon which a conviction can be had on a charge of 
vagrancy." 
Suppose now a mischievous boy or 
a loiterer or a laborer out of work is 
thrown into jail as a vagrant, what 
happens to him ? 
From a thousand examples, let us 
choose but one from a Texas report 
on a local "chain gang" : 
"The day's program was invariably 
this : U p at 4:30 o'clock in the morning, trot two to five miles to the cane 
fields, work there in squads until noon, 
when fifteen to twenty minutes would 
be allowed for the eating of a cold 
dinner; driven hard during the afternoon and brought back by starlight at 
night in the same dog trot they went 
out in the morning. The weak must 
keep up with the strong in his work 
or be punished. Convicts slept in 
their underclothes or naked, as it happened to rain or shine during the day. 
If it rained they hung up their clothes 
to dry and slept without. One convict 
testified that he had frequently taken 
his clothes from the nail frozen stiff. 
One man was on a farm a year, and 
during that time the bedclothes were 
not washed and were sunned but 
twice." 
Thus desperate criminals are manufactured and turned out day by day. 
Can we stop this by lynching? No . 
The first step toward stopping crime 
is to stop lynching. The next step is 
to treat black men like human beings. EDITORIAL 115 
A MIL D SUGGESTION . 
THE Y were sitting on the leeward 
deck of the vessel and the colored man was there with his 
usual look of unconcern. Before the 
seasickness his presence aboard had 
caused some upheaval. The Woman, 
for instance, glancing at the Southerner, had refused point blank to sit 
beside him at meals, so she had 
changed places with the Little Ol d 
Lady. The Westerner, who sat opposite, said he did not care a , 
then he looked at the Littl e Ol d Lady, 
and added in a lower voice to the New 
Yorke r that there was no accounting 
for tastes. The Southerner from the 
other table broadened his back and 
tried to express with his shoulders 
both ancestors and hauteur. Al l this, 
however, was half forgotten during the 
seasickness, and the Woma n sat beside the colored man for a full half 
hour before she noticed it, and then 
was glad to realize that the Southerner 
was too sick to see. No w again with 
sunshine and smiling weather, they all 
quite naturally reverted (did the 
Southerner suggest it?) to the Negro 
problem. The usual solutions had 
been suggested: education, work, emigration, etc. 
They had not noticed the back of 
the colored man, until the thoughtless 
Westerner turned toward him and 
said breezily: "Well , now, what do 
you say? I guess you are rather interested." The colored man was leaning over the rail and about to light 
his cigarette—he had several such bad 
habits, as the Little Ol d Lad y noticed. 
The Southerner simply stared. Ove r 
the face of the colored man went the 
shadow of several expressions; some 
the New Yorke r could interpret, others 
he could not. 
" I have," said the colored man, with 
deliberation, " a perfect solution." The 
Southerner selected a look of disdain 
from his repertoire, and assumed it. 
The Woma n moved nearer, but partly 
turned her back. The Westerner and 
the Littl e Ol d Lad y sat down. 
"Yes, " repeated the colored man, " I 
have a perfect solution. The trouble 
with most of the solutions which are 
generally suggested is that they aggravate the disease." The Southerner 
could not help looking interested. "Fo r 
instance," proceeded the colored man, 
airily waving his hand, "take education; education means ambition, dissatisfaction and revolt. Yo u cannot 
both educate people and hold them 
down. " 
"Then stop educating them," 
growled the Southerner aside. 
"Or, " continued the colored man, "i f 
the black' man works, he must come 
into competition with whites " 
"H e sure will, and it ought to be 
stopped," returned the Westerner. "It 
brings down wages." 
"Precisely," said the speaker, "and 
if by underselling the labor market 
he develops a few millionaires, how 
now would you protect your residential 
districts or your select social circles or 
—your daughters ?" 
The, Southerner started angrily, but 
the colored man was continuing placidly with a far-off look in his eyes. 
"Now , migration is both costly and 
inhuman; the transportation would be 
the smallest matter. Yo u must buy up 
perhaps a thousand millions' worth of 
Negro property; you must furnish 
some capital for the masses of poor; 
you must get some place for them to 
go; you must protect them there, and 
here you must pay not only higher 
wages to white men, but still higher 
on account of the labor scarcity. 
Meantime, the Negroes suddenly removed from one climate and social 
system to another climate and utterly 
new conditions would die in droves— 
it would be simply prolonged murder 
at enormous cost. 
"Ver y well, " continued the colored 
man, seating himself and throwing 
away his cigarette, "listen to my plan," 
looking almost quizzically at the Little 
Ol d Lad y ; "you must not be alarmed 
at its severity—it may seem radical, but 
really it is—it i.s—well, it is quite the 
only practical thing and it has surely 
one advantage: it settles the problem 
once, suddenly, and forever. M y plan 
is this : Yo u now outnumber us nearly 
ten to one. I propose that on a certain date, shall we say next Christmas, 1 16 THE CRISIS 
or possibly Easter, 1912? No , come to 
think of it, the first of January, 1913, 
would, for historical reasons, probably be best. Well , then, on the first 
of January, 1913, let each person who 
has a colored friend invite him to 
dinner. This would take care of a 
few; among such friends might be in ­
cluded the black mammies and faithful old servants of the South; in this 
way we could get together quite a 
number. Then those who have not 
the pleasure of black friends might 
arrange for meetings, especially in 
•'white' churches and Youn g Men's 
and Youn g Women's Christian Associations, where Negroes are not expected. A t such meetings, contrary to 
custom, the black people should not be 
seated by themselves, but distributed 
very carefully among the whites. The 
remaining Negroes who could not 
be flattered or attracted by these invitations should be induced to assemble 
among themselves at their own 
churches or at little parties and house 
warmings. •• 
"The few stragglers, vagrants and 
wanderers could be put under careful 
watch and ward. Now, then, we have 
the thing in shape. First, the hosts 
of those invited to dine should provide 
themselves with a sufficient quantity 
of cyanide of potassium, placing it 
carefully in the proper cups, and being 
careful not to mix the cups. Those at 
church and prayer meeting could 
choose between long sharp stilettoes 
and pistols—I should recommend the 
former as less noisy. Those who guard 
the colored assemblies and the stragglers without should carefully surround the groups and use Winchesters. 
Then, at a given signal, let the colored folk of the United States be 
quietly dispatched; the signal might 
be a church bell or the singing of the 
national hymn ; probably the bell 
would be best, for the diners would be 
eating." 
By this time the auditors of the colored man were staring; the Southerner 
had forgotten to pose; the Woma n 
had forgotten to watch the Southerner ; the Westerner was staring with 
admiration; there were tears in the 
eyes of the Littl e Ol d Lady , while the 
New Yorke r was smiling; but the colored man held up a deprecating hand: 
"No w don't prejudge my plan," he 
urged. "The next morning there 
would be ten million funerals, and 
therefore no Negro problem. Thin k 
how quietly the thing would be settled; no more bother, no more argument ; the whole country united and 
happy. Eve n the Negroes would be a 
great deal happier than they are at 
present. Instead of being made heirs 
to hope by education, or ambitious by 
wealth, or exiled invalids on the fever 
coast, they would all be happily 
ensconced in Heaven. O f course, I 
admit that at first the plan may seem 
a little abrupt and cruel, and yet is it 
more cruel than present conditions, 
and would it not be well to be a little 
more abrupt in our social solutions? 
A t any rate think it over," and the 
colored man dropped lazily into his 
steamer chair and felt for another 
cigarette. 
The crowd slowly dispersed; the 
Southerner chose the Woman , but was 
heard to say something about fools. 
The Westerner turned to the New 
Yorke r and said: "Now , what in hell 
do you suppose that darky meant?" 
But the Littl e Ol d Lad y went silently' 
to her cabin. 
Here in the Time of the ^Winter Morn 
By WILLIA M MOOR E 
Her e in the time of the Winte r morn,-
Love , 
I see the Sunlit leaves of changing hue 
Bur n clear against a sky of tender blue, 
Her e in the time of the Winte r morn, 
Love . 
Her e in the time of the Winte r morn, 
Love , 
I hear the low tone bells of changing 
song 
Rin g clear upon the air the full day long, 
Here in the time of the Winte r morn, 
Love . 
I hear the bells, I see the changing 
leaves, 
An d one lone heart for Summe r silent 
grieves, 
Her e in the time of the Winte r morn , 
Love . EDITORIAL 117 
The Black Folk of America 
In Account with 
TH E YEA R O F GRACE , 1911 
DEBI T 
To The Lynching Terror with over 
100 murders of men whose 
guilt was unproven. 
<I The mob spirit, with the murder, 
maiming and robbing of unknown 
hundreds. 
ffl Segregation ordinances in Baltimore and the South. 
<J Segregation movements to keep 
Negroes out of decent neighborhoods in New York and the 
North. 
Blease, Vardaman and Hoke 
Smith. 
<I Strikes against Negro workingmen 
in Tennessee and elsewhere. 
<| Discouragement of Negro emigration to Canada. 
<J Fall of the "True Reformers." 
tj Wholesale removal of colored 
officeholders in the South by 
President Taft. 
<I The Washington-Ulrich affair. 
<J The deaths of Bishops Grant and 
Handy; George W . Walker, the 
comedian; Bob Cole, the actor 
and composer; Mrs. F. E . W . 
Harper, the author; George Wil ­
liams Walker, the educator; John 
S. Trower, the caterer; Mrs. 
S. J. Garnet, the social worker; 
Justice Harlan, the "Friend at 
Court," and Thomas Wentworth 
Higginson, the author. 
By Balance in favor of the 
Black Folk of America: 
HOP E 
COURAG E 
DETERMINATIO N 
CREDI T 
By The Races Congress. 
•J The appeal of Negro Americans 
to Europe. 
<]| The striking increase of Negro 
wealth in land and homes. 
<J The census report of the increase 
of the Negro American population from 1,377,808 in 1810 to 
9,828,294 in 1910. 
C]J Centenary celebrations of the 
birthdays of Sumner, Phillips and 
Harriet Beecher Stowe. 
<J The blow at peonage in Alabama 
by the Supreme Court. 
C]| The forward movement for the 
colored Y . M . C. A . induced by 
Julius Rosenwald of Chicago. 
The Root-Borah debate on disfranchisement. 
C[ The first colored policeman in 
New York City and the first colored legislator in Pennsylvania. 
<J The first promise of aid to Negro 
higher education at Fisk from the 
General Education Board. 
C| The Protectorate of Liberia. 
•J The appointment of a colored 
Assistant United States Attorney. 
I| The refusal of Cornell to draw 
the "color line." 
f$ The fiasco of Mr. Taft and the 
black soldiers in Texas. 
<fl The fight for suffrage in Oklahoma. 
C| The winning of civil-rights suits 
in New York, New Jersey, 
Massachusetts and elsewhere. 
I| Defeat of disfranchisement in 
Maryland. 
<I The work of the National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People and TH E CRISIS. 118 THE CRISIS 
TH E DOUGLAS S HOSPITA L 
O F PHILADELPHI A 
Th e colored hospital is the result of 
two impulses—the philanthropi c desire 
to help the sick whic h arose during and 
after the Civi l Wa r and' the clinica l 
needs of the new colored physicians who 
found themselves barred by prejudice 
from general hospitals. 
In the South there are either no hospital accommodations for Negroes or 
poorly equipped and badly neglected 
Negr o wards. Her e and there one finds 
an exception to this, like the colored 
hospital at Augusta , Ga . In the colored 
wards of the Southern hospitals almost 
universally the colored doctors are 
excluded. Th e Phoebe Putney Hospita l 
was recently established at Albany , Ga., 
with the distinct understanding that colored patients and physicians were to be 
admitted. Th e colored people began a 
fund to equip an operating room and 
had collected $200 when the white 
physicians voted to exclude colored 
physicians entirely. 
In the Nort h it is usually impossibl e 
for colored physicians to be admitted to 
hospitals. Eve n in the case of distinctively colored charities like the Lincol n 
Hospita l of Ne w Yor k City , wit h its 
endowment yieldin g $115,000 a year, 
given by friends of Negroe s for 
Negroes, no Negr o physician has ever 
been admitted to the staff. 
Th e result has been the founding" of 
about forty Negr o hospitals in the 
Unite d States. One of these we brin g 
to the attention of our readers this 
month, and in later issues we shall speak 
of simila r institutions. 
Th e Frederic k Douglass Memoria l 
Hospita l and Trainin g School was 
founded in Philadelphi a in 1895 by Dr. 
Nathan F . Mossell . Th e hospital was 
incorporated in 1896, and later a modern; THE DOUGLASS HOSPITAL 119 
TH E OPERATIN G BOO M 
thoroughly equipped building was 
erected at a cost of $118,000. Th e hospital has a staff of colored and white 
physicians, and it serves the fifty Negr o 
practitioners of that city wit h the best 
clinica l advantages. Approximatel y 3,500 
in-patients and 40,000 out-patients have 
been treated at the hospital without distinction of color. 
Th e nurse training department receives 
girls- wh o are high-school graduates, and 
gives them a course extending over two 
years and three months. 
The State of Pennsylvani a has appropriated in all $86,000 for the maintenance of the hospital and $18,000 for 
building purposes, while the colored people of the city have, through donations, 
fairs and entertainments, raised $77,000, 
of whic h $50,000 went to the building 
and the rest covered the expense of 
administration. 
Recently a social service department 
has been established and a post-graduate 
course for physicians. 
W e publish a view of the unusually 
THRE E MINISTER S T O PAI N 120 THE CRISIS 
beautiful and well-equipped building, a 
scene in the operating amphitheatre and 
a group of nurses. T o these we are glad 
to add a portrait of Dr. Mossell , the 
medica l director and superintendent, to 
whose tireless efforts the hospital is 
a monument. Dr. 
Mossel l was born in 
Canada in 1856, and 
was graduated at 
Lincol n Universit y 
and the medica l department of the Uni ­
versity of Pennsylvania. H e has also 
studied in London , 
served as president 
of the Nationa l 
Medica l Association , 
and is the author of 
several papers. In 
his wor k he has been 
effectively helped by 
his energetic wife. 
These two, assisted by a board of 
managers under the presidency of An ­
drew J. Stevens, and a consultang staff 
whic h carries such names as S. Wei r 
Mitchell , W . W . Kee n and Marcu s F . 
Wheatland , have begun and carried 
on this work. Th e 
hospital is, how ­
ever, still burdened 
wit h a mortgage 
deb t o f $52,000, 
whic h i t s friends 
are strugglin g to 
satisfy. 
It is doubtful if 
th e philanthropist 
could find a mor e 
effective method of 
investing his funds 
for the future welfare of his fellow 
men than by helping 
this institution. TH E 
CRISI S woul d be glad 
to receive any funds 
for this hospital and 
forward them to the 
prope r authorities. 
DP. N . F . MOSSEL L 
HISTORIC DAY S IN JANUAR Y 
1. Lincol n issues the Emancipatio n 
Proclamation , 1863. Th e Liberato r appears, 1831. Hait i formally declares independence, 1804. 
2. Negroe s of Philadelphi a petition 
Congress for abolition of slavery, 1800. 
3. Lucreti a Mot t born, 1793. 
4. First Regiment Kansa s Colore d 
Volunteers organized, 1866. 
9. Fis k schoolhouse (afterward Fis k 
University ) opened, 1866. 
10. James Varick , first bishop A . M . E . 
Zio n Church , born, 1768. 
11. Isaac Knapp , abolitionist, born 
1804. 
12. Commissio n appointed to inquire 
into the matter of the proposed annexation of Santo Domingo , 1871. 
13. Nationa l convention of colored 
men meets in Washington , 1869. 
15. Free Negroe s of Massachusetts 
authorized to enlist, Wa r of the Revolu ­
tion, 1776. 
17. Mar y Garnett Barbosa , Negr o missionary, born, 1845. 
18. Rhode Island ratifies Fifteenth 
Amendment, 1870. 
21. Joh n C. Fremon t born, 1813. 
22. Toussaint L'Ouvertur e enters the 
city of Santo Domingo , 1801. 
23. Amendmen t to the Constitution 
proposed to forbid Congress to legislate 
on slavery, 1861. 
25. Manumitte d Negroe s forbidden to 
remain in Virginia , 1806. 
28. George S. Boutwell, author of the 
Thirteenth Amendment, born, 1818. 
29. Clay compromise s on slavery 
introduced, 1850. 
30. Unite d States statute declaring the 
slave-trade piracy made perpetual, 1823. 
31. Georgi a prohibits importation of 
slaves, 1798. 
L . M . HERSHAW . TH E BURDE N 
It woul d seem that at Christma s time 
we should not rind it necessary to speak 
of the burden; that, for this season at 
least, the weight should drop from the 
black man and woma n and they should 
stand free and untrammeled, able to 
walk erect through the rough pathway of 
life. But wit h the rejoicing of the 
Decembe r days oppression has grown no 
less; and whil e in every Christian church 
there has been the song of "Peace on 
Earth. " it has brought no hope that the 
burden woul d slip from the weary back 
into the open sepulchre. 
Wha t is withi n this pilgrim pack? 
First, poverty. Th e black man and 
woma n are weighed down by long hours 
of toil, often at uncongenial tasks. Lif e 
grows increasingly difficult. Hig h prices 
for the simplest food, high rental for the 
poorest room or cabin, low remuneration 
for the wearyin g task, this is the commo n lot. Onl y the few escape it. An d 
this load deadens ambition, and makes 
the bright child into the indifferent, 
easily discouraged man or woman. 
Anothe r weight within the pack is disease. "Giv e me health and a day," Emerson said, "and I wil l make the pomp of 
emperors ridiculous. " Afte r a long 
night's sleep to waken, every nerve and 
muscle rested, into the fresh air of the 
morning , is to know, indeed, the majesty 
of living . But to many the new day 
brings a renewal of sickness of body and 
of soul. Fo r the load of poverty too 
often carries with it the other load of il l 
health. 
But these burdens, il l health and poverty, are in the commo n pack. Th e dawn 
of a new year wil l see millions of light 
as well as dark faced laborers bending 
under these deadening loads. Wha t is 
the special burden that the black man 
alone bears? 
It is the burden that separates man 
from man—the burden of misunderstanding. Eac h year the Africa n element in 
our population is shut off a little more 
from the white race, .some avenue of 
opportunity, along whic h the two walked 
side by side, is closed to darker folk. 
An d with this separation comes distrust, 
misunderstanding; at the last the hatred 
that ends in the blind fury of the 
lyncher's mob. 
Th e white jury that failed to convict 
the men of its race for lynchin g a black 
man was only followin g out the lesson 
it had been taught during recent years. 
Da y by day the Unite d States declares 
that the black man must be ignored, that 
his opinion is worthless, that he is not a 
man amon g other men. Ho w then should 
the nation expect, at a time of great excitement, that the lesson it has slowly 
been drillin g into the minds of its people 
should be reversed? If a black man is 
not fit to lay bricks with you, or ride on 
the same car wit h you, or eat in the same 
restaurant wit h you, or bury his dead near 
yours, he is not fit for the same justice 
which is meted to white men. Bur n him 
by all means as an example. Indeed, has 
not this been laid down as precedent 
throughout the land when its Chie f Ex ­
ecutive decided that black defenders of 
their country should be disciplined wit h 
a hasty severity never meted out to 
white? 
Injustice and misunderstanding! These 
go together, and these are the heaviest 
burdens in the black man's pack. Can 
anything be done to lighten them? TH E 
CRISI S believes that it is helping to accomplish this by bringin g to its readers' 
notice facts of injustice. It believes that 
when American s know the disabilities under which the black man's back is made 
to bend, they wil l not so lightly allow 
them to pass without protest. But this is 
the new year, and wil l not the white 
people wh o read this burden decide in 
their hearts that they wil l do one thing 
more? Wil l they not go out of their 
way to know the colored people in the 
city or town in which they live? Wil l 
they not endeavor to include them in 
their plans for civic betterment, in their 
philanthropy, in their religion? Wil l 
they not invite them cordially into the, 
great movements that make glad their 
lives, the movements for economic betterment, for the enfranchisement of 
women? And , on the other hand, wil l 
the dark-faced people strive to put aside 
distrust and to believe in the sincerity 
of the white man or woma n wh o approaches them? This is the harder part. 
But it is indeed the only way by whic h 
the burden shall fall and its former 
bearer be led into the large upper chamber that looks toward the sunrise, and 
that is named Peace. 122 THE CRISIS 
Vision of a Lyncher 
[Writte n for TH E CRISI S and dedicated 
to His Excellency, the Governor of South 
Carolina. ) 
Onc e looked I into hell—'twas in a 
trance 
Throughou t a horri d night of soulwrought pain; 
Dow n through the pit I saw the 
burnin g plain, 
Wher e writhe d the tortured swarm, 
without one glance 
Upwar d to earth or God . Ther e in 
advance 
O f all the rest was one wit h lips 
profane^ 
An d murderous, bloody hands, 
marked to be slain 
B y peers that woul d not bear him 
countenance. 
"God, " cried I in my dream, "what 
soul is he 
Doome d thus to drain the utmost 
cup of fate, 
Tha t even the cursed of Tartarus 
expel?" 
An d the great Voic e replied: "Th e 
chastity 
O f dear, confiding La w he raped; 
now Hate , 
His own begotten, drives him forth 
I N DURANT , OKLAHOMA : "B Y A PERSO N
 fr °m
 hell.' ' 
O R PERSON S UNKNOWN " LESLI E PlNCKNE V HlLL. 
' A FRENZIE D MO B O F PROMINEN T CITIZENS ' TH E YEAR' S BOOKS . CURREN T BOOKS . 
Reviewin g the. literature of the year 
1911 , the followin g seven books woul d 
seem to be of permanent value and to 
deserve to be bought and put on the 
shelves of those interested in race and 
human problems: 
I. "Papers on Interracial Problems 
Communicate d to the First Universa l 
Races Congress, 1911. " Edite d by G. 
Spiller, 48 5 pages. Peace Foundation, 
Boston . Mass. $2.40 . 
This is the latest summary of the scientific aspects and development of race 
problems the worl d over. 
II. Boaz : "Th e Min d of Primitiv e 
Man. " Macmilla n Company, Ne w York . 
$1.50 . 
This contains the conclusions of a 
leading America n anthropologist on race 
equality and intermixture. 
III. Ovington : "Hal f a Man. " 23 6 
pages. Longmans, Green & Co., $1.00 . 
A sympathetic scientific study of colored folk in Ne w Yor k City . 
IV . Chamberlain : "Th e Contribution 
of the Negr o to Huma n Civilization. " 
A pamphlet reprinted from the Journal of Race Development, Vol . I., No . 
4, whic h effectually disposes of the usual 
assertion that the black race has contributed nothing to human culture. 
V . Stowe : "Harrie t Beecher Stowe. " 
Houghton-Miffli n Company , Cambridge, 
Mass., $1.50 . 
A biography of the author of "Uncl e 
Tom's Cabin. " 
VI . Publications of Atlant a University. No . 15 : "Th e College-bred Negro -
American, " 104 pages, 7 5 cents. 
A statistical study of some results of 
higher education. 
VII . D u Bois: "Th e Quest of the Silver Fleece, " 45 2 pages. A . C . McClur g 
& Co., Chicago, $1.35 . 
Th e Independent says: " A race story 
and a very interesting one, and admirably 
told wit h the true artist's touch—not 
merely as a romance, but as a study of 
race psycholog y it is well wort h the 
reading. " 
Al l these books may be obtained at 
TH E CRISI S office for the sum of $8.75 , 
carriage prepaid, and including one 
year's subscription to TH E CRISIS . 
"Blac k and Whit e in Southeast Africa : 
A Study in Sociology. " M . S. Evans, 
Longmans, Green & Company . 
"Cong o Lif e and Folk-lore. " J. H . 
Weeks. 
"Interscholastic Athleti c Association of 
Middl e Atlanti c States." Spalding's 
Athleti c Library . America n Sports 
Publishin g Company, 2 1 Warre n St., 
New York . Colore d athletes. 
"Margare t Harding. " Perciva l Gibbon . 
Methuen. 
"Mr . Perciva l Gibbon , greatly daring, wrestles, in 'Margare t Harding, ' 
wit h perhaps the most thorny of all 
problems—the Race Question, whic h 
bristles defiantly before the white man 
wherever h,e has colonized near the 
tropical zone. Mr . Gibbo n knows 
South Africa n life more intimately 
than do most of the novelists wh o 
have depicted it."—The Nation. 
"Negr o Wome n in America. " Frances 
Hoggan , M . D . • 
«J B. F . Riley's "Th e Whit e Man's Burden" (published by the author, Birming ­
ham, Ala.) is the sincere effort of a 
Southern white man to be fair. The book 
is ramblin g and discursive, but it rings 
with inner sincerity and truth. Th e main 
thesis may be shown by one quotation: 
"Why , then, should there be delay in 
the adoption of a movement which wil l 
rob the future of racial ominousness, and 
clear the years to come of inevitable difficulties wit h which other generations 
must grapple? T o listen to the hoot of 
the racial hater and the clatter of the 
political pettifogger, wh o sees no further 
than his own temporary self-advantage, 
seems folly, in view of that which is involved as well as that which portends. 
Coul d a course justified by conditions 
well known be adopted for the relaxation 
of present conditions, and could there be 
established between the white and black 
races that whic h is friendly and tranquil, 
there could be but one result. Side by 
side there would eventually grow up a 
dual civilization in the America n States, 
and especially in those of the South—one 
purely white America n and the other 
Afro-American. " 
WHA T T O REA D 124 THE CRISIS 
"Th e Elevent h Hou r i n the Lif e of Juli a 
War d Howe. " Mau d Howe . Little , 
Brow n & Company . 
This little book shows that the 
wor k of the last five years of Juli a 
War d Howe's life was as ric h and 
fruitful as that of any portio n of her 
career. 
<J W e give below quotations from the 
extremely interesting article on "Islam 
as a Facto r in West Africa n Culture, " 
which appeared in the Journa l of Race 
Development for October. 
"Ther e are many reasons wh y Islam 
is widely accepted among the Africa n 
races of West Afric a and the Sudan. 
Th e teachers and propagators of Islam 
" * * meet and treat the people as equals, 
residing with them in their towns, 
marryin g the Africa n women , and showin g the greatest sympath y wit h and in ­
terest in Africa n institutions and customs, and yet modifyin g and altering 
them whenever they can do so without 
doing great violence to the feelings and 
habits of the people. Amon g other 
things, it is taught that the Africa n 
black races have a hig h and honorable 
part i n the history and notable achievements of the Mohammeda n faith- Th e 
people are made to feel a pride in the 
fact that the black races are recognized 
in the Koran , whic h contains a chapter 
inscribed to an Africa n Negro . Th e 
people are told that Mohamme d was in 
part descended from an Africa n and had 
a black man as a confidant in Arabia . 
Th e Africans thus feel a close relationship to the Korani c faith." 
TH E CRISI S 
Calendar for 1912 
Legible and Dainty 
with the Januar y 
Crisis Gir l in Colors 
FIFTEE N CENT S 
postpaid; and cheaper by the dozen 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.00* 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
LEGA L DIRECTOR Y 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
5 Beekman Street (Templ e Court) 
New Yor k City 
Tel . 622 2 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
FREDERIC K L . McGHE E 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
Union Block, Fourth and Cedar Streets 
S t Paul, Minn . 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNE Y AND COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
102 0 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
Real Estate and Probate Matters a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
Office: Room 502 , Eberl y Block Columbus, O 
B. S. SMIT H 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LAW . 
Offices: Suite 610 , Sykes Block 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
90 8 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 125 
BOOKS 
THE 
MAGAZINE 
STUDENTS OF THE NEGRO PROBLEM 
The Souls of Black Folk, DuBois 
History of the Negro • Washington 
John Brown • • DuBois 
Up From Slavery • • Washington 
Poems of Paul Laurence 
Dunbar 
Poems of W. S. Braithwaite 
Race Adjustment • Miller 
Negro In the New World, Johnston 
Following the Color Line, Baker 
Works of Charles W. 
Chestnut! 
Atlanta University Studies 
Negro and the Nation • Merriam 
Negro In the South • Washington 
DuBois 
Aftermath of Slavery • Sinclair 
Half a Man • • Ovington 
Life of Harriet Beecher 
Stowe • • • • Stowe 
Mind of Primitive Man, Boaz 
Race Prejudice • • Finot 
Curse of Race Prejudice, Morton 
Quest of the Silver Fleece, 
a novel - - - DuBois 
Through Afro-America, Archer 
Southern South • • Hart 
Inter-Racial Problems, Official Record 
of the Universal Races Congress 
And general readers will 
find this list embraces the 
most popular and comprehensive studies of (he Negro 
question. They are (he 
best books by the best 
writers and thinkers. By 
special arrangements with 
the publishers of the books 
we are in position to make 
combination offers at remarkably low prices. This 
offer is good (or a limited 
time only and is made to 
increase the subscription 
list of 
THE CRISIS 
the magazine edited by 
W . E. B. DuBois with the co-operation of Oswald Garrison 
Villard. Charles Edward Russell. Kelly Miller and 
others. The Crisis is the organ of the National Association For the Advancement of Colored People / 
To the 
Publishers 
of the CRISIS, 
20 Vesey Street. 
OUR OFFER: / New York City. 
\Y / L J i u- . j& Gentlemen: We have made special combinations 
. . . , , • i c rt & Please send, 
with these books in sets or five, ten. hi- ^ . , 
without any cost to 
teen and twenty, together with a £(* . 
O*
 me >
 y ou r descriptive 
year's subscription to the Crisis, 
and is a record of every important happening and 
movement in the world which bears on the great 
problems of interracial relations and especially 
those which' affect the Negro American. 
and will be glad to have the ^ 
names and addresses of al1 
who find themselves 
interested in this 
greatest of 
problems. 
circular offering these 
sets of books on the 
Negro Problem and a 
year's subscription to the 
CRISIS. 
Name 
Address 
City 
State 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 
THE 126 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
CLASSIFIE D ADVERTISIN G 
•J Through our Classified Advertising Service you have the opportunity 
to tell your little wants to 40,000 SELEC T readers. 
<J If you want HELP , you can find, among TH E CRISIS readers, 
graduates of Industrial Schools and thousands of young people who are 
trained for efficient, dependable service. 
<J If you want a POSITION , TH E CRISIS can help you find highclass places for teachers, managers, clerks, stenographers, hotel men, etc., etc. 
<J Yo u will find our readers very responsive to this department for 
Business Opportunities, Investments, Correspondence Schools, Agents 
Wanted, etc. 
tj Advertisers may have replies sent in care of TH E CRISIS and forwarded. 
<fl Classified advertising rates made known on application. 
- REA L ESTAT E 
Valuable Texas Lands 
For Sale 
Larg e tracts of farm land in the best localities of the State for sale at very flattering 
prices. Small tracts for good lands suitable for 
farming, truck, fruits and any domestic product. 
We have for sale a number of large farms already in cultivation, good houses and barns, 
wells, and nice pasture lands, which can be 
obtained at reasonable rates. City property a 
specialty. Business lots in the best part of 
the city, improved and unimproved. Larg e lots 
suitable for factory property with switch 
facilities. 
No investment can be more valuable than an 
investment in Texas real estate. Lands are becoming so valuable that they are doubling 
themselves in value in less than a year's time. 
Fo r any investment in Texas property, write 
T. B . Madison Rea l Estat e Company, 2415 El m 
Street, Dallas, Texas. 
To Colored People 
F
OR SALE — W e have houses from $1,000 to 
830,000. Our city is the capital of Ohio 
and a great manufacturing center—-plenty of 
work, a good place to locate for business. Can 
sell you a house for $50, $100 to $500 down, 
balance like rent. Fo r investment and speculating houses or business places, $1,000 to 
$5,000 down, balance on long time payment. 
Far m land prices from $1,000 to $10,000 up. 
An y of these are i n good locations. Writ e for 
further information. 
THI S IS A COLORE D ENTERPRISE . 
EDWAR D A. SHANKLIN 
Real Estat e 
1218 1/2 M t Verno n Ave . Columbus , Ohi o 
Come to Oklahoma 
TAFT . OKLAHOMA , is the fastest-growing colored town in the United 
States. Already a flourishing, prosperous community with bank, industrial college and State school for colored race, 
cotton gin, brick yard, churches, numerous stores and other enterprises, all controlled by thriving colored citizens. 
Surrounded by the most fertile farming 
land in Oklahoma. Directly in the path 
of the fortune-making oil developments 
in Oklahoma. Splendid openings for 
home seekers, business men, mechanics 
and others. Invest your money in Taft 
now. It will make you handsome 
returns. 
Beautifully located lots, $25 to $30 
each. Five dollars cash, small monthly 
payments without interest or taxes. 
Perfect titles positively guaranteed. 
Write to-day for handsome illustrated 
map, booklet and lithograph. 
REEVES REALTY CO. 
Flynn-Ame s Bldg. . Muskogee . Okla . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS 
REA L ESTAT E 
16 0 ACRE S O F LAN D FRE E 
Under the U . S. Horn«toad Act. 160 acres of land 
may be acquired free of charge, except small fee for 
filing application and recording patent, by any person 
of age. married or single (If married, the head of the 
family is entitled), who is not the owner of any 
land. Lan d located In 21 States. Some very rich 
and productive. Choice of location. Send $1.00 for 
a copy of the Free Homestead Ac t Address 
0. A. WRIGHT, Box 121. Bedford City, Virginia 
MUSI C 
HELE N ELIS E SMIT H 
CONCER T PIANIS T 
Post-Graduate of the Institute of Musica l Ar t 
Pupi l of Sigismund Stojowski 
Teache r of Piano, Theory , Ear-training , etc. 
221 EAS T 86T H STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
MISS EDIT H W . McKENN Y 
Concert Pianist 
310 W . 119th Street New Yor k City 
Piano lessons given privately or in classes 
at reasonable rates. 
Musi c furnished for private parties. 
SCHOOL S 
YOUN G MAN , HAV E YO U A TRADE ? 
B y our method we teach the Barbe r Trade in 
six weeks. 
We give you a complete set of tools and 
secure yon a position in a shop. Call or write 
for particulars. 
NE W YOR K BARBE R SCHOO L 
Costello & Wis e 
Cor . Bower y and Rivington St. NE W YOR K 
Our Normal Preparatory Course 
includes a thorough review of Arithmetic , Grammar, Geography, U . S. History , Physiology, 
Reading, Spelling, Penmanship, Drawing , Civil 
Government and Theor y and Ar t of Teaching. 
Just the thing to prepare you for a teachers' 
examination. Address 
AFRO-AMERICA N CORRESPONDENC E 
SCHOO L 
2808 St. An n Street New Orleans, La . 
FURRIE R 
Seventeen Years' Experienc e 
WOR K TURNE D OU T PROMPTL Y 
MRS . G. B. NEEDLE S 
Lat e with Broadwa y houses 
PRACTICA L FURRIE R 
Al l kinds of furs remodelled, repaired and relined. Whit e furs cleaned, equal to new. Coats 
guaranteed to fit. Price s reasonable. 
24 WES T 1S5T H STREE T NE W YOR K 
SITUATIO N WANTE D 
YOUN G LAD Y desires position as stenographer 
or office helper. Experienced. References 
given. Address A . L . V. , care of TH E CRISIS , 
20 Vesey Street. 
Mention 
ADVERTISER 127 
ENTERTAINE R 
'Phone 4876-W Harle m 
Th e Quaint Entertainer , Autho r and Banj o 
Comedian 
AL. BROWN 
Presents His 
DUO , TRI O AN D QUARTETT E 
For Al l Privat e Occasions 
References: The Publi c for 12 Year s 
Studio: 16-18 W . 136th St. New Yor k Cit y 
Hours: 10 A . M . to 7 P. M . 
HEL P WANTE D 
RELIABL E HELP at all times for the most 
discriminating employers. 
Out-of-town correspondence invited. 
References thoroughly investigated 
Address: 
MIS S I. L . MOORMA N 
463 Leno x Avenue New Yor k 
'Phone : Harlem, 6370 
Middlesex Employment Agency 
Offers you the benefit of its experience, gained 
by years of actual conduct of business and the 
prestige that comes from a large clientele of 
satisfied patrons. 
Our rigid investigation of references keeps our 
standard high. Mai l orders solicited. 
2229 Fift h Avenue, near 136th Street, 
New York . 
ME N AN D WOME N WANTE D 
to sell beautiful Ar t Pictures. Ou r agents 
are coining money on these pictures. 
Thre e sample pictures by mail, 35 cents. 
Te n sample postcards by mail, 6 cents. 
Address 
JACO B GRIFFIT H 
252 W. S3d Street New York 
WANTED — A first-class photographer to take full 
charge of studio in best city in America, with 
privilege of buying half interest of entire 
business. Owner going on road as demonstrator. Fo r particulars address No. 100, care 
of TH E CRISIS . 
PATENT S 
L . H . LATIME R 
MECHANICA L AN D ELECTRICA L ENGINEE R 
and 
SOLICITO R O F PATENT S 
55 John Street New Yor k 
Inventions Perfected, Models and Experimental Machine s Designed and Constructed. 
Technical Translations. 
Telephone 343 John Room 604 
REGALI A 
A RAC E ENTERPRIS E 
Manufacturing Badges, Banners and 
Supplies for all Fraterna l and Church 
Societies. Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L . "Jones, Pres. 
N. E . Cor. 8th and Plum Streets 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
TH E CRISIS . 128 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
BOOK S 
Publications of the N. A A . C . P. 
Th e N . A . A . C P. has for sale the following 
pamphlets: 
1. Disfranchisement: A powerful argument by 
the Rev. Joh n Hayne s Holmes. 
2. Education in the South: Facts about the 
discrimination against the Negro. B y the Rev. 
Horac e Bumstead, former president of Atlanta 
University. 
3. Th e Real Race Problem: A scientific comparison of the black and the white man by 
America's foremost anthropologist, Prof. Boas, of 
Columbia University. 
4. Social Control. B y Jane Addams, of Hul l 
House. 
5. Th e Negro as a Soldier. B y BrigadierGeneral Burt, U . S. A . 
FIVE CENTS EACH . THREE DOLLARS A HUNDRED 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
JAME S F . MORTON , JR. , A.M. , Author and Publisher 
Forceful, rational, comprehensive. A n arsenal 
of facts and unanswerable arguments. Invaluabl e 
for propaganda. Rea d the chapter on "Th e Bug ­
bear of Social Equality, " which is a veritable 
eye-opener. Thousands already sold. Agents 
wanted everywhere. 
PRIC E 25 CENT S 
Address the Autho r at 244 West 143d Street, 
New York , N . Y . 
TH E CRISIS 
CHARLE S D. LEVY , Agent 
4218 Clara Street New Orleans, La . 
WHER E T O STO P 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Marshall's Hotel 127-129 West 53d Street 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
COMFORT—Large , airy rooms, offering genuine home comforts plus the 
conveniences and privileges of a modern hotel. 
SERVICE—I n the hotel and dining room the "Marshall" service is an exceptional feature, which assures comfort and pleasure for our patrons. 
Restaurant open all night. Cuisine to satisfy the most discriminating 
VOCA L AN D INSTRUMENTA L MUSI C EVER Y EVENIN G 
Breakfast, 7:30 to 12:30, 30c. Luncheon, 12:30 to 3, 30c. Dinner, 6 to 8, 35c. 
Special Course Dinner Every Sunday and Holidays, 50c. 
Telephones 4693 - 4694 Columbus J . L . MARSHALL , Proprietor 
'Phone 2877 Leno x " A Quiet place for quiet people to dine " 
WHIT E ROS E WORKIN G GIRLS ' "TH E BRADFORD " 
HOME 73 WES T 134T H STREE T 
217 East 86th Street Between fift h and Leno x Avenue s NEW YOR K 
Bet. Second and Thir d Avenues Oysters, Chops, Steaks, Rarebits, Salads, Club 
Pleasant temporary lodgings for working girls, Sandwiches, Etc . Regula r Dinner , 25c., from 
with privileges, at reasonable rates. Th e Home 2 p.m. to 9 p.m. Meals Served at Al l Hours, 
solicits orders for working dresses, aprons, etc. Privat e Dinin g Boom. Furnishe d Rooms To 
Address: Let. Permanent or Transient. 
MBS . FRANCE S E . KEY8ER , Supt. JOH N E . BRADFORD , Proprieto r 
TH E SOUTHER N RESTAURAN T 
2229 Fifth Avenue IS YOU R HOTE L LISTE D HERE ? 
Bet. 135th and 136th Sts. 
Real Hom e Cooking ; Meals Served at Al l Hours. : I F NOT , WRIT E US . 
REASONABL E RATE S EXCELLEN T SERVIC E 
Home-made Rolls Served Ho t 
NORT H CAROLIN A 
SANDERS ' HOTE L 
301 3. Caldwell Street, Charlotte, N. C. 
Ideal location for transient and permanent 
boarders. Al l modern conveniences and comforts 
of home life. 
J. T. SANDER S 
Proprieto r 
'Phone 681 Ho t and Cold Baths 
WARRE N HOTE L 
MIS S BETTI E DUNCAN , Proprietress 
First-class accommodations. Meals at all hours. 
RATE S REASONABL E 
COR . RAMSE Y AN D PROCTO R STREET S 
Thre e Blocks from Unio n Station 
DURHAM , N . C . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 129 
S. A . KELSEY , Pres. DR . WM . J . CARTER , Chiropodist. MME . A . C. KELSEY , Gen' l Instr. 
The Kelsey School of Beauty Culture and Hair Dressing 
328 Lenox Avenue, New York City 
Manicuring, Shampooing, Hair Dressing, Beauty Culture, Hair Making and 
Chiropody scientifically taught. Day and night sessions. Instructions given to 
pupils in their own homes if desired. Diplomas awarded. Send for bookletdirectory of recently graduated students. 
HOO T SUPREM E 
OFFICER S O F TH E 
Hoo Hoo ! Ho o Hoo ! 
SOMETHING NEW 
Ho o Hoo ! 
The Afro-American 
Order of Owls 
With a Graduated Scale of Endowment 
WANTED—Organizer s i n ever y cit y i n the Unite d 
States. Fo r particular s writ e G . W. Bland , H . S. P. , 
110 1/2Colfax Avenue , South Bend , Indiana. 
ESTABLISHE D 18S7 'Phone 4715 Mad . Sq. 
L . A . de TOSCAN O CO . 
OLDES T COLORE D REGALI A ESTABLISHMEN T I N TH E CIT Y 
Knights of Pythias 
Knights Templars 
And Patriarchs 
Equipments 
BADGE S 
JEWEL S 
REGALI A 
Paraphernalia 
and Supplies 
for All Societies 
Estimates Given 
Mme. B. E . de Toscano, Manager 
146 WES T 31st STREE T Bet. Sixth and Seventh Avenues NE W YOR K CITY 
Do You Want to Make Money? 
CANVASSER S TO SEL L SPHINX HANS OPE 
Used in garage, machine shop, factory and home. Twenty-five boxes 
for $1.25; you sell for $2.50. Whitens the skin, softens the hands, prevents 
chapping, heals cracks and sores. The first aid in burns. Strictly antiseptic. 
SPHINX LABOR-SAVING SOAP CO., Inc. 
117 West Street, Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Telephone 3268 Harle m CARPE T CLEANIN G 
CLEANER S AN D RENOVATER S FO R PARTICULA R PEOPL E 
NE W YOR K CAREFU L CLEANIN G BUREA U 
12 WES T 13STH STREE T 
W e make a specialty of cleaning and renovating carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered 
furniture , we also vacuum clean in the home. We are not the largest carpet cleaner in the 
world, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOIN G CARPET S AN D RUG S OU R SPECIALT Y 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 
Home Nest Tree 
110 1/2 West Colfax Ave. 
South Bend, Ind. 130 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Is Your Hair ^ 
"^Falling Out? ^ 
Your Hai r Wil l Not Be Beautiful Unless It Is Healthy 
Have 
You 
When the hair splits, breaks off, falls out, or you have 
an abnormal amount of dandruff, you need the attention 
of a hair specialist. 
MADAM E WALKER' S 
^-PREPARATIONS— • 
Have 
You 
Dandruff? will no t onl y
 reliev e
 these conditions and encourage Eczema? 
—i—— — a soft, healthy growth, but in using them you get the —• -
7 advice and personal attention of Madame Walker, who [ 
is regarded as an expert in the treatment of scalp diseases 
ADDRES S 
MADAM E C . J . WALKE R 
640 N. WES T STREE T INDIANAPOLIS , IND., U . S. A . 
Ladies' Kid Gloves 
United 
Glove Co 
2 Broadway 
New York, N. Y. 
Sav e Mone y Buyin g Direc t 
No. N. 656. Two-clasp imported 
ki d glove, wit h new heavy selfcolored or black embroidery, in 
colors and white, pretty and attractive. White , black, tan, gray, 
mode, navy blue, green. Sizes 
5 1/2 to 8 (1/4 sizes). Usuall y retailed 
$1.25, our price 85c. 
•No. N. 662. Eight-button length 
Glace Mousquetaire, two clasps or 
two buttons at wrist. Can be wor n 
with any length sleeve. In white, 
black, gray. tan. mode, ox blood, 
green. Sizes 5 1/2 to 7 1/2- Usuall y 
retailed $2. our price $1.45. 
FREE — Sen d for booklet, showing all 
styles of kid. suede, cape, chamois, silk, 
cashmere and golf. 
Bom. 2220 Cen 6322 
Van Noy Printing Co. 
100 Line n Finis h Cards by Mall , 60 c. 
COMMERCIAL ) PRINTIN G 
SOCIET Y PRINTIN G 
BOO K AN D JO B PRINTIN G 
2315 MARKE T ST . ST . LOUIS , MO . 
0. Augustus Wright 
Attorney-in-Fact 
P. O. Box 121 Bedford City, Va. 
Practices before the Department of the 
Interior, and the several bureaus thereof 
at Washington , D . C. Prosecutes 
claims for pension, increase of pension and bounty land. 
Searches made of U . S. Patent Office 
records; assignments of patents prepared and filed. Trademark s and copyrights procured. 
Correspondenc e solicited. 
Approved : Bureau of Pensions, T. P. 
9-26-11. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, for the 
ADVANCEMENT of COLORED PEOPLE 
(Incorporated May 25, 1911) 
OBJECT.—Th e National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People 
is an organization composed of men and 
women of all races and classes who believe that the present widespread increase 
of prejudice against colored races and 
particularly the denial of rights and 
opportunities to ten million Americans of 
Negro descent is not only unjust and a 
menace to our free institutions, but also 
is a direct hindrance to Worl d Peace 
and the realization of Human Brotherhood. 
METHODS.—Th e encouragement of 
education and efforts for social uplift; the 
dissemination of literature; the holding of 
mass meetings; the maintenance of a lecture bureau; the encouragement of vigilance committees ; the investigation of complaints ; the maintenance of a Bureau of 
Information; the publication of TH E 
CRISIS; the collection of facts and publication of the truth. 
ORGANIZATION.—Al l interested 
persons are urged to join our organization 
—associate membership costs $ 1, and 
contributing and sustaining members pay 
from $2 to $25 a year. 
FUNDS.—W e need $10,000 a year 
for running expenses of this work and particularly urge the necessity of gifts to help 
on our objects. 
OFFICERS.—Th e officers of the 
organization are: 
National President — Mr . Moorfield 
Storey, Boston, Mass. 
Chairman of the Executive Committee— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard , Ne w 
York . 
Treasurer—Mr. Walter E . Sachs, New 
York . 
Director of Publicity and Research—Dr. 
W . Ε . B . D u Bois, Ne w York . 
Secretary—Miss Mar y W . Ovington, 
New York . 
COMMITTEE.—Ou r work is carried on under the auspices of the following General Committee, in addition to the 
officers named: 
Miss Gertrude Barnum, New York. 
Miss Frances Blascoer, New York. 
•Rev. W. II. Brooks, New York. 
Prof. John Dewey, New York. 
*Dr. John Lovejoy Elliott, New York 
•Mrs. Thos. Ewing, Jr., New York. 
*Rev. John Haynes Holmes, New York. 
Mr. Hamilton Holt, New York. 
Miss Maud R. Ingersoll, New York. 
*Mrs. Florence Kelley, New York. 
*Mr. Paul Kennaday, New York. 
•Mrs. F. R. Keyser, New York. 
Dr. Chas. Lenz, New York. 
Mr. Jacob W. Mack, New York 
*Mrs. M. D. Maclean, New York. 
•Mr. John E. Mllholland, New York. 
Rev. Horace G. Miller, New York. 
Mrs. Max Morgenthau, Jr., New York. 
Mr. James F. Morton, Jr., New York. 
Mr, Henry Moskowitz, New York. 
Miss Leonora O'Reilly, New York. 
•Rev. A. Clayton Powell, New York. 
•Mr. Charles Edward Russell, New York. 
Mr. Jacob H. Schiff, New York. 
Prof. E. R. A. Seligman, New York. 
•Dr. Joseph Silverman, New York. 
Mrs. Anna Garlin Spencer, New York. 
•Prof. J. E. Spingarn, New York. 
Mrs. Henry Villard, New York. 
•Miss Lillian D. Wald, New York. 
•Mr. Wm. English Walling, New York. 
*Bishop Alexander Walters, New York. 
Dr. Stephen S. Wise, New York. 
Miss M. R. Lyons, Brooklyn, Ν. Y. 
•Dr. Ο. M. Waller, Brooklyn, Ν. Y. 
Mr. D. Macon Webster. Brooklyn, Ν. Y. 
Mr. Geo. E. Wibecan, Jr., Brooklyn, Ν. Y. 
Mrs. W. H. Talbert, Buffalo. Ν. Y. 
Hon. Thos. M. Osborne, Auburn, Ν. Y. 
•Mr. W. L. Bulkley, Ridgefleld Park, N. J. 
Mr. George W. Crawford, New Haven, Conn. 
Miss Maria Baldwin, Boston, Mass. 
Mr. Francis J. Garrison. Boston, Mass. 
Mr. Archibald H. Grimke, Boston, Mass. 
Miss Adelene Moffat, Boston, Mass. 
•Mr. Albert E. Pillsbury, Boston. Mass. 
Mr. Wm. Munroe Trotter, Boston, Mass. 
Dr. Horace Bumstead, Brookline, Mass, 
Miss Elizabeth C. Carter, New Bedford, Mass. 
Rev. Harvey Johnston, Baltimore, Md. 
Rev. Garnett R. Walter, Baltimore, Md. 
Prest. Chas. T. Thwing. Cleveland, O. 
Mr. Chas. W. Chesnutt, Cleveland, O. 
Hon. Harry C. Smith. Cleveland, O. 
Prest. H. C. Kins, Oberlin, O. 
Prest. W. S. Scarborough, Wilberforce, O. 
•Miss Jane Addams, Chicago, Ill. 
•Mrs. Ida B. Wells Barnett, Chicago, III. 
•Dr. G. E. Bentley, Chicago. Ill. 
Miss Sophronisba Breckenridge, Chicago, Ill. 
Mr. Clarence Darrow, Chicago, III. 
Mr. Julius Rosenwald, Chicago, III. 
Mrs. Celia Parker Woolley. Chicago. Ill. 
Mr. F. L. McGhee. St. Paul, Minn. 
Miss Frances Bartholomew. Philadelphia, Pa. 
•Dr. N. F. Mossell. Philadelphia. Pa. 
•Dr. Wm. A. Sinclair, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Miss Susan Wharton. Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mr. R. R. Wright. Jr., Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mr. W. Justin Carter, Harrisburg. Pa. 
Rev. Harvey Johnson, D. D., Baltimore, Md. 
Hon. Wm. S. Bennet. Washington, D. C. 
Mrs. Carrie W. Clifford, Washington, D. C. 
Mr. L. M. Hershaw, Washington, D. C. 
Prof. Kelly Miller, Washington. D. C. 
Prof. L. B. Moore, Washington, D. C. 
Justice W. P. Stafford, Washington, D. C. 
•Mrs. Mary Church Terrell, Washington, D, C. 
•Rev. J. Milton Waldron, Washington, D. C. 
Prest. John Hope. Atlanta, Ga. 
Mr. Leslie P. Hill, Manassas, Va. 
Mr. William Pickens. Talladega, Ala. 
•Executive Committee. 
OFFICES : 
Suite 311, 20 Vesey Street, New York . TH E FROG S 
Announce Their First Stage Performance and 
Midwinter Ball at 
NE W STA R CASIN O 
107th Street, bet. Lexingto n and Par k Avenue s 
on 
Monday Evening, January 29, 1912 
A t whic h time wil l be presented a scries of allegorica l tableaux wit h musi c 
A One-ac t Comed y wit h Songs. 
A Dramati c Sketc h in Pantomime . 
A Satirica l Burlesque . 
Al l written and acted by Frogs. 
Reserved seats, 50c, 75c, $1; Box seats, $2.50 to $6, not including admission 
Fo r informatio n concernin g advance reservations address 
CORKE R and ROGERS , Advertisement Committee 
Car e of Nai l and Parke r 
145 WES T 135th STREE T NE W YOR K CIT Y 
1
 'That the particular purpose and object of our Society or Club are the promotion of 
social intercourse between the representative members of the Negro Theatrical Profession 
and of those connected directly or indirectly with Art, Literature, Music, of Song, Stories 
or Terpsichorean Art, and Liberal Professions and the patrons of the Arts. The creation of 
a library relating especially to the history of the Negro, and to record all his worthy 
achievements, particularly those pertaining to Arts. The collection and preservation of 
original Folk-Lore, of Pictures, Bills of the Plays in which the Negro has participated ; 
Photographs and Curiosities which might in any way be connected with such History.'' 
TH E DIFFERENC E 
Between "GOOD ENOUGH " and the "BEST " is the 
difference between ordinary print-shop work and ours. 
Ou r facilities and long years of experience give 
our work that INDIVIDUALITY which you appreciate in 
your printed things. 
W e refer you to Mr . Cond é Nast of Vogue and 
Dr. W . Ε . B . D u Bois of TH E CRISIS. 
B y the way, we print TH E CRISIS. D O you like 
it? If so, let us make an estimate on your work. 
ROBERT N . WOOD 20 2 East 99th St., New York 'Phone Lenox 6667 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 