ONE DOLLAR A YEAR \ .'• , TEN CENTS A COPY 
The CRISIS 
Vol. 13-No . 1 NOVEMBER, 1916 Whole No. 73 Publisher's Chat, 
A s is usual with our city numbers—the great amount 
of interesting material relative to Richmond, Va. , and 
the difficulty of completing some important details make s 
it advisable to postpone the RICHMON D NUMBE R until 
January. It will be the better for the waiting. 
Meantime , prepare for our CHRISTMA S NUMBE R 
which we expect to be more interesting than our Christmas numbers of the past; and that is saying much. 
Await TH E CRISIS CALENDA R for 1917. 
A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) $1.0 0 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPH Y OF A N EX-COLORE D MAN . (Anonymous) . 1.2 0 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . (Maud Cuney Hare ) 1.5 0 
A NARRATIV E OF TH E NEGRO. (Leila Amo s Pendleton) 1.5 0 
SOULS OF BLAC K FOLK . (W . E. B. D U Bois) 1.2 5 
TH E WHIT E MAN' S BURDEN . (T . Shirby Hodge ) 1.0 0 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . (B. G. Brawley ) 1.2 5 
HAL F A MAN . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) 1.0 0 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.5 0 
JOH N BROWN . (W . E. B. D U Bois) 1.2 5 
NEGRO I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W . Cromwell) 1.2 5 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W . Crawford ) . . . 1.0 0 
NEGRO CULTURE I N WES T AFRICA . (George W . Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO. (W . E. B. D U Bois) 5 0 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGRO PRIO R TO 1861 . (Carte r G. 
Woodson ) 2.0 0 
FACT S OF RECONSTRUCTION . (John R . Lynch ) 1.5 0 
LIF E AN D LETTERS OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR. (W . C. BerwickSavers) 2.2 5 
MASTERPIECES OF NEGRO ELOQUENCE . (Alic e Moor e Dunbar, 
Editor) 2.5 0 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E. Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T OF TH E HOUS E OF BONDAGE . (Kelly Miller) 1.5 0 
Address, TH E CRISIS , : : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Mention The Crisis TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE, A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducted by 
W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, Business Manage r 
Contents Copyrighted, 1916, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for November, 1916 
PICTURES Page 
COVER. Photograph From Life. By F. H. Cloud 
MEN OF THE MONTH 20 
MR. HUGHES AT NASHVILLE, TENN 34 
ARTICLE S 
THE COLORED CITIZEN OF PUERTO RICO. By Hallie E. Queen 13 
THE LOVELY LADY. A Story. By M. E. Lee 14 
THE CALL. A Poem. By Will N. Johnson 15 
MATE. A Poem. By G. Douglas Johnson 36 
DEPARTMENT S 
EDITORIAL 9 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED 
PEOPLE 16 
MEN OF THE MONTH 19 
THE LOOKING GLASS 22 
THE HORIZON 28 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Whe n a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. . -
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York. N. Y. 4 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Address to the Colored Voters 
by the 
COLORED ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
of the 
REPUBLICAN NATIONAL COMMITTEE 
Adopted in New York on 
October 6, 1916 
The Committee of Colored Citizens selected from the 
country at large as Advisory to the Republican National Committee having met this day in New York City and desiring to 
express to the colored voters of the country the necessity for 
supporting the Republican Party candidates for President, 
Vice-President, Senate and House of Representatives addresses this letter to the colored voters of the country whose 
duty it is to register in order that they may perform their duty 
to the country in this National crisis. 
This is the Presidential year. The time has come to hold 
the Wilson Administration and the Democratic Party to a 
"strict accountability," Are you ready for the fight? Or do 
you desire four years more of what the New York World 
calls the "Jim Crow Government at Washington"? No campaign since that for the second election of Abraham Lincoln 
has been more vital to the liberty and happiness of the 
10,000,000 of colored citizens than is the present campaign 
for the election of Charles Evans Hughes for President, and 
a Republican Congress. 
Four years ago a considerable number of the race helped 
to elect a Democratic president. This was done under fair THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 5 
promises of just treatment, "not grudgingly given but in generous fashion." The result has shown the experiment to have 
been the utmost political folly and race-suicide, and has shown 
that the Democratic party cannot be trusted to deal fairly with 
our race in this country. The votes of the men of color for the 
Democratic candidates for President were obtained by fine 
phrases and false pretenses. No sooner had the Democratic 
Administration come into power than Mr. Wilson and his advisors entered upon a policy to eliminate all colored citizens 
from representation in the Federal Government. The offices 
of Assistant Attorney General, Recorder of Deeds, Register 
of the U. S. Treasury, Auditor for the Navy, Minister to 
Hayti, Collectorships of Internal Revenue in New York, 
Florida, and Hawaii, were vacated and filled by white Democrats. There were no "deserving Colored Democrats" to be 
found in the country. Not only did the Administration proceed to demote and eliminate the Negro from the Civil Service 
of the United States by scores, and to segregate those remaining in the service, but also to make impossible further appointments by requiring the race of the applicant to be shown by 
his photograph. 
The Administration was "too proud to fight" Mexico but 
did not hesitate to conquer the Black Republic of Hayti and 
Santo Domingo. There was one policy of International justice 
for Mexico and another one for the Negro Republics to the 
south of us. The President has expressed himself as in sympathy with the "enslaved men and women of Mexico," but 
has found no words of sympathy for the Colored citizens of 
America. "The New Freedom" does not include the Negro. 
"Humanity" for which the President has expressed such great 
love, does not include the Colored Race. The President said 
in a notable address that "the man who seeks to divide man 
from man, group from group, and interest from interest is striking at the very heart of America." No man has done so much 
since Emancipation to separate and divide the Nation into 6 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
groups, and to eliminate the Colored Race as a representative 
group of Americans, as has the President himself. 
Colored men, we must arise! Those who vote and those 
entitled to vote must strike for their liberties. This is a campaign for the restoration of the rights, privileges and immunities 
that we have heretofore enjoyed under a Republican Administration of the National Government. Four years more of President Wilson will mean our complete elimination from American politics. We submit that the man who is ready to die for 
his country at Carrizal is good enough to serve his country at 
Washington; and that the man who is fit to be buried in the 
National Cemetery at Arlington, is fit to serve his country in 
the Capitol of the Nation. 
The Republican candidate for President, Charles Evans 
Hughes, has shown himself to be a man of highest character 
and of absolute sincerity in his devotion to the cause of liberty, 
justice, and humanity, and when he is elected President of the 
United States, we may confidently expect from him a square 
deal and complete protection in all our sacred rights as citizens, 
and the full enjoyment of the opportunities to which we are 
justly entitled, under the Constitution and Laws of our Country. 
SIGNED: 
Charles W. Anderson, of N. Y. 
William H. Lewis, of Mass. 
William Oscar Payne, of N. Y. 
Andrew F. Stevens, of Pa. 
W. Justin Carter, of Pa. 
Charles A. Cottrill, of Ohio. 
William P. Dabney, of Ohio. 
Harry S. Cummings, of Md. 
Charles Colburn, of Del. 
Philip Waters, of W. Va. 
Whitfield McKinlay, of D. C. 
James A. Cobb, of D. C. 
Charles Pickett, of D. C. 
R. R. Church, Jr., of Tenn. 
Fred R. Moore, of N. Y . 
W. C. Matthews, of Mass. 
Rev. Richard M. Bolden, of N. Y. 
Junius M. Green, of N. Y. 
Gilchrist Stewart, of N. Y. 
Harry G. Tolliver, of Conn. 
Rev. Ernest Lyon, of Md. 
J. C. Napier, of Tenn. 
A. A. Felding, of Tenn. 
Henry Lincoln Johnson, of Ga. 
Benjamin J. Davis, of Ga. 
Perry W. Howard, of Miss. 
Joseph E. Lee, of Fla. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER ? 
SPEECH 
of 
CHARLE S E. HUGHE S 
Delivered at 
Bethel A. M. E. Church, New York City 
NOVEMBER 6, 1906 
Mr . Anderson , Ladie s an d Gentlemen : 
It is a grea t satisfactio n fo r m e to b e abl e to be wit h yo u 
tonight . 
Forty years ago we had a great crisis in this country—a 
little more than forty years ago—and to preserve the Union 
we poured out our money, our treasure and the lives of many 
of our best citizens. W e desired to have equality before the 
law. W e desired to have the benefits of free institutions extended to all those that were just as much entitled to them as 
those that already enjoyed them. 
No one knows better than you how important it is that 
appeals to passion should not subvert the judgment. No one 
knows better than you that in dealing with those who are 
guilty we should proceed according to due process of law. W e 
want the spirit of fairness always to prevail. 
W e don't want any lynch law in this country. W e don't 
want any lynch law in criticism. W e don't want any lynch 
law in newspapers. W e don't want any lynch law, or the 
spirit that manifests itself in lynch law, anywhere. 
I stand for equality before the law. I STAN D EVE R 
AGAINS T UNJUST DISCRIMINATIO N AGAINS T AN Y 
MA N O N ACCOUN T O F HI S COLO R O R O N ACCOUN T 
O F HI S RAC E O R O N ACCOUN T O F ANYTHING . 
W e are all together in this country working out our salvation under the greatest plan of self-government that the world 8 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
has ever seen. It was founded for the purpose of equalizing 
opportunity. Its foundation principle is that all men stand 
before the laws as citizens with equal rights and equal opportunities, and with an equal chance to get the rewards of industry and integrity, with equal chance to win the reputation that 
is due to manhood and honor and decency in life and honor in 
all the activities of life. 
W e revere the memory of that great man who, in silent 
fortitude, bore his burden, who was content always to be 
right, careless alike of praise or of blame, who was more 
anxious to be just than to be famous, who was more anxious 
to be fair than to hold office, and through all his life breathed 
the intense desire to give liberty, to give freedom, and in all 
that he did to answer with his conscience in the presence of 
the God who gave it to him. 
W e canno t hav e to o muc h o f tha t spirit in ou r America n 
life, an d w e canno t condem n to o strongl y the misus e o f tha t 
appeal. 
I want you to know, my friends, that if I am elected Governor, I will be your Governor, the Governor of every one of 
you. I want to see that you have, every one of you, a square 
deal. I want every one of you to be protected in your sacred 
rights as citizens, and have the opportunity that you are justly 
entitled to have in this great commonwealth. An d I wan t yo u 
to know , whethe r yo u ar e Republican s o r whethe r yo u ar e 
Democrats, whateve r you r allegianc e ma y hav e been , tha t I 
stan d her e wit h n o othe r ambitio n bu t t o serv e th e peopl e o f 
the stal e an d be the Governo r o f all, irrespectiv e o f race , colo r 
o r party. " 
EVERY COLORED MA N 
Should Endorse these Lofty Sentiments by 
VOTING FOR 
CHARLES EVANS HUGHES 
and the Entire Republican Ticket TH E CRISI S 
Vol. 13—No. 1 NOVEMBER, 1916 Whole No. 73 
Editoria l 
APPROVAL 
I WRIT E to say that I cordially 
approve the position that you 
have taken in the last numbe r 
o f TH E CRISI S in regard to the 
political attitude which colored men 
and their friends must take. It 
seems to me exactly right. I thought 
it wa s an extremely good number. 
Yours truly, 
MOORFIELD STOREY. 
th e worl d las t mont h 
THE sale o f the Danish West Indies, full as they are of color 
problems and calculated to 
intensify the one problem to 
which the United States gives no attention and in which it exercises no 
commo n sense, has not yet been consummated. It will, however, probably come—not on account of the 
wish o f Denmark, but on account of 
her weakness. Then we shall welcome some 40,000 mor e colored comrades to help us in the fight fo r freedom. The strikes which have threatened and eventuated recently are the 
attempts o f the workin g class to gain 
a larger share o f the results o f industry. The y are perfectly justified. 
Modern industry has been built on 
the theft o f the products o f labor b y 
a system which gives to the rich man 
and the leading gamble r a ridiculously disproportionate share of the 
world's income. These strikes are 
coming no w because o f the rapid increase in the cost o f living and the 
expanding demand fo r labor in the 
piling up o f world wealth. Pity it is 
that colored laborers are not mor e 
largely members of unions and have 
not learned mor e thoroughly the 
strike philosophy. W e see, happily, 
our sister, Mexico, made up o f people 
o f mingled Spanish, Indian and Ne ­
gro blood, free, at least temporarily, 
from the menace o f war. Greedy 
American and European investors 
have for decades fattened on her 
mines, her industries and her peons. 
Th e Revolution was an awful effort 
to get rid o f these parasites and other 
beasts of prey of native growth. Our 
every effort should be bent toward 
giving Mexico freedom for her new 
development. The campaign primaries bring out the Southern oligarchial rule. In the North primaries are 
for the nomination of party candidates ; in the South they are fo r the 
election o f State officers. In the 
North they have been conducted on 
the whole with freedom and fairness; 
in the South they are conducted with 
fraud and unfairness; yet the South 
rules the Nation. The Great Wa r 
totters to its close—not that the close 
is necessarily near; it may be a year 
or two years off—but it is in sight. 
The nation that wantonly precipitated it is going to be beaten. W e follow then with tense interest the 
blood drama on the Somme, the Styr 
and the Danube. Those wh o would 
read further o f these events should 
note Slosson's article on the "Danish 
West Indies" in the Independent and 
Dabney's article on Mexico in the 
Outlook. Beyond these they may 
study "America n Labor Unions " 
with Helen Marot, and above all read 
Boudin's "Socialism and War. " 10 THE CRISIS 
THE TERRIBLE GOOD 
IT is not the sins o f the wicked 
that make life's worst tragedy 
—it is the deeds o f the good . 
Her e is a case in point: The 
"Birth o f a Nation" is the worst public libel ever perpetrated. It has been 
outlawed by governors, exorcised by 
mayors and damned by all rightthinking people. 
An d yet! 
The Y . M. C . A. — the Youn g Men's 
CHRISTIA N Association — is today 
promoting it in Panama as a moneymaking scheme ; and Hampton Institute has not hesitated to use this 
vile and unspeakable libel on ten 
millions o f Negroe s as a means o f 
cheap advertising! 
Hampton, Tom Dixon and the Y . 
M. C . A. ! Good Lord ! 
JOSIAH ROYCE 
IN the death of the great teacher, Josiah Royce , at Harvard University, the Negr o race in 
Americ a and indeed all races 
lose a fine-fibered friend. His book, 
"Rac e Questions and Other American 
Problems, " published in 1908, should 
be in every black man's library. He 
writes in this wise : 
"Dead men not only tell no tales; 
they also, strange to say, attend no 
schools and learn no lessons. An d 
hereby they prove themselves in the 
eyes of certain students of race questions to have been always o f a much 
lower mental type than the cultivated 
men wh o killed them. Their surviving descendants, if sufficiently provided with the means o f corruption 
and if sufficiently down-trodden, may 
remain henceforth models o f degradation. Fo r man, whatever his race, 
is an animal that you unquestionably 
can debase to whatever level you 
please, if you have powe r and if you 
then begin early enough and devote 
yourself persistently enough to the 
noble and civilized task o f proving 
him to be debased. 
"I doubt not, then, that some races 
are mor e teachable than others. But 
I do ver y much doubt our powe r to 
estimate how teachable a rac e is, or 
wha t can be made o f them, or wha t 
hereditary mental powers they have 
until w e have given them centuries o f 
opportunity to be taught. Fortune 
and the defects of the Roma n Empire gave to the Germani c peoples an 
extraordinary opportunity to learn. 
So the world found out ho w teachable 
they were . Let their descendants not 
boast unduly until they, too, have 
given to other races not indeed the 
opportunities o f conquerors, but some 
equal opportunity to show o f wha t 
sort o f manhood they are capable. " 
Ho w clear and just is this reasoning and yet ho w seldom it is applied. 
Fo r instance, at Columbia's opening 
Professor Seligman speaks o f the 
wa y in whic h the University must 
stand fo r intellectual freedom: 
"Intellectual freedom means liberation from superstition and all the 
primitive manifestations o f mental 
enslavement. The Universit y 
achieves the mastery o f the mind 
ove r matter, o f man ove r nature. 
Next is mastery ove r one's self. T o 
achieve this victory w e need to strike 
off the fetters o f prejudice, the bonds 
o f convention and above all, the 
shackles o f sentiment. Th e University, through the liberation o f the 
intellect, is humanizing mankind. " 
An d yet strenuous effort ha s been 
made at Columbia and elsewhere not 
only to deprive colored men o f University training, but to keep them 
from developing their own Universities. The y have been solemnly 
preached to and urged to be servants. 
But when a white woma n write s to 
the Ne w Yor k Journal and asks about 
house servants wha t does the Journal 
say ? It says wha t every whit e man 
knows is true and just as true o f 
black people as o f whit e people : 
"Remembe r that domestic service 
is slavery. Lack o f appreciation, EDITORIAL 11 
lack o f good manners on the part o f 
employers, makes it often a very unpleasant kind o f slavery. No woma n 
enters domestic service if she can 
help it, as a rule. An d at present 
almost any woma n can help it." 
SCIENTISTS 
ONE o f the extraordinary 
things about many American 
men o f science and the thing 
that has brought them in disrepute among scientists o f the world 
is the ease with which they profess 
to talk about matters o f which in the 
nature o f the case they know nothing. 
Dr. Wood s Hutchinson, fo r instance, 
ma y be, as the New Yor k Journal 
modestly puts it, the "world's fore ­
most write r on medical subjects. " A t 
any rate, he takes a day off to write 
on the Negr o problem. Wha t does 
he know about it ? Nothing. Ho w 
much contact has he had with Ne ­
groe s outside o f a few servants wh o 
have waited on him? None . Wha t 
does he know about the inner currents o f feeling, thought and striving 
among these ten million human beings ? Not a thing. But do these 
facts deter Dr. Hutchinson? No t a 
bit. He tells us in two columns just 
wha t has been happening in the race 
fo r the last fifty years; just what 
Negroe s have been thinking o f and 
doing. They frankly and readily 
admit, he says jauntily, that they 
"cannot as yet compete on equal 
terms in the arena o f civilized life 
with the white race. They are but a 
child-race b y contrast—only half a 
century from slavery and scarcely 
two centuries from savagery—but 
like a child-race they are growing. 
The y have the future befor e them 
and they are willing to wait and let 
the next hundred or two hundred or 
three hundred years decide the question o f wha t their real racial worth 
and possibilities are." 
It ma y be said without a moment's 
hesitation that this is not the attitude 
o f the Negr o race in America—neve r 
has been and never will be—and that 
for Dr. Hutchinson or for anyone else 
to spread such balderdash among the 
white public is simply to deceive 
them. It is peculiarly indefensible 
when he writes ostensibly as a scientist with knowledge o f his subject. 
SOUTHERN CIVILIZATION 
THE new Encyclopedia Britannica has listed the States of 
the Union according to the 
numbe r o f sets o f that monumental wor k which have been sold in 
proportion to population. Wher e is 
the South in this list? Wher e would 
you expect it to be ? A t the end, o f 
course, with Mr. Vardaman's State 
leading the rear and Mr. Tillman's 
State next to it and Georgia, Ala ­
bama and Texas, o f lynching fame, 
ranking close to the end. This is not 
only the natural fruit o f slavery; it is 
the fruit o f present political and 
legal conditions in the South. W e 
have it out o f the South's own 
mouth. The Macon Telegraph writes 
o f the recent Primary in Georgia : 
"The 'red shirt' days in South Carolina ; the rottenest days during the 
period o f the Hambur g riot; the 
slime o f the most nauseating politics 
ever known in Georgia—none o f it 
even nearly borders on to the method 
o f campaigning now going on in behalf o f Hugh M. Dorsey. " 
The Primary in South Carolina 
wa s just as bad if not worse . It is 
this kind o f oligarchy that the South 
wants perpetuated; it is fo r this reason that the Southern women in the 
Suffrage convention at Atlantic City 
wer e so strenuously opposed to a 
National Suffrage Amendment. Suffrage based on National law will 
eventually be enforced by the National Government; but Suffrage 
based on Georgia law will be enforced 
as Georgia is now enforcing it. Ye t 
the Northern women in the Suffrage 
convention wer e blind as bats as to 12 THE CRISIS 
the real animus behind the fight o f 
Laura Clay and Kate Gordon. The 
woman correspondent of the New Republic grows enthusiastic, shrill and 
almost inarticulate ove r one o f them: 
"W e gloried in her. W e revelled 
in her! " 
Of course we did, and if some poor, 
old black woman, disfranchised and 
deprived of her rightful support by 
a lyncher's mo b which had made a 
mistake, had happened into that convention "we " would not have "glo ­
ried" or "revelled" in her. W e would 
have passed the hat and told her to 
go home and not agitate fo r the "Impossible. " 
MR. HUGHES 
WE are sorry that Mr. Charles 
Evan s Hughe s has not found 
opportunity to answer the courteous 
and pertinent letter printed on page 
16 and sent him nearly a month ago. 
W e are told by Mr. Herbert Parsons, 
o f the Republican National Committee, that the failure to answe r wa s not 
intentional no r significant. Mr. John 
E. Milholland, a staunch friend o f the 
Negro, also assures us that Mr. 
Hughes' attitude is right on every 
question raised in our letter. 
All this is gratifying, but it is not 
sufficient. W e want to say a last 
wor d to the leaders o f the Republican 
party ; if anyone thinks that the Re ­
publicans have 500,000 Negr o votes 
in their pockets they have some mor e 
thinking to do. 
No intelligent Negro can vote for 
Woodrow Wilson, but he can vote fo r 
Allan L. Benson or H E CA N STAY 
HOM E on election day, unless Mr. 
Hughe s satisfies him by some statement more specific than the Nashville speech and more recent than the 
speech o f ten years ago. 
Underwood and Underwood. 
GOVERNO R WHITMA N RECEIVE S TH E FIRST COLORE D REGIMEN T INT O TH E NE W YORK 
NATIONA L GUARD . TH E COLORE D CITIZE N O F PUERT O RIC O 
By HALLI E E. QUEE N 
THE waters of the Caribbean Sea flow 
gently into Mona Passage and thus 
are led into the Atlantic Ocean, passing at 
this point by the beautiful Island of Borinquen, or Puerto Rico as it is now called. 
Should a steamer passenger find himself 
weary at this point he might drop off at 
one of the landlocked harbors or open roadsteads which Nature has formed at various 
points on the coast. Be he decent and respectable he is sure of a welcome, the nature 
of which will not be measured by the color 
of his skin. 
On the western coast of the Island is situated the beautiful town of Aguadilla, where 
Columbus, on his second voyage (1493) 
stopped to get water. Here we would be 
glad to welcome the stranger and some of 
our High School youths would be happy to 
show him the city. 
Come first into our school. The first free 
school in Puerto Rico was opened by Maestro 
Rafael Cordero, a Negro cigar maker, for 
whom a street in the capital is now named. 
The American traveler will be struck with 
the various physical types of the students. 
He will surely find, in one room, every class 
that he would discover in the United States 
should he travel from East to West and from 
North to South. One of the finest teachers 
on the Island, Senorita Carmen Gomez Tejera, is a colored girl. She has the record 
of holding the highest average ever made 
by any student of the Insular Normal School 
since that institution was established. One 
of my own students, Candelario Calor, also 
colored, has one of the best developed brains 
with which I have come in contact. He works 
side by side with other types of students who 
admire and praise him without once referring to his color. 
The Spanish explorers found the island 
populated by Indians. The only Spaniards 
who came were men and they formed unions 
with the Indian women, producing a Spanish-Indian mixed race. On the tenth of September, 1518, Don Lorenzo Gorrebad was 
given the privilege of introducing 4,000 
Africans into the Antilles for the purpose of 
slavery. Many of these came to Puerto Rico. 
New unions were formed between the Spaniards and Africans, Indians and Africans 
and Indian mulattoes and African mulattoes. 
The results of these mixtures are the Puertoricans of to-day. Brown hair and white 
face, red skin and black locks, mulatto and 
Negro types and even, though rarely, blue 
eyes and golden hair are seen. 
Wha t sad problems would arise among 
these people did they live in this, the white 
man's country. But not so here. Society 
easily divides itself into two classes called 
"first" and "second" (never "white" and 
"colored"). 
The first group consists of persons whose 
positions keep them out of the artisan work. 
That is, they are the law makers, physicians, 
teachers, engineers and other professional 
people. The second class consists of barbers, 
tailors, tobacco workers, hat makers and 
other artisans. These are the two classes of 
good society. Below them is a class called 
"the poor people," which consists of everything from servants to beggars, and no account is taken of color. Within it there is a 
picturesque group of pure African blacks 
who will not marry outside of their own 
ranks and who retain the songs and symbolic dances of their native land. 
Between the first and second classes there 
is but one line drawn. Each class has its 
own casino or hall in which its balls are 
given and to which only its own members 
are invited. In every other point of social 
contact these two classes are equal. In 
friendships, schools, theatres, hotels and 
even in secret societies the line breaks down. 
Some of the most eminent citizens of Puerto 
Rico have been and are men of color and it 
is difficult to find any statistics on this subject, as a man's race is seldom mentioned. 
Dr. Jose C. Barbosa, a member of the 
Executive Council and close to the governor 
in politics, is a colored man. Don Eugenio 
Lopez Sanchez, Chief of the Federation of 
Labor, was a Negro. Don Jose Madero, 
Government Engineer; Dr. Zaratt, Public 
Health Inspector; Gaetan Barbosa, ExMayor of Bayamon, and many others, are 
certainly colored men. 
A t least two colored Americans, whom I 
know personally, are making excellent records on the Island—one in law, the other in 
dentistry. 
13 14 THE CRISIS 
After the Indian slaves were freed in 
Puerto Rico, Negro slavery existed until on 
March 22, 1873, the Spanish Republic, by 
unanimous vote, abolished all slavery in 
Puerto Rico. This freed 34,000 Negroes. 
Yes, really freed them, for the Negro of 
Puerto Rico, with forty years of freedom, is 
a man in possession of all the rights of the 
Spanish descendant who sits beside him in 
the Legislative Assembly. 
So often, since I have been on the Island, 
have I wondered what and why is prejudice? 
I have met Americans from Texas, Alabama 
and North Carolina as well as from Maine 
and Massachusetts. They all seem to have 
forgotten Colorphobia and are kind, broad 
and courteous. This may be due to the lofty 
spirit of Governor George Colton, and even 
more, to that of former Commissioner of 
Education, Edwin Grant Dexter, than 
whom a truer nobleman never lived. 
And now we bid the traveler farewell, but 
always with a hearty wish that he come 
again. It may be worth his while, when in 
his country of storm and stress of racial 
hatreds, to remember that just across the 
ocean the American flag floats over a little 
Island whose palm trees shade free men. 
There never a murderous rope has been 
coiled, nor a Jim Crow sign hung, nor a 
door of opportunity closed to a man because 
his face was black. 
TH E LOVEL Y LAD Y 
By M. E. LEE 
WE had a sort of little Venice there all 
to ourselves. Off Tradd one went 
down slope to the edge of Greenhill street 
and there came upon our place, a white 
cottage pushing its slim dock into the Ashley River. 
The narrow dock served as our back 
porch and we often sat there in the halfgold December sun, watching streamers of 
light shifting about on the brownish river. 
Or, when the tide was low, we would look 
down upon stilted sandpipers that shot 
about the soggy mouse-colored sands. Once, 
I remember, two particularly large buzzards flew languidly over our heads. Then 
Peter was ready with his everlasting folk 
tale. 
Little boy Peter! I can see him well: 
brown legs dangling against the palmetto 
stakes, round eyes gazing up. "Yo u know, 
mum"—"mum" always, for in that narrow 
strip called Charleston both vowels and 
piazzas are broad. "Yo u know, mum, Mistah Buzza'd he goin' to fin' somethin', fo ' 
truth, mum. Then when those two tucky 
buzza'ds fin' somethin' they go back awn 
get the king of the tucky buzza'ds, mum. 
Awn he come with all the hundred otha buzza'ds. But they don't touch anything till 
King Tucky Buzza'd pick out the whatevah 
it is eye. Then he fly off awn leave all the 
otha's to eat." 
Peter's self-importance sometimes wearied 
me, so I looked up now at the white polar 
bears in the sky and pretended not to hear 
the small boy at my side. Persistent Peter, 
however, was not easily discouraged. Fo r a 
moment he studied my face, then dangled 
his feet with increased velocity and tossed 
his small head and crowed: 
"Tucky Buzza'd, Tucky Buzza'd, len' me you' 
wing, 
Fly across da rivah to see Sallie King. 
Tucky Buzza'd, Tucky Buzza'd, len' me you' 
wing, 
Fly across da rivah to get my gol' ring! " 
"Wher e on earth did you get that song, 
Peter Wall? " I was about to ask in spite of 
myself when a thin voice piped, as if out of 
the water, "O , Petah, sing the little song 
again. Go on. " 
I turned and in a minute saw a tall white 
woman, lank as a ferret and bent like a 
German cutlass, complacently watching us 
over a tiny gate. 
You could scarcely be brought to appreciate the arrangement of this gateway unless 
you had seen Peter's godmother's place. 
Part of the palmetto-staked dock prolonged 
itself a trifle after reaching land to become 
an end of Godmother Wall's back porch. A t 
the gate partitioning the dock from the 
porch Mrs. Case, our white visitor, was halting. 
"Sing the song again, Petah." 
My small companion was all diffidence and 
graciously responded to his encore b y chirping that nonsense song about the "buzzad's" THE CALL 15 
while I looked to see how our caller was 
taking it. She was receiving it on paper, 
scratching away eagerly. 
"No w then, Petah," said she at last, 
"what's that otha' one you sang in front of 
my house yestahday? You know." 
Aye ! Soon Peter was exultingly rolling 
forth: 
"Brer Rabbit, what ah you to do-dee? 
To open da oystah fo ' da young ghul. 
De oystah bite off my fingah, 
De young ghul took me fo ' lovah." 
Peter accompanied his serenade with magnificent swagger, shoulder shrugs, working 
of the eyeballs, much as the black oyster 
men—fronting whose verdant little island 
we then sat—must have rendered that same 
selection. Why, Peter had caught the very 
poised arrogance that I could fancy constant 
lording it over her had accustomed the 
oyster man to flaunt before "the young 
ghul." 
Mrs. Case scratched away industriously. 
But I thought in the meantime, "She is missing the richest part of it, Peter's gestures." 
Now the godmother of Peter came out 
and all but courtesied. 
"Oh, Becca, you the very one I want to 
see! " cried our guest with loud condescension. "How does that go about—you know" 
—carelessly—"a—a—'Barkalingo Watermelon,' whatever it is? Let's hear that 
now. " 
Again pencil and paper impatiently 
waited. Stout Rebecca crossed her arms 
before her and complied with sweet grace, 
like the old-fashioned lady she was. 
The song came, mellow as river murmurs. I can see Rebecca Wall there now, 
standing before her small bower of ferns 
and palms and milky jonquils and Mexican 
vines that gleamed in the light, while all 
about her, but in her eyes more than elsewhere, shone the gold sun. How good and 
strong and beautiful was cinnamon-brown 
Rebecca. 
"All right," said Mrs. Case without glancing from her manuscript. "Know any moah, 
do you? You know, I'm writing a book all 
about you Chawleston colored people's 
songs and you got to help me out, Becca, 
like a good girl." 
Rebecca said she would be only "too 
proud" to do so. When her visitor called for 
more she gave the dance song that Negroes 
once sang in the moonlight in Battery Park 
before they were compelled to retire to the 
Mall. She again complied without show of 
weariness or ill-feeling and sang "Toolieloo " so sweetly. 
Mrs. Case had filled perhaps a dozen pages 
in her note book and now she glanced up 
to say, "Thanks " and "That all?" 
Rebecca, smiling ruefully, replied that she 
feared it was. 
"Now, if you should evah want any of my 
rose clipping, Becca, why you know just 
where to get them. Good-bye." And off 
marched the interviewer through our porch 
and up the slope. 
"That is a very lovely lady," smiled Rebecca, returning from an attempted escorting. "So good to colored people." 
Rebecca's glance was perhaps following 
the figure of Mrs. Case up the slope, but at 
the words "lovely lady" my eyes had been 
satisfied to seek no further than the kindly 
face before me. In its patient optimism 
was loveliness enough for me. 
TH E CAL L 
By WIL L N. JOHNSON 
OH! the summer is soft and the breezes 
blow 
Where my ship rides over the sea, 
And the gulls still eagerly lead I know, 
For my Love is Calling to me. 
Oh! the mist envelops my wine-spent years, 
And the ship of my hope goes down; 
But my soul sails on thru the sea of tears 
Where my Love's sad Callings sound. National Association for the Ad 
vancement of Colored People 
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE ANTI-LYNCHING FUND 
August 5 to October 5, 1916 
Receipts to August 4 previously announced—$7,260.93 
BRANCHES — 
Pittsburgh $170.00 
Boston—Proceeds of dances 
given by Committee of 
Twenty-seven, Mrs. Butler R. Wilson, chairman. $110.00 
Miscellaneous 17.00 
127.00 
Des Moines, Ia 80.00 
Northern California 78.25 
Kansas Citv, Kan 76.00 
Cleveland, O 66.70 
Topeka. Kan 61.00 
Muskogee, Okla 61.31 
Toledo, O 50.00 
Decatur, Ill 49.00 
St. Paul. Minn 41.00 
Springfield, Ill 41.00 
Louisville, Ky 38.75 
Philadelphia, Pa 36.S3 
Wilmington, Del 35.00 
El Paso, Te x 34.50 
Providence, R. I 33.00 
Albuquerque, N. M 32.00 
Terre Haute, Ind 31.20 
Los Angeles, Cal 30.00 
Columbus, O 27.50 
Buffalo, N. Y 27.50 
E. St. Louis, Ill 25.00 
Danville, Ill 24.25 
Gary, Ind 23.55 
Harrisburg, Pa 21.00 
Cincinnati, O 18.30 
St. Joseph, Mo 15.00 
Total $1,351.64 
FRO M OTHE R COLORE D GROUPS — 
Lieut.-Col. Charles Young— 
Tenth Cavalry $208.25 
Twenty-fourth Infantry. 392.60 
$600. S5 
Kansas City. Mo. , anti-lynching 
meetings - - - 1S5.35 
Washington, D. C . anti-lynching 
meetings 142.75 
National Association of Colored 
Wome n 100.00 
Charleston, S. C , Anti-Lynching 
Committee, Miss Sadie E. Conyers, Sec'y 84.35 
Oklahoma City, Okla, anti-lynching meetings 67.50 
Brockton, Mass., contributions— 
Tames E. Atus, collector 65.5 0 
Ft. Gibson, Okla., contributions— 
James D. Evans, collector 57.00 
Masonic Grand Lodge of Kentucky 53.00 Credited 
Ohio District Grand Lodge No. 24, 
G. U. O. of O. F.. Springfield.. 50.00 
Okmulgee, Okla., anti-lynching 
meeting 44.0 0 
Second Baptist Church. Mumford, 
N. Y 43.2 5 
Boley, Okla.. anti-lynching meeting 42.00 
Great Falls, Mont., contributions— 
Oscar S. McFarlin. collector... 10.50 
Pennsylvania State Federation of 
Colored Women's Clubs 40.00 
Northeastern Federation of Colored 
Women's Clubs 32.33 
Bristol, Va. , contributions —Wm . 
H. Brown, collector 28.10 
Tremont Temple Baptist Church, 
E. St. Louis, Ill 25.00 Credited 
Trinity A. M. E. Church. Baltimore. Md 24.50 
Springfield, Mass., contributions— 
W . B. Jones, collector 23.12 
Pingree Lodge No. 1, K. of P. Detroit, Mich .-• 24.00 Credited 
Annapolis, Md. , Volunteer Association . . ! 22.50 
Central Club, Youngstown, O 20.00 
Contributions through The Guardian, Boston, Mass 20.00 
Guthrie, Okla., anti-lvnching meeting 20.00 
Tulsa, Okla., anti-lynching meeting. 18.50 
Historical and Literary Society of 
Bethel A. M. E. Church, NewBedford, Mass • 17.60 
Colored Progressive Ass'n of Win ­
nipeg, Can 16.00 
Eufaula, Okla., anti-lynching meeting 15-00 
St. John's Baptist Church-of Wo -
burn, Mass 14.20 
Contributions through The Monitor, 
Omaha, Neb 13.00 
Contributions through The Jesse 
Goode Real Estate Company, 
Boston, Mass 12.50 
Masonic Grand Lodge of Maryland 12.30 
A. M. E. Church, Lynn, Mass 12.00 
Total $1,884.72 
INDIVIDUA L CONTRIBUTIONS — 
Albert E. Pillsburv, Boston 100.00 
Walte r E. Sachs, New York 50.00 
W . C. Gannett, Cambridge 30.00 
Anonymous, Boston 25.00 
Gov. R. L. Beekman. Providence 25.00 Credited 
Rev. Hutchins C. Bishop, New 
York 25.00 
E. Hegstrom, Chicago 25.00 
Bishop John Hurst, Baltimore ... . 25.00 
Mrs. W . E. Josenberger, Ft. Smith, 
Ark 25.00 
V. E. Macy. New York 25.00 
Thomas S. Perry, Esq., Boston . . 25.00 
J. J. Jennings, Austin, Tex 22.00 
Miss Margaret Fawcus, South Africa 15.00 
Total 392.00 
Miscellaneous Contributions 373.42 
Grand Total $11,265.71 
All unpaid pledges to this fund are immediately payable and the Directors of the National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People are very anxious to have 
these items paid at the earliest possible date 
without requiring the Association to incur 
the expense of further reminders. 
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 
THE following letter was sent to Honorable Charles Evans Hughes, September 28, 1916: 
Sir: 
As an organization representing the Negro race and thousands of its friends we 
are deeply interested in the presidential 
election 
16 N. A. A. C. P. 17 
During the last campaign, believing firmly that the Republican Party and its leaders 
had systematically betrayed the interests of 
colored people, many of our members did 
.what they could to turn the colored vote 
toward Mr. Wilson. We received from him 
a promise of justice and sincere endeavor 
to forward their interests. We need scarcely to say that Mr. Wilson grievously disappointed us. 
We find ourselves again facing a presidential campaign with but indifferent 
choice. We have waited for some time to 
gather from your writings and speeches 
something of your attitude toward the colored people. We have seen little. We are 
told, of course, in general that you have no 
race policy and propose to treat all Americans squarely. If Negroes were Americans 
—if they had a reasonable degree of rights 
and privileges we could ask no more than 
this; but being as they are, members of a 
segregated class and struggling against tremendous prejudices, disabilities and odds, 
we must for their own salvation and the 
salvation of our country ask for more than 
such treatment as is today fair for other 
races. W e must continually demand such 
positive action as will do away with their 
disabilities. Lynching is a national evil of 
which Negroes are the chief victims. It is 
perhaps the greatest disgrace from which 
this country suffers, and yet we find you 
and other men of influence silent in the matter. A republic must be based upon universal suffrage or it is not a republic; and 
yet, while you seem anxious to do justice 
toward women, we hear scarcely a word 
concerning those disfranchised masses of 
the South whose stolen votes are used to 
make Rotten Boroughs of a third of the nation and thus distort and ruin the just distribution of political power. Caste restrictions, fatal to Christian civilization and 
modern conceptions of decency, are slowly, 
but forcibly, entering this land and making 
black folk the chief victims. There should 
be outspoken protest against segregation 
by race in the civil service, caste in public 
travel and in other public accommodations. 
As Negroes and as their friends; as 
Americans; as persons whose fathers have 
striven for the good of this land and who 
ourselves have tried unselfishly to make 
America the land of just ideals, we write 
to ask if you do not think it possible to 
make to the colored and white people of 
America some statement of your attitude 
toward this grievous problem such as will 
allow us at least to vote with intelligence. 
It seems to us that we have a right to 
know your attitude toward lynching, disfranchisement, caste and race hatred, and 
that without this knowledge it will be impossible for us to cast a discriminating vote. 
We are especially anxious to know how far 
the possession of a dark face or a drop 
of Negro blood will in your administration 
act as a bar to appointment to office and 
how far the inherited prejudice of many 
Americans shall veto the rights and civil 
privileges of others. 
We trust, Sir, that you will not regard 
this statement and request as beyond the 
courtesy due you or as adding too much 
to the burdens of a public man. 
We beg to remain, Sir, 
Very respectfully yours, 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE. 
(Signed) J. E. SPINGARN, 
Chairman of the Board of Directors. 
(Signed) OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD, 
Treasurer. 
(Signed) W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS, 
Director of Publications and Research. 
(Signed) A. H. GRIMKE, 
President, District of Columbia Branch. 
No answer has been received to the above 
letter except a brief acknowledgment from 
Mr. Hughes' Secretary saying that the letter would be brought to Mr. Hughes' attention. 
THE ATTITUD E OF CANDIDATE S 
IN accordance with the established custom of the N. A. A. C. P. the following letter 
has been sent out: 
TO PROSPECTIV E SENATORS AN D CONGRESSMEN : 
SEPTEMBER 1, 1916. 
Will you, if elected in November, use the power of your office and vote: 
(1)—T o create an effective sentiment in America against lynching? 
(2)—Against all forms of race segregation, particularly as they affect the District of 
Columbia and interstate commerce? THE CRISIS 
(3)__To secure to colored citizens a proportional share in all the benefits of all Federal 
. expenditures, including Federal aid to education? 
(4)—T o secure equal opportunities for qualified colored citizens in public office and 
the public service, including national defense? 
(5)—For reapportioning seats in Congress in accordance with the voting population in 
all sections of the country ? 
(6)—T o suppress peonage by the enforcement of Article XIII of the Constitution? 
(7)—T o repeal all statutory recognition of race for residents of the United States? 
(8)—T o secure absolute equality of accommodation in interstate travel for all citizens? 
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People is asking these 
questions of each candidate for either branch of Congress. Will you kindly return your 
answer to reach New York not later than October 1? Your stand on these Negro questions will be published in our organ, the CRISIS, the most widely circulated Negro publication in America ; and the information will be furnished to the local colored press of 
your state. 
Appreciating the courtesy of an early reply, 
I am, Very truly yours, 
J. E. SPINGARN, 
Chairman of the BoardIt is yet too early for all answers, but we publish those received. / / your Senator 
and Congressman are not here please write us and we will send his. answers as soon as 
received. 
THOS E WH O ANSWE R "RIGHT " 
STATE PARTY DISTRICT NAME 
Iowa 
Iowa 
Iowa 
Kansas 
Kansas 
Kansas 
Kansas 
Kansas 
Kansas 
Kansas 
-Maine 
Maine 
Michigan 
Missouri 
Missouri 
Missouri 
Missouri 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
West Virginia 
West Virginia 
West Virginia 
Wisconsin 
Wisconsin 
Wisconsin 
Wisconsin 
Wisconsin 
Socialist 
Progressive 
Socialist 
Socialist 
Socialist 
Prohibition 
Socialist 
Prohibition 
Republican 
Republican 
Republican 
Prohibition 
Socialist 
Republican 
Republican 
Republican 
Democratic 
Prohibition 
Progressive 
Socialist 
Socialist 
Democratic 
Socialist 
Democratic 
Socialist 
Socialist 
Socialist 
Republican 
Republican 
Republican 
Prohibition 
Socialist 
Prohibition 
Socialist 
Democratic 
Progressive 
Republican 
Republican 
Democratic 
Socialist 
Republican 
Republican 
Social Democratic 
Socialist 
4th 
9th 
8th 
2nd 
3rd 
4th 
5th 
7th 
7th 
Sth 
State-at-large 
Senator 
3rd 
4th 
12th 
13th 
12th 
State-at-large 
State-at-large 
State-at-large 
State-at-large 
8th 
11th 
14th 
16th 
18th 
20th 
20 th 
21st 
23 rd 
24th 
26th 
28th 
29th 
19th 
18th 
5th 
6th 
Senator 
2nd 
6th 
7th 
9th 
Senate 
Bufkin 
Sizer 
James 
Stevens 
Laughlin 
Greene 
Va n Osdol 
Kershner 
Simmons 
Wilson 
Fernald 
Shepherd 
Rogers 
Geiger 
Dyer 
Rhodes 
Gill 
Rummels 
Graham 
Prosscr 
Baer 
Heacock 
Husted 
Brennan 
Koch 
Steincr 
Dehoff 
McCall 
Rowland 
Hop wood 
Smith 
Tillotson 
Rich 
Tursek 
Bailey 
Rupley 
Cooper 
Gobey 
Chilton 
Bauernfeind 
Davidson 
Esch 
Naumann 
Eisner 
(Continued on page 20.) Men of the Month 
THREE BISHOPS 
BISHOP JOSHU A H. JONES was raised 
to the Bench at the General Conference 
of 1912. Since then he has been the object 
of serious attacks which culminated at the 
General Conference in 1916. 
The Episcopal Committee of fifty members took up his case. He was charged with 
"mal-administration, stealing, lying and 
conduct unbecoming a Christian gentleman." 
There were more than twenty specific 
counts. By a vote of 28 to 22 the bishop 
was "found guilty as charged," although 
some of the counts were thrown out. 
Usually the punishment for such a finding is suspension or expulsion; but in this 
case "the committee made a recommendation 
for mercy and the General Conference voted 
that he be reprimanded. He was accordingly reprimanded by the Board of Bishops. 
T H E last General Conference of the A. M. 
E. Zion Church elected five bishops: 
Andrew J. Warner, Lemuel W. Kyles, Robert B. Bruce, George C. Clement and William L. Lee. 
Bishop Lee was formerly a pastor in 
Brooklyn, N. Y., but is now stationed at 
New Orleans and has charge of the Zion 
churches in Mississippi, Louisiana and 
Texas. 
R T. REV. S. D. FERGUSO N died recently in Liberia. 
Bishop Ferguson was born in Charleston, 
S. C , in 1842. When a little boy his parents 
took him to Liberia where he was educated 
in the Mission schools of the Episcopal 
Church. In 1865 he was ordained to the 
diaconate at Cape Palmas, to the priesthood 
at Monrovia in 1866 and consecrated Bishop 
in 1885 in Grace Church in New York City. 
He has been Bishop of the Episcopal Church 
in Liberia for the last thirty-five years and 
his death removes the only colored member 
of the House of Bishops of the Episcopal 
Church. 
AMENIA 
WE spoke last month of the remarkable 
conference at Amenia when men 
representing all shades of opinion in the 
Negro race with their white friends sat 
down and talked it out and found surprisingly few disagreements. 
We show here a picture of some of the 
conferees. 
THREE WHITE FRIENDS 
THRE E white friends of the Negro race 
have died recently—William Hayes 
Ward, Seth Low and Miss Martha Schofield. 
William Hayes Ward was the kind of 
friend whom THE CRISIS loves to honor. His 
biography and picture can be found in the 
March, 1914, issue of THE CRISIS. He stood 
for the full manhood rights of the Negro 
and he never wavered or equivocated. 
SET H LOW, while a sincere and helpful 
friend, never conceived of the Negro 
as a complete man. He thought of him as a 
half-man, a servant, a trained "hand." He 
believed in industrial schools for Negroes, 
but not in colleges. He was afraid of thoroughly educated black men. His loss is a 
loss to the Negro race; but not one comparable to the loss of William Hayes Ward.\ 
MISS MARTHA SCHOFIELD was born 
near Newtown in Bucks County, Pa., 
February 1, 1839, and died in Aiken, S. C , 
February 1, 1916. 
Miss Schofield began her labors in 1865 
on Wodmalaw Island where 1,500 Negroes 
who had followed Sherman's army in its 
march to the sea, had just been landed. 
With one white woman she set to work to 
literally clothe the naked and feed the starving. 
The Freedmen's Bureau built her a small 
frame house in Aiken, S. C , in 1870, and she 
founded the Schofield School. At her death 
this small beginning had grown to be known 
as the Schofield Normal and Industrial 
School, comprising two entire city squares, 
with eight buildings. 
19 20 THE CRISIS 
JOSHUA H. JONES. S. D. FERGUSON. 
SOME OF TH E AMENI A CONFEREES, 
JOHN HENR Y MURPHY . MISS MARTH A SCHOFIELD. 
WILLIA M L. LEE . 
R. R, WRIGHT , JR. MEN OF THE MONTH 21 
A BUSINESS MANAGER 
THE Book Concern of the A. M. E. 
Church is in financial difficulties. 
It has a debt of $15,379 and its creditors, 
especially the paper houses, refused to do 
further business except on a cash basis. 
This forced the business manager, Dr. J. I. 
Lowe, to resign and the business management has been put into the hands of the 
editor of the Christian Recorder, Dr. R. R. 
Wright, Jr. 
Dr. Wright is not only a carefully trained 
editor, but has before shown his business 
ability. He will, without doubt, extricate 
the Book Concern from its unfortunate condition. 
AN EDITOR 
JOHN HENR Y MURPHY , editor and publisher of the Afro American, was born 
in Baltimore, Md., in 1840. He received his 
early education in that city and started his 
business career as a feed and produce 
dealer; for twelve years he was in the house 
decorating business. In 1890 he established 
a printing plant and purchased the Afro 
American in 1899. 
Mr. Murphy was sergeant in the Thirtieth 
Regiment, U. S. Infantry, from March, 1864, 
to December, 1865. He is a trustee of Provident Hospital and Bethel A. M. E. Church. 
He organized the first Presiding Elder District Convention in the A. M. E. Church, 
was its first District Superintendent and 
has three times been a delegate to the General Conference. He is a 33rd degree Mason, a member of the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People, the 
Young Men's Christian Association and 
Past Imperial Potentate, A. E. A. O. N., 
Mystic Shrine. 
Mr. Murphy was married to Miss Martha 
Elizabeth Howard in 1868 and they are the 
parents of eleven children. 
(Continued from page 18) 
WHA T TH E OTHE R CANDIDATE S SA Y 
UNSATISFACTOR Y 
STAT E NAM E PART Y DISTRIC T ANSWE R I N REGAR D T O 
Iowa 
Kansas 
Kansas 
Kansas 
Kansas 
Kansas 
Michigan 
North Dakota 
North Dakota 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
VVisconsin 
Wisconsin 
Wisconsin 
Wisconsin 
Missouri 
Arizona 
Iowa 
Whitenack 
Anthony 
Richardson 
Chapman 
Harger 
Kershner 
Burris 
Young 
McDonald 
McGrew 
Crago 
Cunningham 
Ream 
Kincaid 
Hill 
Clifford 
Konop 
Sutherland 
Meeker 
Chandler 
Hughes 
Socialist 
Republican 
Socialist 
Prohibition 
Republican 
Prohibition 
Democratic 
Republican 
Democratic 
Prohibition 
Republican 
Socialist 
Socialist 
Progressive & Repub 
lican 
Prohibition 
Prohibition 
Democratic 
Democratic 
Republican 
Socialist 
Socialist 
1st 
1st 
3rd 
5th 
8th 
7t h 
2nd 
2nd 
At-large 
At-large 
22 nd 
23rd 
26th 
Senate 
7th 
9th 
10th 
10th 
1st 
10th 
Race segregation 
Interstate travel 
Not specific 
Interstate travel 
Segregation 
Segregation 
Travelling accommodations 
Segregation, reapportionment, 
travelling accommodations 
Segregation and reapportionment 
Not specific 
Segregation , reapportionment, travelling accommodations 
Reapportionment 
Statutory recognition of race 
Not specific 
Not specific 
Statutory recognition of race 
Interstate travel 
Statutory recognition of race 
Federal aid 
Segregation 
Not specific 
Interstate travel 
Not specific 
We call particular attention to these answers of candidates for United States Senator and Representative. Every Negro voter should know where his candidate stands 
on vital matters effecting the colored man's status. If your candidate has NOT 
answered write him and write us. If he has answered WRON G or INDEFINITEL Y 
vote against him. If he has answered RIGHT vote for him whether he be labelled 
Republican, Democrat, Socialist or Prohibitionist! Here lies our only political and 
social salvation. The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
RABINDRANAT H TAGORE in the Independent: 
"On the seashores of the West 
The funeral pyres are emitting 
The last flames 
Caught from the torch of a selfish and decadent 
Civilization. 
Perhaps the all-embracing rays 
Of Thy light of joy 
Are lying hidden on Eastern shores 
With patience 
Under the veil of humility 
In the darkness of silent sorrow." 
John Murray, of London, has published 
" A History of the Gold Coast and Ashanti," 
by W. Walton Claridge. It is an explanation of the methods of the British in tropical 
colonization. 
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, 
Mass., have published "The French Revolution in San Domingo," by T. Lothrop Stoddard. It is a conservative, if not reactionary view. 
An excellent little pamphlet is made of 
the papers read at the 19th annual meeting 
of the American Negro Academy, Washington, D. C. The papers on the "Sex Question 
and Race Segregation," by the Hon. Archibald H. Grimke, President, and on the 
"Status of the Free Negro Prior to 1860," 
by L. M. Hershaw, are especially noteworthy. Mr. Grimke says: 
"One cannot keep down a feeling of pity 
for a large class of women in the South 
who cannot meet in street, or store, or car, 
a well-dressed and comely colored girl without experiencing a pang of suspicion, a 
spasm of fear. For there arises unbidden, 
unavoidably, in the minds of such women, 
the ugly question, whose daughter is she, 
and whose mistress is she to be? . . . 
" A hostility, deep-seated and passionate 
as that which proceeds from white women 
as a class toward black women as a class, 
shoots beyond the mark and attacks indiscriminately all colored women without regard to character, without regard to standing or respectability. It is enough that they 
belong to the black race; ergo, they are bad, 
ergo, they are dangerous. All this bitter 
hatred of the women of one race by the 
women of the other race has borne bitter 
fruit in the South in merciless class distinctions, in hard and fast caste-lines, designed 
to limit contact of the races there to the 
single point where they come together as 
superior and inferior." 
The Armstrong Association of Philadelphia, Pa., has published an interesting 
"Study of Living Conditions Amon g Colored 
People in Suburban Towns About Philadelphia." It found among other things 1,895 
home owners. 
ESCAPING SLAVES 
THE Macon, Ga., Telegraph, which next 
to the Charleston News and Courier 
is the funniest paper in the South when 
writing on the Negro problem, emits this 
wild, leading editorial on the Negro emigrant : 
"Police officers, county or city, all over 
the State, all over the South, should be bending every effort to apprehend and jail the 
labor agents now operating everywhere 
about us to take the best of our Negroes 
North to fill the rapidly widening labor 
breach there. This invasion of the South 
for Negroes isn't just a temporary raiding 
of our labor market, but is part of a wellthought-out and skillfully executed plan to 
rifle the entire South of its well-behaved, 
able-bodied Negro labor. Unskilled labor is 
at a high premium in the United States just 
now, a premium that will increase rather 
than be withdrawn. . . . 
"There are those who say they'll come 
back quickly enough. But that isn't true. 
Ellis Island will not clear labor into this 
country again for at least one full generation, possibly two. . . . 
"W e must have the Negro in the South. 
The black man is fitted by nature, by centuries of living in it to work contentedly, effectively and healthily during the long summers of semi-tropical and tropical countries. 
He has been with us so long that our whole 
industrial, commercial and agricultural 
structure has been built on a black foundation. It is the only labor we have; it is the 
best we possibly could have—if we lose it, 
we go bankrupt! 
"Everybody seems to be asleep about what 
22 THE LOOKING GLASS 23 
is going on right under our noses. That is, 
everybody but those farmers who have wakened up of morning's recently to find every 
male Negro over 21 on his place gone—to 
Cleveland, to Pittsburgh, to Chicago, to Indianapolis. Better jobs, better treatment, 
higher pay—the bait held out is being swallowed by thousands of them all about us. 
And while our very solvency is being sucked 
out from underneath we go about our affairs 
as usual: our police officers raid poolrooms for 'loafing Negroes,' bring in twelve, 
keep them in the barracks all night and 
next morning find that ten of them have 
steady, regular jobs, were there merely to 
spend an hour in the only indoor recreation 
they have; our county officers hear of a disturbance at a Negro resort and bring in 
fifty-odd men, women and boys and girls to 
spend the night in the jail, to make bond at 
ten per cent, to hire lawyers, to mortgage 
half of two months' wages to get back on 
their jobs Monday morning—although but a 
bare half dozen could have been guilty of 
the disorderly conduct. It was the week 
following that several Macon employers 
found good Negroes, men trained to their 
work, secure and respected in their jobs, 
valuable assets to their white employers, 
suddenly left and gone to Cleveland, 'where 
they don't arrest fifty niggers for what three 
of 'em done.' Many of these men who left 
haven't been replaced except with those it 
will take years to train to do their work as 
well as they did it—but at as high a cost 
from the start. 
"It is the most pressing thing before this 
State today. Matters of governorships and 
judgeships are only bagatelle compared to 
the real importance of this Negro exodus 
going on from Georgia. There is a little 
lull now with winter coming on, but the 
spring will see it set in its full volume unless something is done at once to stop it." 
The Montgomery, Ala., Advertiser takes 
up the same wail with a remarkable admission at the end: 
"When the farmer who depends upon Negro labor goes to put in his crop next spring 
he will see that he is face to face with an 
ugly situation if he has been unable to keep 
Negroes on his place. The farmers of the 
Black Belt of Alabama cannot get on without Negro labor. Theoretically it is a fine 
thing to say that we will substitute white 
labor from abroad or from somewhere else. 
But where is that labor? It is not here. 
It is not to be found in the North and West 
for those sections are now suffering from 
labor shortages; that's why Negro laborers 
are leaving. 
"And the Negro will not come back once 
he leaves the South." 
Yet the masses of the South show little 
comprehension of the real meaning of this 
movement. The Birmingham, Ala., Ledger, 
for instance, waves a lordly hand: 
"The sensible Negro will stay at home 
and take advantage here of the prosperity 
that is coming and the wise city authorities, 
who find Northern labor agents at work, 
will do a good thing to send them back 
North on the first train." 
To be more specific: the Birmingham, 
Ala., News preaching of sanitation among 
Negroes says: 
"These leaders of the Negroes can do a 
great personal service to themselves and to 
the community at large if they would emphasize upon the people of their race the 
supreme necessity of proper garbage and 
sewage disposal." 
What in the name of common sense can 
poor, disfranchised laborers do in the matter 
of sewer and garbage disposal in a city like 
Birmingham? Only one thing, as we see it, 
and that is leave. Another matter has been 
mentioned several times by the Miami, Fla., 
Daily Metropolis: 
"Many a hard working Negro, ignorant of 
business and afraid of the white man, has 
been dealt with most dishonorably by Miami 
dealers of a certain class. And it is time 
that honorable white men take a hand in 
protecting them against the extortionist 
seller of installment plan goods. 
"In one instance, of which we have knowledge, a Negro woman paid $57 for a bedroom suite worth not more than $25 and 
then she almost lost her money and the 
furniture because the dealer claimed she 
still owed $3! " 
No wonder Northern papers like the Duluth News Tribune are smiling: 
"If the South wants to keep all of its Negro labor and not share it liberally it will 
have to offer equal inducements in wages, 
living conditions and opportunity and a 
fuller measure of equality in treatment. If, 
on the other hand, it really wants to get rid 
of the Negro and substitute white labor, now 
is its chance." 
Meantime colored papers are talking out. 
The Southwestern Christian Advocate says: 24 THE CRISIS 
"Let us for a moment be frank with each 
other; the Negro at heart loves the South, 
its activities, its sunshine, its climate, but 
he is very much dissatisfied with the treatment that he otherwise receives. His families do not receive proper protection at the 
hands of constitutional authorities nor at 
the bar of public opinion. There are not 
proper facilities for the education of his 
children; there is not a congenial atmosphere for the development of self-respect 
and of racial contentment. We are disfranchised; we are hedged about and we are 
lynched without redress. Even a worm 
sometimes will recoil and a half dead hound 
will resent constant mistreatment. Is it any 
surprise, therefore, that in spite of all the 
Negro's natural inclination to Southern climate he so eagerly seizes an opportunity to 
go elsewhere?" 
So, too, S. N. Jefferson, writing to a white 
Pensacola, Fla., paper says: 
" 'It is probable that "the well informed 
Negro " who told the Birmingham editor 
that it was good schools that was drawing 
the Negro could have given other and more 
potent reasons had he been so minded. He 
could have told how deep down in the 
Negro's heart he has no love for proscription, segregation, lynchings, the petty persecution and cruelties practiced against him, 
nor for the arresting of "fifty niggers for 
what three of 'em done," even if it does 
take all of this to uphold the "scheme of civilization." ' " 
In San Francisco, where the unions have 
persistently refused to admit colored laborers, 250 Negroes are being used as strike 
breakers in a stevedore strike. A local colored paper says: 
"There is no reason why the stevedores' 
union should not have had colored men in it 
as well as all the trades unions. They are 
men. They are here. They have the brain 
and brawn. Wh y not give them a chance? 
When will these unions turn from the error 
of their ways? There was a lively discussion in one of our local labor union's meetings this week with regards to the Negro 
strike-breakers at present in San Francisco. 
One indignant speaker remarked that the 
colored men did not hope to do that work; 
that they were only working for meanness, 
whereat a colored member arose to explain 
a few points, informing the council of this 
well-known opposition to the black man as 
a laborer. Yes, possibly the union man had 
forgot. " 
There is some, though slight, evidence 
that the South is learning something from 
the migration of its laborers. The New Orleans, La., Times Picayune writes: 
"The chances are that the Negro exodus, 
or drift, is likely to increase unless some 
better effort is made to check such of this 
emigration as would be prevented by legislating against those labor agents who deceive and hold out false pretences to seduce 
labor; or unless the conditions of the Negroes be improved in those sections where 
they are dissatisfied. It is well to remember there is now a formidable competition for Negro labor in the North without 
thought to the political or economic results 
that may follow. " 
A correspondent in the Birmingham, Ala., 
News adds: 
"But taking it all in all, if the really 
strong men who, in fact, rule our Southern 
communities, would actively exert themselves in the interest of common fairness 
where the Negro is concerned no labor 
agents or other influence could ever succeed 
in any effort to take the Negro away from 
the South." 
MOB MURDER 
IT is in the unconscious, every day attitude 
* of the South that one sees absolute insensibility to the real meaning of lynching. 
The Columbia, Tenn., Herald says: 
"The bodies of two Negroes, Wiley Tidwell and Manuel Carter, who were lynched 
at Hohenwald early Thursday morning for 
the killing of Bud Burns at the Gordonsburg 
mines Friday night, last, were quietly interred today. . . . 
"The excitement incidental to the lynching has almost subsided at Gordonsburg and 
Hohenwald. Since the mob that killed the 
Negroes were masked no one knows who 
composed it and no effort is being made to 
arrest the members. Sheriff O. C. Christian, from whom the keys to the jail were 
taken at the point of a pistol, was unhurt by 
the mob and has resumed the duties incidental to his position. It is said that nothing will be done about the lynching. . . . 
"Officers of the law in both Lewis and 
Maury Counties" have not abated their 
search for the [third] Negro. Although no 
strong hope is held out for his immediate 
capture the officers hope to get him finally." THE LOOKING GLASS 25 
Wha t can be more illuminating than the 
above, or explain more readily, the questions 
raised in this editorial in the New York 
Evening Post: 
"O f the character of Hugh M. Dorsey, 
who has defeated Gov. Harris for the nomination for Governor in Georgia, we have 
the evidence that the most reputable newspapers in the State refused to support him 
or opposed him, that Tom Watson and the 
unspeakable sheet that was thought to have 
done so much to obtain the lynching of 
Frank were behind him and that Dorsey 
himself tried to exploit anti-Semitic prejudice to assist his campaign. We know that 
he was flatly opposed to the commutation of 
sentence that Frank received from Ex-Gov. 
Slaton and that his prosecution of Frank 
approached the vindictive—it being testified 
by certain of the witnesses that agents Dorsey had employed to gather evidence had induced them to perjure themselves. One sentence alone from Dorsey's recent open letter 
ought to have caused fair-minded men to 
vote against him: his assertion that the 
attitude of the Jewish race in the Frank 
case and in every criminal case in which 
a Hebrew is the defendant has demonstrated 
the fact that the successful prosecution of 
a Hebrew is regarded by the members of 
that race as persecution. There were complicating issues, notably Prohibition, while 
Harris has made none too good a Governor. 
But it is impossible to escape the impression 
that the character of the prosecution of 
Frank was offered for endorsement and was 
endorsed by those elements which rejoiced 
over his lynching." 
The Columbus, O., Citizen says: 
"If this is to be accepted, as is asserted 
in Georgia as an endorsement of the Frank 
lynching, Georgia is still in need of a moral 
disinfectant." 
We cannot refrain from quoting this lovely bit from a colored paper, the Louisville, 
Ky., News, half truth and half satire: 
"Last week at Erwin, Tenn., a circus elephant was hanged to a derrick for killing 
her keeper. The animal could have been 
given an instantaneous and painless death 
by shooting it, or the desired result could 
have been brought about by other methods 
certainly more humane than by the slow 
process of strangulation. Why, then, was 
it necessary to hang the elephant? To those 
uninitiated in the mysteries of mobfever the answer is a bit puzzling; we, 
however, hazard the following explanation: 
"The owner of the circus knew that a 
lynching has a morbid fascination for a 
Southern audience. . . . 
"Afte r the men, women and children had 
thoroughly enjoyed themselves watching the 
dying convulsions of the mammal he was 
cut down and then came the usual rush for 
souvenirs. 
"No w there chanced to be among the audience a man in whose veins flowed the 
purest blood of the South and who could 
trace his ancestry in a straight line back to 
the Pilgrim fathers. He had come expecting 
to see a Negro lynched and, arriving late, 
was horrified to discover that they were 
lynching a respectable elephant. When the 
rush came for souvenirs his rich, blue blood 
fairly boiled with indignation. He rushed 
forward and faced the eager crowd with 
flashing eyes. 
" 'For shame, for shame, men and women 
of Tennessee,' he cried: 'Have you forgotten the strong and tender cords which bind 
you so inseparably to the South of Clay and 
Jefferson? Do you choose to forget that 
here is the cradle of American culture, the 
home of gallant men and saintly women? I 
beseech you in the name of all this not to 
sully your own fair names and drag the 
name of our proud State in the quagmire of 
shame and dishonor by rudely dissecting 
this erring quadruped as you would a common Negro.' 
"His voice broke. Strong sobs shook his 
robust frame, but his eloquence had won 
the day. He had touched the tender hearts 
of his audience and the elephant went back 
to mother earth in one piece." 
DODGING CHRIST 
WE have a dim recollection of the words 
of a certain eminent Christian of 
years gone by who believed in Christian 
unity to an extent that took no account of 
"Jew or Gentile, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond 
nor Free" ; but the Episcopal Church knows 
better. In a labored report of seven long 
columns one paragraph says: 
"It is a question for earnest consideration 
whether, under normal conditions, the ideal 
of the Church is not more truly expressed 
by the analogy which seemed so natural to 
St. Paul, of the family. It would seem at 
least appropriately conformable to God's 
natural creation that the racial family 
should be completed religiously and ecclesi-26 THE CRISIS 
astically by the full organization of teachers 
and pastors and fathers in God. The oneness in Christ Jesus surely is not expected 
to obliterate racial distinctness any more 
than sex differences. And since this consummation is longed for in Asia and accomplished in one little piece of Africa, why 
should it be less desired in the Africa or 
Asia of our American life? . . . 
"There will be removed from this family 
the irritations of a conglomerate membership, with its attendant insolvable questions 
of administration, which so naturally arise 
from the differences of race." 
Wha t is it that has raised this problem? 
The white Episcopal bishops have practically refused to be bishops of black folk. 
Thus we have a anomalous condition as one 
colored clergyman shows: 
Tw o NEGRO GROUPS 
The Province of Washington—30 clergy 
and 7,000 communicants. 
The Province of Sewanee—66 clergy and 
7,000 communicants. 
WHIT E MISSIONARY DISTRICTS 
Porto Rico—8 clergy and 600 communicants, a bishop. 
Nevada—8 clergy and 1,000 communicants, a bishop. 
North Texas—8 clergy and 1,000 communicants, a bishop. 
Philippine Islands—10 clergy and 1,200 
communicants, a bishop. 
Eastern Oregon—8 clergy and 1,500 communicants, a bishop. 
Brazil—17 clergy and 1,300 communicants, a bishop. 
Salina—14 clergy and 1,600 communicants, a bishop. 
Cuba—22 clergy and 1,700 communicants, 
a bishop. 
Oklahoma—17 clergy and 2,000 communicants, a bishop. 
Eastern Oklahoma—12 clergy and 1,800 
communicants, a bishop. 
Thus, we have, for the two Negro bishopless provinces, a total of 96 clergy and 14,-
000 communicants. Leaving out Brazil, for 
the nine combined missionary districts for 
white people, we have a total of 99 clergy 
and 11,800 communicants, with 9 bishops. 
The clergyman continues: 
" A story is told of a man who rode up 
to the polls on a mule to vote. He could not 
vote unless he had some visible property. 
In course of time he was compelled to sell 
his beast. Upon going on foot to the polls 
and offering to vote, it was inquired, 'Wher e 
is the mule?' To which he replied that he 
had sold him. The reply came back, 'Yo u 
can't vote here.' The outraged man made 
answer: 'Who is doing the voting, me or the 
mule?' And, we would like to inquire, to 
whom does the Church send the Episcopate, 
to rivers, mountains and lakes, or to human 
beings? If to human beings then it is just 
as necessary to send it to people who are 
systematically treated as 'a race apart,' in 
this country, as it is to send it to Liberia, 
or Dahomey. 
"Plain, every-day honesty demands one 
of two courses. Let the Church see to it 
that the 'color line' is absolutely and entirely ignored; or else grant the request." 
Bishop Nelson, the arrogant Prelate of 
Atlanta, would be more than willing to push 
the Negroes bodily out of the Church: 
"To end this wearisome debate and to 
give a whole race that which it asks for, let 
a joint commission of the two Houses of the 
General Convention be appointed to look out 
and recommend three Negro priests, citizens 
of the United States, men of good report 
and sound learning; prepare a definite concordat and terms of communion, and ask 
that these men be consecrated as bishops in 
the Church of God for the Negro race; outline their jurisdictions (e.g., East, South, 
and West) ; establish and set on its way, 
with every token of good will and with every 
assistance, spiritual and physical, which we 
can afford, an autonomous Negro Episcopal 
Church in and for the United States of 
America. 
"This, I submit, is a reasonable and effective substitute for all the make-shifts, 
and for this latest, the most injurious and 
dangerous plan ever invented to breed dissension, to disrupt organizations which have 
cost us so dearly, to derange the polity of 
the Church, to withdraw sympathy, to multiply antagonistic influences—the Negro 
Missionary District at Large. " 
Bishop Greer, of New York, dissents: 
"It is quite true that the spiritual care of 
10,000,000 Negroes, most of whom are in the 
South, represents a great problem and they 
are entitled to bishops of their own race, yet 
it would be much better to have such bishops 
under the direct control of the head of the 
diocese. They should be suffragan bishops. 
"These suffragan bishops should have a 
vote in the House of Bishops. A t the pres-THE LOOKING GLASS 27 
ent time suffragans have a seat in the 
House of Bishops but no vote." 
Meantime the Columbia State shows what 
Christianity is doing for South Carolina: 
"Homicide is a disease of the people. In 
South Carolina 300 or 400 or more die from 
its ravages every year. Whether punished 
by law or not, the manslayer and his family 
suffer scarcely less than the slain and his 
family. 
"Since 1906, ten years, 4,000 or 5,000 men 
have died by violence in South Carolina. In 
ten years more South Carolinians have been 
shot to death or otherwise slaughtered by 
South Carolinians than were killed in one 
of the great battles of the Wa r of Secession. 
The woe of a killing in private brawl is infinitely greater than the woe of slaughter 
in battle. Slayer and slain and those dear 
to them equally suffer." 
Winifred James writes about Christianity 
in Panama: 
"A s for the unmarried men, they, a few 
of them, play bridge or poker occasionally, 
but their chief pleasure seems to lie in 
drinking round the bars of the town and 
exalting, for periods short or long, the colored ladies above their wash-tubs." 
"LIES AGREED UPON'' 
THE definition of history as "Lies 
Agreed Upon" is finding fresh exemplification in Tom Dixon's effort to exalt the 
"Ku Klux Klan." By his melodramaticnovels, then by a play and finally by a moving picture he proposes to make this generation believe that the Ku Klux gang were 
pure-hearted crusaders instead of the cutthroats and rascals that they really were. 
This is too much even for a Southern paper 
like the Charlotte, N. C , Observer: 
"An equestrian statute of 'The Little 
Colonel' in Confederate uniform would 
prove an adornment to Cleveland County's 
Court House lawn of unquestionable acceptance. Colonel McAfe e organized the Ku 
Klux Klan in Shelby and Mr. Dixon would 
perpetuate this event by shrouding the 
bronze image of the Colonel in the uniform 
of the Klan. It would be hard to conceive 
of a statue more grotesquely treated. The 
events which a statue thus designed would 
be intended to perpetuate are but little 
understood by people other than our own 
and never will be. It is history that belongs 
to the past, that should be of record and 
stored in the archives as a sealed book. The 
erection of a statue of the class proposed 
would impose upon the people of this and 
succeeding generations the duty of perpetual explanation and defense, a duty that 
might become irksome with the passing of 
the years and that might in the end be repudiated. We should think 'The Little 
Colonel,' himself, would choose, if the privilege could be granted him, to be memorialized as a Confederate officer, in which role 
for all ages there would be none to give his 
name other than acclaim. In the writing 
of books Mr. Dixon had no responsibility to 
consider other than the pocket of the people; 
but in the erection of the character of a 
memorial which he has proposed there devolves upon him the greater responsibility 
of consulting public sentiment." 
Can we not from this easily see "why Negroes have no history" according to white 
folk? Fifty years of lying writers could 
easily prove that Abraham Lincoln was 
never born. Speaking of Abraham Lincoln 
reminds us of an excellent editorial in the 
Elizabeth City, N. C , Independent: 
"The harmless fiction on which history 
has been written since the art of writing 
has been practiced, was reinforced and reemphasized and possibly finally and irrevocably worked into the record as it will 
go down to posterity, at Hodgenville, Ky., 
last Monday, when the United States Government took over the legal title to 110 acres 
of land and the cabin on it, which we are 
assured was the birthplace of Abraham Lincoln. In the generations yet to come, probably, it will be found and proved by historical records that the origin of the martyred President was another case of immaculate conception. And millions of people, 
particularly descendants of the slaves freed 
by the great President's emancipation proclamation, will believe it, and there will be 
much wrangling and argument over the possibility and impossibility of such a thing. 
"The simple truth about the origin and 
birth of Abraham Lincoln makes a more 
beautiful, a more romantic, and a more 
easily understood story than the evasive and 
untrue one that has been given and accepted 
and written into history. He was born in 
North Carolina and not in Kentucky; his 
mother was Nancy Hanks; neither his 
mother nor himself ever saw Kentucky or 
Thomas Lincoln, until the infant Abraham 
was two years old. The marriage of Lincoln 
and Nancy Hanks was one purely of expediency that an unfortuante young woman 
and her child might find a home." Th e Horizo n 
MUSIC AND ART 
H. T. BURLEIGH' S "The Three Shadows, " his latest published song, was 
heard for the first time at the Knights of 
Columbus' concert held in Boston, Mass., 
October 1. The song was sung by the celebrated Irish tenor, John McCormack, who 
had an audience of over 3,000 persons. Musical America of September 2 says: "Mr. 
Burleigh has written a tone-poem for voice 
and piano in setting Rupert Brooke's "The 
Soldier." The thematic material is distinguished; the development masterly. It rises 
in more than one place to the symphonic 
with those broad lines on which Mr. Burleigh now creates his music. It is a song 
that should win new laurels for H. T. Burleigh, for it stands high in his list, adding 
to his already notable contribution a big inspired composition executed with mastery 
and created with human understanding." 
A setting of Paul Laurence Dunbar's 
"Ashes to Ashes, Dust to Dust," under title 
of "Mortality," has been made by Gabriel L. 
Hines. The song has been effectively sung 
by Charles Granville, an American baritone, 
on a recent Chautauqua tour. 
On October 5, at Bethel Church, Chicago, 
Illinois, a very successful "home-coming" 
recital was given by the Defender with 
Mme. Anita Patti Brown, soprano, as the 
honored artist. Assisting talent was represented by Harrison Ferrell, Jr., violinist; 
Charles N . O'Jon, a South American pianist; Estella Majors and Theodore Taylor, 
accompanists. An added feature was a 
short address on Brazil by the Brazilian 
Consul, Hon. Stuart Alexander. 
Mr. W. Adams of Washington, D . C , has 
opened a Conservatory of Music in that city 
with three foreign and sixteen native instructors. 
A very successful Music Festival was 
held at Birmingham, Ala., under the auspices of the Y. W. C A. The director was 
Carl R. Diton, pianist-composer. Mr. Diton 
is to be heard in the East in a series of 
piano recitals. 
Sidney Woodward, tenor, of Atlanta, 
Ga., was heard in a song recital on October 
9 at Ebenezer Baptist Church, Boston, Mass. 
"Jeptha and His Daughter," a dramatic 
cantata in three acts, has been rendered by 
the young people of Florence and Sumter, 
S. C 
Ernest H. Hays, organist, and Wesley 
Howard, violinist, who graduated from the 
New England Conservatory of Music in the 
class of 1916, have returned for special 
study. They will be engaged in concert 
work this winter. 
Miss Mable Raimey of Milwaukee, Wis., 
the first graduate of the first summer school 
of the Normal Voca l Institute, Chicago, Ill., 
was given full two years credit by an examining board of five members at the College 
of Music of the University of Wisconsin. 
The Folk Song Chorus of the Normal 
Vocal Institute recently appeared with 
great success to a crowded house at the 
gymnasium of the William Beye School, 
Oak Park, Ill. 
Mrs. E. Azalia Hackley, who appeared at 
the High School and First Methodist 
Church of Harvey, Ill., for the benefit of 
the Amanda Smith Home recently, is now 
engaged in community vocal work in the 
vicinity of Philadelphia. She will be engaged in this service and Folk Song Festivals until May. 
L. H. Caldwell, a graduate of the Crouse 
College of Fine Arts, Syracuse University, 
has opened a piano studio in that city. 
Nearly 2,000 people attended the Negro 
semi-centennial, September 16, at the Coliseum in St. Louis, Mo. The Fisk Jubilee 
Singers took an important part in the program. Verdi's "Traviata " and the "Last 
Rose of Summer," by Anita Patti Brown, 
and a tabloid production of "Julius Caesar" 
under the direction of Richard B. Harrison 
were other features. 
The Washington, D. C , Conservatory of 
Music, under the direction of Mrs. H. G. 
Marshall, opened for this season's work 
September 25 . 
The DuBois Dramatic Club, Omaha, 
Neb., recently presented "The Starry Flag " 
at the Boyd Theatre for the benefit of St. 
John's A. M. E. Church. Mrs. W. T. Osborne 
is manager of this organization. 
The work of five colored students of Miss 
Best's class in the Art Department of the 
Los Angeles, Cal., High School, was the only 
work of High School students selected for 
exhibition by the Government of the Republic of Panama. 
An interesting concert was given at 
Roanoke, Va., at the church of the Rev. E. 
E. Ricks, where the colored and white choirs THE HORIZON 29 
united in the program. This city is about 
to build a colored theatre to seat 1,000 persons and to be known as "The Hampton." 
An art exhibit was held by the colored 
Y. M. C. A. at Huntsville, Ala. 
INDUSTRY 
COLORE D girls have replaced white 
girls in the sausage room of the Armour Company in St. Lous, Mo. The white 
girls went on a strike and the colored girls, 
who were scrub women, were promoted. 
The Tennessee Colored Fair was held at 
Nashville with a large attendance. 
Frank R. Willis won first prize for the 
heaviest cornish chicken among 2,800 fowls 
on exhibition at the Kentucky State Fair. 
Governor Craig of North Carolina was 
one of the speakers at the Negro State Fair 
held at Raleigh. 
The Colored Tri-State Fair was held at 
Memphis, Tenn., in September. It had one 
of the largest demonstrations of domestic 
science ever attempted. Negro folk songs 
were sung daily by a chorus of five hundred. 
Deerfield, the Negro farm colony in Colorado, has held its second annual Fair. 
The first annual Fair of the Oklahoma 
colored people was attended by large numbers. 
Louisville, where colored people own over 
$2,000,000 worth of property, has not a single colored employee in the City or County 
Government according to the Louisville 
News. 
The colored hod carriers and building 
laborers have been organized into unions in 
Dallas, Tex. They expect over 1,000 members. It is doubtful, however, if the Central 
Labor Council would seat a Negro delegate. 
The largest grain elevator in the world 
is being erected at Girard Point, Philadelphia. Twenty-five hundred Negro laborers 
are being employed. 
Negro moulders have been employed at 
the Pequonnock Foundry, Bridgeport, 
Conn., in place of striking whites. The 
white Moulders Union has always refused 
to admit Negroes. 
A meeting has been held in Philadelphia 
to secure colored girls as operators in the 
mills of the Powell Knitting Company. Two 
hundred are asked for. 
Philadelphia is among the first of the 
Northern cities to make special arrangements for receiving and working among the 
new Negro workmen who are emigrating 
from the South. The Local Branch of the 
N. A. A. C. P. has begun active work 
through its Vigilance Committee. 
Atlas Skipper, while digging mussels in 
Black River, Ark., found a 30-grain pearl 
which he sold for $000. 
EDUCATION 
THE Appellate Court of Kentucky has 
decided that the railroad tax collected 
in school districts must be divided between 
white and colored pupils according to number. The whites were trying to get the 
whole of it. 
An Educational Agricultural Congress 
was held at Shorter College, Ark. 
During the year 1914, 115 white High 
Schools were accredited in the State of Virginia and no colored schools. There are in 
this State today over 600 white High 
Schools and only 5 colored High Schools. 
The State Department of Wilberforce 
University has contracted for two new 
buildings at a cost of nearly $100,000. One 
building is to be for recitations and the 
other a gymnasium. The University Department of Wilberforce, which belongs to 
the A. M. E. Church, is seeking to raise 
$50,000 for general purposes. Interested 
persons should write to Chaplain T. G. 
Steward. 
In one county of South Carolina there 
were during 1915-16 3,348 white pupils in 
63 schools with 123 teachers; 5,398 colored 
pupils with 84 teachers. The white schools 
cost $52,846 or $15.75 per capita; the colored schools cost $6,753 or $1.25 per capita. 
The Rev. E. A. White of Cleveland, O., a 
colored man, has been selected as President 
of Walden University, Nashville, Tenn. 
One of the best colored schools in the 
State of Oklahoma is the L'Ouverture High 
and Grammar School at McAlester. It is a 
twelve-room building of brick and stone in 
the center of a block 400 by 270 feet. It 
has electric light, steam heat, laboratories, 
water and sewer connections and the school 
site has been made especially beautiful. 
The High School Department was established by J. W. Pettus, the present Principal, and has a full four years' course. 
There are 160 colored Catholic Schools in 
the country attended by 16,000 children. 
One University, St. Xaxier, has been established at New Orleans, La. 
Orangeburg County, S. C , has 193 white 30 THE CRISIS 
teachers who are paid $77,594 and 130 colored teachers who are paid $13,531 for the 
year. In the white schools each male 
teacher averaged $646 and each female 
teacher $355 a year. In the Negro schools 
the averages were $166 for men and $83 
for women! There were 5,926 white children in school and 8,415 colored children. 
The average length of the white school term 
was 140 days and the colored school 70 days. 
The per capita expenditure for white pupils 
was $21.10 and for Negroes $1.27. Each 
white teacher enrolled 31 pupils and each 
colored teacher 84! Here is Justice for 
you! 
Biddle University, Charlotte, N. C , has 
70 acres of land and 14 buildings worth 
$225,000. 
Paul Quinn College, Waco, Tex., has recently been reorganized. J. K. Williams is 
President. 
Yor k County, S. C , has 5,983 white pupils and 7,177 colored pupils. The white 
pupils cost $13.25 per capita and the Negro 
pupils $1.22. The average annual salaries 
were $565 for white men and $120 for colored men; white women $338, colored women $60! 
John M. McPherson, a colored U. S. 
Agent for the Agricultural Department at 
Washington, has founded a new school in 
Randolph County, Ala., which will open 
with two teachers this fall. 
Nearly 1,200 pupils enrolled at the opening of the new Dunbar Colored High School, 
Washington, D. C. 
Bishop Carter of the Colored Methodist 
Episcopal Church has raised more than 
$13,000 for Negro education in Texas. 
The Cuyler Street Public School of Savannah, Ga., is urging each of its 1,000 
pupils to deposit $1.00 in the School Fund 
on the first school day. 
The Chamberlain High School will take 
the place of Leland University, New Orleans, which was damaged by storm last 
September. The present school is under the 
Louisiana Baptist Association and other colored organizations. 
Charles H. Moore, a colored man, is 
State Inspector of Negro Schools in North 
Carolina. His salary is raised by the colored people; but he has succeeded in adding 
over $50,000 to the rural school appropriations this year. 
By the will of the late Seth Low Tuskegee Institute will eventually receive $50,000. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
THE 9th U. S. Cavalry has celebrated the 
fiftieth anniversary of its entrance 
into service. The regiment is now in the 
Philippines. Chaplain L. A. Carter was the 
prime mover in this celebration. 
The 8th Illinois Regiment, composed of 
colored troops, which has been on the Texas 
border since June 30 has been ordered home. 
The 15th Infantry, the first colored regiment of the reorganized National Guard of 
New York, has been officially received into 
the organization and reviewed. It has white 
and colored officers. 
Canada is seeking to recruit a battalion 
of Negroes at Windsor. 
Dr. J. E. Spingarn, Chairman of the 
Board of Directors, N. A. A. C. P., suggests 
that while we are fighting discrimination of 
all sorts in the United States Army it 
would be well to take advantage of the offer 
of General Woo d to establish an instruction 
camp for colored officers next summer. Persons interested in such a project should 
communicate with Dr. Spingarn at this 
office. 
H. F. Worley, a white man, has been 
named as General Receiver of Customs for 
the Republic of Liberia to succeed R. P. 
Clarke, who has resigned. Worley receives 
$5,000 a year with transportation, etc. 
During the last five-year period there 
has been a greater reduction in mortality 
among colored people of New Yor k City 
than among white people as compared with 
the previous five-year period. 
The colored people of Panama have been 
successful in keeping the "Birth of a Na ­
tion" out of the public theatres; but the Y. 
M. C. A. is proposing to present it privately 
to "white people only." 
Mrs. Georgia A. Robinson has been appointed to the police force by the Chief of 
Police of Los Angeles and is the first colored woman in the country to hold this position. 
Dr. D. W. Byrd, of Norfolk, Va., has 
been elected President of the National Medical Association and Dr. F. F. Bishop, Pittsburgh, Pa., Editor of the Medical Journal. 
Miss Belvar Caution-Overton of West 
Medford, Mass., has been appointed Head 
Surgical Nurse at the Provident Hospital, 
Chicago. 
Chaplain O. J. W. Scott has been transferred from the 25th Infantry to the 10th 
U. S. Cavalry. THE HORIZON 31 
Underwood and Underwood. 
MESSES . BURLEIGH , MOTO N AN D JOHNSON 
A T TH E SET H LO W FUNERAL . 
The Pythians are about to buy the building formerly occupied by the Prudential 
Savings Bank in Birmingham, Ala. 
The first municipal roller skating races 
were held by the city of Cleveland September 30, 1916. There were so many entries 
that the boys raced in relays. Harrison 
McKoin Smith, a colored boy, won every 
heat in every race. He was thus entitled to 
five first prizes consisting of gold and silver 
medals. On last Labor Day Smith entered 
the races at Oberlin, O., winning the 100-
yard dash, the 75-yard dash and the threelegged race in company with another boy. 
Fo r these he received a gold watch and 
other prizes. Smith is only 15 years of age. 
Arthur Scurlock and McKinley Emanuel, 
two young colored men of Chicago, have 
gone to South America ; the one to open an 
electrical supply house and the other to 
manage a branch of a chiropody company. 
Bud Wicks, a ten-year-old colored boy 
of Woodbury, N. J., saved the life of a 
twelve-year-old white boy who had fallen 
into the water. 
The colored branches of the Louisville 
Free Public Library issued during the year 
1916 the extraordinary total of 105,181 volumes and held 490 meetings. 
Adam Manuel of the Creek Nation, 
Okla., recently died leaving five children. 
Luther Manuel, one of his sons, is believed 
to be the richest Negro boy in the world. 
The Manuel land was supposed to be worthless for farming purposes; but it proved to 
be in the heart of an oil field and Luther 
Manuel now has an income of $50,000 a 
month. 
Dr. George Montgomery Herriot recently 
took the examination in pharmacy for the 
Indiana State Board and stood at the top of 
all his white competitors. He is a graduate 
of Howard University. 
The Savannah Saving and Real Estate 
Corporation, in Georgia, handled in the first 
eight months of its existence $220,000. It 
received on deposit $76,000 within the same 
time. Walter S. Scott is President. 
Plans have been drafted for a Colored 
Department at Memorial Hospital, Richmond, Va. This will be the first of a group 
to cost $100,000; in addition $25,000 will be 
spent in equipment. There will be 148 beds 
and a nurse training school. 
HARRISO N McKOI N SMITH . 32 THE CRISIS 
The Whittier Center of Philadelphia has 
incorporated the Whittier Center Housing 
Company and purchased a plot of ground 
where they are erecting model tenements 
for colored people. 
J. Washington has purchased two large 
brick buildings in the business center of 
Marlin, Tex. A picture show and undertaking establishment will be among the enterprises installed. 
Thomas E. Taylor, for eleven years Secretary of the colored Y. M. C. A. at Indianapolis, Ind., succeeds James L. Jamison as 
Secretary of the Branch in New York City. 
Miss H. B. Green won a gold medal in 
the W. C. T. U. oratorical contest at West 
Newton, Pa. 
The colored people of Oklahoma have 
succeeded in getting their reformatory for 
Negro boys on foot. They have a modern 
stone building two stories high at McAlester. The school room will seat 100 pupils 
and covers eight grades. Books are desired 
for the library. 
Benjamin Braxton has been made Probation Officer for colored boys in Norfolk, 
Va. 
Mr. George W. Carver of Tuskegee Institute has been made a member of the Ad ­
visory Board of the New National Agricultural Society. 
Lenox Community Center at P. S. 89, in 
New Yor k City, had an unusually prosperous year. Nearly $2,000 was taken in from 
various activities, most of which was spent 
for the development of its work. This is 
one of the best community centers in the 
city. 
St. Angelo, Tex., is interested in a colored child prodigy, John Pippin, a ten-yearold boy who has never been to school and 
yet reads difficult matter and has an extraordinary sense of hearing. 
The National League on Urban Conditions Amon g Negroes has issued its annual 
report. It expended nearly $25,000 during 
the year ending September 30, 1915. 
A t the annual police field meet held in 
September in Cleveland, O., J. W. Findley, 
colored, won the 100 yards dash for Boy 
Scouts. 
In the Western Tennis Tournament held 
by the Prairie Tennis Club, Chicago, Ill., 
Chester Booth and J. H. Stamps won in 
doubles and Dr. Cromwell in singles. 
Mercy Hospital, Philadelphia, is planning to erect a $150,000 building. 
Amon g the life guards at Atlantic City, 
N. J., are three colored men: P. Turner, L. 
Byrd and J. Wighte. 
Professor J. E. K. Aggrey studied sociology at the Summer School at Columbia 
University and was written up in the Summer School Annual. He has been recently 
elected a Fellow of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain. 
A Community House for Colored People 
has been established at York , Pa. A committee of colored and white citizens have it 
in charge. 
Arthur Rhone has just been granted a 
Carnegie Hero Medal for rescuing a white 
woman and her little boy at Long Branch, 
N. J. 
John H. Woodson, the only Negro fireman in Brooklyn, has won distinction for 
daring rescues at a recent fire. 
The colored women of the State of Iowa 
are raising a fund of $500 with which to 
commission Henry O. Tanner, the artist, to 
paint a picture of the late Booker T. Washington. They propose to hang the portrait 
in the Memorial Hall of the State Capitol. 
Two colored troopers of the 9th U. S. 
Cavalry have invented a new gunpowder. 
MEETINGS 
A LARG E Negro Congress called by the 
Equal Rights League was held at 
Washington, D. C. Dr. Harvey Johnson, of 
Baltimore, Md., was elected Chairman and 
W. M. Trotter, of Boston, Mass., Secretary. 
The address to the country scored peonage, 
segregation and lynching, but did not mention Mr. Hughes. 
The 6th annual session of the Oklahoma 
State Federation of Colored Women's Clubs 
met in Eufuala. They protested against the 
railway accommodations for colored people 
and voted to become members of the N. A. 
A. C. P. 
Colored chiropodists of New Yor k have 
founded a Pedic Society with Valentine 
Thomas as President. 
The biennial meeting of the governing 
body of the colored Odd Fellows was held 
in Washington, D. C. The old officers were 
reelected. The Order has 14,680 lodges, 
households, councils, etc., and a total membership of 284,970 persons. The Central 
Board of Management owns property valued 
at $174,674. The parade of 4,000 participants was unusually effective. THE HORIZON 
Two conventions of the Baptists have 
been held: the Convention at Savannah, 
Ga., seems to have been the largest and to 
have attracted the most influential Baptists. 
A monument to George Leile, the first Baptist Foreign Missionary, was unveiled at 
this convention. The Boyd convention at 
Kansas City, Mo., was also large. There 
are no signs of reconciliation between these 
two branches. 
The Grand Lodge of Colored Masons of 
Connecticut met at Bridgeport with George 
W. Crawford as Grand Master. 
Fifty delegates representing various organizations of the colored people of Rhode 
Island met for conference in Providence. 
They plan active work in cooperation with 
the N. A. A. C. P. 
A Negro Post Masters' Association has 
met in Boley, Okla., under the presidency of 
C. S. Simmons. 
The 3rd annual convention of the National Alliance of Postal Employees met in 
Kansas City, Mo. 
The first annual meeting of the National 
Travellers' Protective Association has been 
held in Birmingham, Ala. 
PERSONAL 
THE marriage is announced of President 
H. L. McCrorey of Biddle University 
to Mary Catherine Jackson of Athens, Ga. 
Miss Jackson has long been the chief assistant to Miss Lucy Laney of Haines Normal 
Institute. 
Miss Inez Casey of Philadelphia, for 
thirty years a teacher in the Public Schools 
of Philadelphia, is dead. 
John Lubrie Hill, a colored musical genius, died in New York City recently. 
Arthur F. Albert, who died recently at 
Washington, D. C , was a young man of 
high character. He was instructor of Mechanics at the Vocational School, having 
learned his trade at the United States Navy 
Yard ; he contributed to technical magazines. 
George W. Dennis, a California pioneer, 
is dead. He was at one time wealthy and 
for twenty-two years has been messenger to 
the State Harbor Commission. 
THE CHURCH 
THE 32d annual conference of Episcopal 
Church Workers Amon g Colored People held a three days conference in Philadelphia. Archdeacon H. L. Phillips presided and 150 delegates were present. 
33 
THERE have been 12,737 Negro voters 
registered in St. Louis. 
(I An Advisory Campaign Committee of 
colored men has been meeting at Republican 
headquarters, New York City. Among 
those present were : Charles W. Anderson, 
New York ; Fred R. Moore, New York ; William Oscar Payne, New York ; Andrew F. 
Stevens and Justin Carter, Pennsylvania; 
Charles A. Cottrill and William P. Dabney, 
Ohio; William H. Lewis and W. C. Matthews, Massachusetts; Richard M. Bolden 
and Junius M. Green, New York ; Gilchrist 
Stewart, New York ; Isaac Nutter, New Jersey; Harry G. Tolliver, Connecticut; Dr. 
Ernest Lyon and Harry S. Cummings, 
Maryland; Charles Colburn, Delaware; 
Phillip Waters, West Virginia; Whitfield 
McKinlay, James A. Cobb and Charles Pickett, District of Columbia; R. R. Church, A. 
A. Fielding and J. C. Napier, Tennessee; 
Henry L. Johnson and Benjamin Davis, 
Georgia; Perry W. Howard, Mississippi; 
Joseph E. Lee, Florida. 
There are 30,000 Negro voters in Oklahoma owing to the defeat of the recent disfranchising amendments. 
Mr. Hughes, the Republican candidate, 
spoke to 2,000 Negroes in Hadley Park, 
Nashville, Tenn. He said: "We want honesty, with respect to the ballot. I want an 
honest and a pure ballot. I say to you that 
I stand, if I stand for anything, for equal 
The Rev. W. H. Moses charges in public 
print that of the $350,000 invested in the 
Baptist Publishing Plant only $11,500 is 
the property of the Publishing Board, the 
rest being the private property of the 
Boyds. 
The Rev. M. W. Gilbert, formerly President of Selma University in Alabama, has 
become Pastor of the First Baptist Church, 
Nashville, Tenn. 
Dr. W. W. Beckett, the new A. M. E. 
Bishop to South Africa, sailed to his post 
last month. 
Rev. E. H. Hamilton, a Congregational 
pastor and social worker, has been called to 
the Colored Congregational Church of 
Houston, Tex. 
Colonel R. J. Reynolds has given real 
estate and money to the value of $6,500 to 
the C. M. E. Church at Winston-Salem, 
N. C. 
The Lutheran Church spent $97,000 on 
its colored missionary work last year. 
POLITICAL 34 THE CRISIS 
and exact justice to all. I stand for the 
maintenance of the rights of all American 
citizens, regardless of race or color." 
The Democrats of the 3rd Senatorial 
District of Michigan have nominated Francis H. Warren, a colored man. The district, 
however, is hopelessly Republican. 
Attention has been called to the fact that 
the militia which responded to the call of 
President Wilson came from the North and 
not from the South. None came from 
North Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Kentucky, Tennessee, Arkansas, Mississippi and 
Alabama, and only 500 from Louisiana. 
MR. HUGHES ADDRESSES COLORED NASHVILLE. 
Above: The Speaker; below: The Audience. THE HORIZON 35 
Negro voters in Arkansas are considering a Negro Party ticket. 
Mr. Charles H. Studin, a member of the 
Board of Directors, N. A. A. C. P., is Democratic candidate for State Senator in the 
18th Senatorial District. This includes a 
number of colored voters and it is hoped 
they will not forget Mr. Studin's services 
to the race. 
Major Robert R. Jackson was renominated for the State Legislature in Chicago, 
also Mr. B. H. Lucas, another colored man. 
Colonel F. A. Dennison of the 8th Illinois 
Regiment was defeated for the nomination 
for Municipal Judge. 
FOREIGN 
MR. WILLIA M A. SOGA of South Africa is dead. He was a graduate of 
Glasgow University and became a medical 
missionary widely known among his people. 
Prince George of Battenberg is Lieutenant in the Royal British Navy. He is engaged to be married to the great-grandchild 
of the colored Russian poet, Pushkin. Miscegenation ! 
It is reported that Lidj Jeassu, Emperor 
of Abyssinia, has been deposed and that his 
aunt, Ouizero-Zeoditu, a woman forty years 
old, the wife of Ras Gongsa and daughter 
of the late Emperor Menelik, has proclaimed herself Empress of Abyssinia. 
The Dutch are having considerable trouble with rebellions in their East Indian possessions. 
Lovedale, the celebrated South African 
school for colored people, celebrated its 75th 
anniversary July 21. Last February General Botha opened the new Native College 
adjoining Lovedale institute. The college 
has been financed largely by the natives 
and is an institution for higher education. 
GHETTO 
A DELEGATIO N of 25 Negroes waited 
upon the City Council of Kalamazoo, 
Mich., and protested against discrimination 
in theatres and restaurants. 
The Afro-American Order of Owls has 
won a decision from the American Court of 
Appeals against the white Owls who sought 
to restrain them from operating. 
An East Indian who was "Jim Crowed" 
in a street car in Memphis, Tenn., has 
brought suit against the street railway. 
A colored teacher has been appointed to 
the 8th grade in one of the Chicago, Ill., 
Public Schools. Some protest was made by 
the white patrons but the Board of Education stood firm. 
Over 700 Negro children in Savannah, 
Ga., cannot find accommodations in the colored Public Schools. 
Professor Colquette, a teacher in the 
white city schools of Kansas City, Mo., has 
been dismissed because of his dark complexion. The Superintendent of Schools is 
"convinced" that he is white, but the clamor 
of the patrons was too great. 
In many Southern cities the colored 
teachers do not receive notice of their reappointment or dismissal until just before 
the opening of school. In Jacksonville, Fla., 
they were notified this year one day before 
the opening. 
The colored woman who was refused admission to the Maternity Hospital at Stoneham, Mass., has sued for $5,000 damages. 
A five-story apartment house in Chattanooga, Tenn., made a rule that its servants 
must walk up the steep back stairs and not 
use the elevator. The servants struck. 
Four officers of the 8th Illinois Regiment, colored, were appointed members of a 
court martial. Protests signed by several 
hundred white soldiers were forwarded to 
Washington. 
The Holderness School, Philadelphia, 
Pa., has refused to admit E. B. Mays, a 
colored boy. 
A woman who "claimed" to be one of the 
large number of descendants of General 
Robert E. Lee, tried to raise a row in New 
York when she found colored women attending the City Committee of the Hughes 
Alliance. She was quickly hustled out and 
effort was made to keep the incident out of 
the papers. 
The Georgia senators have been asked to 
appear before the Supreme Court at the rehearing of the Louisville, Ky., segregation 
case. There are said to be 8,000 vacant 
houses in Louisville on account of the segregation law. 
The segregation order referred to on 
page 300 of the October CRISIS was quickly 
revoked through the interference of Senator 
Martine of New Jersey, the President's political foe, and other Western senators. 
The attempt to segregate Negroes by inserting clauses in deeds which prevent the 
sale of property to Negroes has received a 
setback in New York and in California. In 
Harlem, N. Y., it has been impossible so far 
to prevent a colored family from occupying 
a restricted district in 136th street, although the matter is still in court. In Los 
Angeles a colored man has been prevented 3 6 THE CRISIS 
since 191 5 from occupying his own property 
because of such a clause. On September 26 , 
Attorney W. O. Tyler secured a verdict 
which allowed his client to move in. 
Michael Daley of Newton Center, Mass., 
has paid $1 9 to the court for forcibly kissing a colored girl. 
Mr. George E. Wibecan is sueing the 
Empire Theatre in Brooklyn, N. Y., for discrimination. 
A colored man, Robert Griffin, charged 
with assaulting a white woman, barely escaped a mob at Dothan, Ala. When he was 
brought to trial the jury exonerated him 
and the judge referred to this as "One of 
the many cases in which innocent men are 
charged with crime." 
Sixteen members of the Lima, O., mob 
have been indicted and 1 3 are in jail. Meantime the woman who was attacked identified 
as her assailant not the man whom the mob 
tried to lynch but another colored man who 
had been in jail three months, and could not 
possibly have been near her! 
John Mitchell, Jr., Editor of the Richmond Planet, is challenging the Federal 
authorities to proceed against him for exposing the indecent conduct of a white Richmond policeman in the toilet room of a C. 
& O. Railway train. The general conduct of 
policemen throughout the United States toward colored people is a growing scandal 
and is evidently part of an understood 
scheme. In Richmond an attorney was dismissed for protesting against the beating of 
a colored woman by a policeman. Colored 
men have been beaten so brutally in Richmond, Va., Jacksonville, Fla., and Kansas 
City, Kan., that the authorities have had to 
order investigations. 
C Mrs. John F. Chandler, a prominent 
white woman of Elizabeth, N. J., was beaten, gagged and robbed in her home last 
June by a colored man. Two days after B. 
Carter, a colored repairer of lawn mowers, 
was arrested charged with the crime and 
identified by Mrs. Chandler twice under 
oath. He was put in jail and threats were 
made against his life. On August 23 , Lewis 
Brown, a colored man, was arrested in 
White Plains, N. Y., wearing the clothes 
stolen from the Chandler residence and confessed that he was the real culprit! 
In the August CRISIS we told of the brutal 
shooting of a colored porter at Selma, Ala. 
Since then the murderer has been tried and 
as the evidence is so overwhelming against 
him he was declared "insane at the time of 
murder." A commission will eventually determine whether he is "still" insane! 
The following lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: 
Sept. 8, Tacoma, Wash., T. W. Bethel -
killed by strikers for being a "Scab. " 
Sept. 9, Columbus, Ga., unknown Negro— 
supposed to have been killed for murder of 
Crawford, a farmer. 
Sept. 9, Elizabeth, La., Israel—shot for 
wounding a foreman. 
Sept. 20 , Lafayette Ga., Henry White -
hanged for alleged attack upon a white girl. 
Sept. 21 , Cuthbert, Ga., Pete Hudson -
shot for killing a sheriff. 
Sept. 21 , Olanthe, Kan., Bert Dudley, a 
white man—hanged for murder. 
Sept. 23 , Gordonsburg, Tenn., two Negroes—shot for the murder of Bud Burns. 
Sept. 27 , Bainbridge, Ga., Moxie Shuler— 
hanged for "attempting to attack" a white 
girl. 
Sept. 29 , Nowata, Okla., John Foreman 
and F. Powell—hanged for the killing of a 
sheriff. 
Oct. 4, Arlington, Ga., Mary Conley, a 
colored woman—shot to death because her 
sou killed his employer! 
MAT E 
By G. DOUGLA S JOHNSO N 
OUR separate winding ways we trod, 
Along the highways, unto God, 
Unbonded by the clasp of hand, 
Without a vow, we understand. 
Forever strange the fusing kiss -
Omnipotent —we bide in this 
They need no trammeling of bars, 
Whose souls were welded with the stars. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Good Opportunities for 
Good Men 
Standard Life Insurance Company offers the best opportunity to the colored man 
or woman with business ability and salesmanship since January 1st, 1863. 
Standard Life is the only existing Old Line, Legal Reserve Life Insurance Company among its people and as such offers wonderful opportunities to colored men who 
are seeking permanent connection with an institution that is no longer an idle theory 
in the mind of one man, but is already catalogued with institutions that have made good. 
With its carefully managed affairs, its absolute security, its good talking points, its 
liberal contracts, its high rate of interest on its assets, you just cannot fail if you have 
got salesmanship ability and the knack of "hitting the line hard and hitting it steadily," 
Every possible aid is given the man who carries the rate book. The warm personal 
interest between the agents and the company inculcates that feeling that spurs ambition 
and inspires success. 
We are seeking to develop an agency force of clean, responsible, capable men who 
have, either developed or latent, ability for the selling of Life Insurance. No man who 
is seeking a "soft snap" can ever hope to make good with the Standard Life. The 
work is hard—there will be times when the way may be difficult—but the man with 
grit and determination to win will succeed and the rewards will far outweigh the trials 
and hardships he has borne. We want men—red-blooded—aggressive—progressive 
men. No man with any trace of the "quitter" in him need apply, for he will not succeed. W e are ready to meet the requirements of every state in the Union. We have 
not entered them because we have not had enough of the right sort of men to open 
them and we will not do it with any other kind. We are perfectly frank with you. 
If you are of the right sort, you can succeed with Standard Life. If you are not, you 
cannot succeed. 
The Remuneration —We cite you one case out of several, that of one of our 
Georgia agents, Mr. J. T. Lundy, of Statesboro. His commissions for the month of 
September, in a small Georgia town were $198.22. Mr. Lundy is not a spectacular producer. He is just a steady worker—doing each day's work during that day. Steady 
plugging brought these results. Would such an amount interest you? Perhaps you 
would not make this much the first month or in any of the first six or eight months. 
But remember, the doctor has to spend at least four years in school, the lawyer at least 
three in study. Can you afford to spend at least a few months when you will not be 
making as much as Mr. Lundy did in September? We want men who are going into 
the Life Insurance business for life, who believe that "Life Insurance is the best thing 
in the world," who are willing to work hard. 
IF YO U MEAN BUSINESS, WRITE. 
STANDAR D LIFE INSURANC E COMPAN Y 
Home Office, 200 AUBURN AVENUE ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
CAPITA L $125,000.0 0 
Licensed in Georgia, Alabama, Tennessee, Kentucky, Arkansas, Missouri. Texas, 
Mississippi, and the District of Columbia. 
OVER TW O AND A HALF MILLION OF INSURANCE IN FORCE 
HEMA N E. PERRY President 
HARR Y H. PACE Secretary 
WM. H. KING Director of Agencies 
WM . DRISKELL Superintendent of Agents 
37 
Mention TH E CRISI S 3 8 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National President 
MOORFIEL D STOREY , Bosto n 
Chairman of the Board of Directors 
DR . J. E. SPINGARN , Ne w Yor k 
Director of Publications and Research 
DR . W . E. B. D U BOIS . Ne w Yor k 
Vice-Presidents 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , Ne w Yor k 
REV . JOH N HAYNE S HOLMES , Ne w Yor k 
JOH N E. MILHOLLAND , Ne w Yor k 
ARCHIBAL D H . GRIMKE , Washingto n 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTON , Brookly n 
REV . G. R. WALLER , Springfield, Mass. 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION 
FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D RO Y NAS H 
Treasurer Secretary 
ADDITIONA L MEMBER S OF TH E BOAR D OF DIRECTOR S 
Chicago Brooklyn Ne w Yor k 
JAN E ADDAM S DR . V . MORTO N JONE S REV . HUTCHIN S C. BISHO P 
DR . C. E. BENTLE Y DR . O. M . WALLE R MRS . FLORENC E KELLE Y 
_ , Ne w Haven PAU L KENNADA Y 
JOSEP H PRINC E LOU D GEORG E W . CRAWFOR D CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
BUTLE R R. WILSO N Philadelphia CARLE S H ST UDI N 
Baltimor e Dr. WILLIA M A . SINCLAI R £ UNDERHIL L 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T Washington LILLIA N D . WAL D 
DR . F. N . CARDOZ O PROF . GEO . WILLIA M COO K WILLIA M ENGLIS H WALLIN G 
The Anti-Lynching Fund of $10,000 has been 
raised; but $10,000 is a very small sum. Wh y not 
make it $15,000? Awake! Put on thy strength, O 
Zion! 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
The Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying two dollars or more. 
Date , 1916 . 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD, Treasurer, 
7 0 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
SIR: 
1 desire to become a member of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People and to receive The Crisis. 
In payment of my dues for one year, I enclose dollars. 
Name 
Street 
City and State 
Mention THE CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 39 
Read Th e Following Bills 
Introduced in Congress by Democrats for the Oppression 
and Humiliation of Colored American Citizens. 
Can any Self-Respecting Colored Voter Support the Candidates of the Democratic Party? 
Register your Protest by Voting the Republican Ticket 
from Top to Bottom. 
IN TH E HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES . 
D ECEMBE R 6, 1915. 
Introduced by M R . VINSO N of Georgia. 
A BILL— H. R. 13. 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives 
of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That 
within four months after the passage of this Act each and 
every transportation company, firm, and person operating cars, 
vessels, or other vehicles of any character within the District 
of Columbia for the conveyance of passengers shall provide 
separate and distinct accommodations for the conveyance of 
white and negro passengers; that is to say, that they shall provide certain cars, vehicles, or compartments for the exclusive 
use and conveyance of white people, and certain cars, vehicles, 
or compartments for the exclusive use and conveyance of negro 
people: Provided, That the cars, and conveyance of negro 
people: Provided, That the cars, in all respects as good, comfortable, and convenient as those provided for the other race. 40 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
IN TH E HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES . 
J UL Y 27, 1916. . 
Introduced by M R . CARAWA Y of Arkansas. 
A BILL -H.R . 17183. 
To prevent the enlistment of negroes in the military service of 
the United States. 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives 
of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That 
hereafter there shall not be enlisted or reenlisted in the military 
service of the United States, either in the Army or Navy, any 
person of the negro or colored race. 
S EC . 2. All laws and parts of laws in conflict herewith 
are hereby repealed. 
IN TH E HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES . 
D ECEMBE R 6, 1915. 
Introduced by M R . AsWEL L of Louisiana. 
A BILL -H . R. 539. 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives 
of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That 
heads of all executive departments shall ISSUE all such orders 
as shall be necessary to secure IN all branches of the civil service 
of the United States, to the utmost extent consistent with public 
interests, the segregation of civil employees of the white race 
from those of African blood or descent in the performance of 
their services. 
SEC 2. That in all executive departments within the District of Columbia clerks or employees shall not be required to 
occupy the same office or workrooms with clerks or employees 
of African blood or descent; nor shall any white clerk or em-THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 41 
ployee be placed under the orders, direction, or supervision of 
any person of African blood or descent. 
SEC . 3. That IN the railway Mail Service of the Post 
Office Department white clerks shall not, except in cases of 
emergency, be ordered to duty in the same mail car with postal 
clerks of African blood or descent. 
SEC. 4. That IN the administration of the provisions of 
this Act there shall be no discrimination in favor of or against 
clerks or employees of equal efficiency on account of race. 
IN TH E HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES . 
D ecembe r 6, 1915. 
Introduced by M r . VINSO N of Georgia. 
A BILL —H. R. 11. 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives 
of the United States of America in Congress assembled, That 
heads of all executive departments shall issue all such orders 
as shall be necessary to secure IN all branches of the civil service 
of the United States to the utmost extent consistent with the 
public interests the segregation of civil employees of the white 
race from those of African blood or descent in the performance 
of their services. 
SEC. 2. That in all executive departments within the District of Columbia clerks or employees shall not be required to 
occupy the same office or workrooms with clerks or employees 
of African blood or descent; nor shall any white clerk or employee be placed under the orders, direction, or supervision of 
any person of African blood or descent. 
SEC . 3. That in the Railway Mail Service of the Post 
Office Department white clerks shall not, except in cases of 
emergency, be ordered to duty in the same mail car with postal 
clerks of African blood or descent. 42 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
BOOKS BY COLORED AUTHORS 
Nearly a quarter of a century has passed 
of its publications are in active circulation, 
the American people than those that relate 
in themselves. Limitations of space enable 
by prominent colored authors. 
Race Adjustment: Essays on the Negro in 
America. By Kelly Miller, colored; Dean 
of the College of Arts and Sciences and Professor of Mathematics, .Howard University. 
Third thousand. $2.15 by mail. 
Chicago News: "The book is written with great 
ability, in English quite free from fault, and its logic 
is fairly inexorable." 
New York Evening Post: "As admirable for its 
calmness and good temper as for its thoroughness 
and skill." 
Out of the House of Bondage. By Kelly 
Miller, colored; Dean of the College of Arts 
and Sciences, Howard University. $1.65 by 
mail. 
Boston Transcript: "Written in a clear and decisive style, with a comprehensive and convincing 
command of the subject. H e neither denounces nor 
condemns; he analyzes and constructs possibilities 
upon the fundamental basis of human nature. No 
man of his race has so sure a power of pruning the 
fallacies with passionless intellectual severity from 
the pernicious arguments of the prejudiced demagogues." 
The Facts of Reconstruction. By John R. 
Lynch, colored; formerly Member of Congress; later Fourth Auditor of the Treasury; 
at present Major in United States Army. 
Fourth thousand. $1.65 by mail. 
Chicago Tribune: "This book is perhaps the most 
important contribution which has been made by any 
political writer during recent years to the political 
literature of the reconstruction era." 
The Key; or, a Tangible Solution of the 
Negro Problem. By James S. Stemons, 
colored; Field Secretary of the Joint Organization of the Association for Equalizing 
Industrial Opportunities and the League of 
Civic and Political Reform. Mr. Stemons 
contends that industrial opportunity, rather 
than industrial education, is the basic need 
of the Negro. He presents his arguments 
in vigorous English of extraordinary 
purity, and the book may easily be classed 
with the foremost literature of the Negro 
race. $1.00 by mail. 
Racial Adjustments in the Methodist Episcopal Church. By John H. Reed, D. D., 
K. C , colored; with an introduction by Adna 
B. Leonard, D. D., LL. D. $1.60 by mail 
Philadelphia Christian Recorder: "The book is 
filled with splendid idealism, and in spite of its 
somewhat verbose character, presents a fine argument, which in this day of compromise for the present 
exigencies may not be heeded." 
since the Neale house was founded. Hundreds 
None of these are more vitally important to 
to racial problems. They comprise a library 
us to announce here but a few of these books 
Haiti: Her History and Her Detractors. By 
J. N. Leger, colored; formerly Minister 
from Haiti to the United States. Illustrated. Two editions: one in English and 
the other in French. Each edition $3.20 
by mail. 
The Nation, New York : "Haiti, at last, has a 
champion who is entitled to be heard; for he speaks 
from fullness of knowledge, and from a position of 
political eminence sends forth no uncertain sound. 
It is not too much to say that the latest book on 
Haiti is also the best that has ever appeared respecting the so-called 'Black Republic' Minister Leger 
has struck a new note, for, unlike others who have 
written on the subject, he places himself against a 
veritable wall of facts, and not only wards off the 
blows that are aimed at his country, but takes the 
aggressive against her critics." 
The New Negro; His Political, Civil, and 
Mental Status. By William Pickens, Lit. 
D., colored; Dean of Morgan College, Baltimore. Dr. Pickens was graduated from 
Yale in the highest grade of his class and 
won the Phi Beta Kappa Key and the Ten 
Eyck Oration. Although a young man, he 
has won distinction as a scholar; he is 
among the foremost men of his race. $1.60 
by mail. 
Negro Culture in West Africa. By George 
W. Ellis, K. C , F. R. G. S., colored; recently, and for eight years, Secretary of 
the United States Legation in Liberia; 
author of "Liberia in the Political Psychology of West Africa, " "Islam as a Factor 
in West African Culture," "Dynami c Factors in the Liberian Situation," and other 
works. Profusely illustrated. $2.15 by 
mail. 
Chicago Tribune: "It is the third consecutive contribution made by a noted man to our knowledge 
of conditions and peoples in West Africa." 
Albany Times-Union : "It is easily one of the most 
important contributions ever made to the literature 
of the Negro race." 
New York Crisis: "This history ought to be in 
every American's library." 
The Black Man's Burden. By William H. 
Holtzclaw, colored; Principal of the Utica 
Normal and Industrial Institute for the 
Training of Colored Youn g Men and Young 
Women, Utica, Mississippi. With an introduction by the late Booker T. Washington. 
Illustrated. Third thousand. $1.60 by mail. 
New Orleans Times-Picayune: "It is an interesting study of Negro achievement and should be an 
inspiration to the young men and the young women 
of the race." 
Prof. Wm. E. Chancellor, Ph. D., the eminent historian and educator, writes: "The 
Neale Publishing Company to-day represents high-water mark in Americ a for its historical 
works. Upon its list are to be found the best books upon each and every side of the common issues of our public life. Such is the authority of the list considered as an entirety 
as to lend luster to each separate title, creating a presumption in its favor. " 
Order through 
THE NEALE PUBLISHING CO. 
440 Fourth Avenue 
New York City or THE CRISIS, 70 Fifth Ave
Mention THE CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
THE NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOOL, DURHAM , N. C , 
extends a cordial invitation to the heads of Universities, Colleges and Secondary Schools for the education and training of 
colored people in the United States to be the. guests of the 
School, November 21-24 , 1916 , for the purpose of Conferences, 
closer unity and understanding of the needs and educational requirements 
of the colored people. 
Among the subjects to be discussed particular stress will be laid on 
the following: 
1 . What is the opinion of the Educators themselves in regard to the 
duplication of work in schools in the various communities? Has it been 
hurtful, unwise and wasteful ? What plans ought to be fostered to correct the evil? 
2 . To what extent should classes devoted to Teacher Training be 
encouraged ? How and where located ? 
3. What system should be devised to meet the requirements of the 
rural teacher? 
4 . What should be the standard of the University, College, Normal 
School, Teacher Training and Secondary Schools ? 
5. How should students be received from one to the other? 
6. To what extent should religious instruction be carried on in the 
various schools? 
7. Should there be a general clearing-house for aid for Negro 
schools? 
8. Is the aid given by the various Funds and Boards to Negro education wise, economical and helpful ? 
Many other and kindred subjects will be announced on the tentative 
program which will be published in the early Fall. 
This Conference has been suggested by a great many who desire to 
know the actual condition and needs of the schools devoted to Negro 
education from those who are actually doing the work. No Conference 
in recent years will be more far-reaching in its effects than this. 
The guests will be entertained free of charge by the National 
Training School. Durham itself presents a field of study and inspiration, 
which will be furnished by no other city of its size in the country. 
Do you approve of such a Conference ? Will you be present ? Please 
let me know at your earliest convenience. 
Yours for service, 
James E. Shepard 
President National Training School, 
Durham, N. C. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 
AN INVITATION TO EDUCATORS 44 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
KASHMIR PREPARATIONS 
"Better Than the Best" 
Skin Beautiful Hair Beautiful 
"TH E KASHMI R GIRL " 
The "KASHMI R Way " is the fashion in Beauty Culture. The KASHMI R 
Skin and Hair Preparations are said by leading food authorities to contain genuine 
food elements necessary to the Beauty and growth of the skin and hair. The 
KASHMI R PREPARATION S produce new skin as well as whiten, soften and 
cleanse the skin. Wrinkles, blackheads, and liver spots disappear immediately. 
The complexion takes on the charm of color and youth. Become fashionable and 
learn the "KASHMI R WAY. " TH E KASHMI R INSTITUT E is the best 
equipped correspondence Beauty College in the world. Terms reasonable. The 
course is complete, fascinating and inexpensive. Catalog" free. 
KASHMI R PREPARATION S 
The Kashmir Cream Brown Face Powde r 
The Kashmir Whitener and Cleanser 
The Kashmir Eczema or Tetter Corrective 
The Kashmir Cold Cream 
The Kashmir Vanishing Cream 
The Kashmir Balm 
The Kashmir Dandruff Cure 
The Kashmir Hair Beautifier 
All preparations sold in 50c. sizes. Postage extra 4c. 
THE KASHMIR CHEMICAL CO. 
Foreign offices Paris Tokyo Kashmir Bldg. AGENTS WANTE D 
C ALCUTT A 4709 Stale Street, Chicago, ILL, U. S. A. Big opportunity for energetic agents 
Mention THE CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 45 
WHAT A FIVE DOLLAR BILL 
OF YOURS WILL DO! O 
It will purchase ONE SHARE of stock in the greatest NEWSPAPER SYNDICATE 
under the control of Colored people in the world, which proposes to operate a chain 
of "daily newspapers" connected and linked with each other by telegraph wires in 
such cities as: New York: Boston, Mass.; Philadelphia, Pa.; Pittsburgh, Pa.; Baltimore, Md.; Washington, D. C, and Richmond, Va. 
It will help to make possible the great and needful service in unseating and abolishing that demon monster "color-prejudice" which has and is still keeping a padlock 
on the doors of "EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES " to this race. 
It will help to place in the hands of the race a bludgeon which will be in the form 
of concerted opinion that will more effectively wipe out the heinous and atrocious 
crimes of lynching in a single year than all of the thunder talk promises made by 
office seeking politicians would bring about in a decade. 
It will help to provide a PRINTING PLAN T to be installed in each one of the 
above named cities which will give to qualified men and women POSITIONS of a 
higher grade. 
It will help you to help yourself. 
W e have prepared a wonderfully interesting booklet of "facts and figures" on this 
most wonderful opportunity. It will tell you of many things of which you have probably never thought about. It will inform you of the vast amount of good that is in 
your own power to do. Send for it and read it over—today. It is FREE! 
THE THUNDERER PRINTING & PUBLISHING COMPANY, inc. 
174 West 135th Street, NEW YORK CITY 
LOUI S A. LEAVELLE , Prest. JOH N D. HADWIN , Treas. 
The Wonder 
of the Age 
LIQUID ENAMEL 
Is the last word in a High surface 
Polish. Positively gives the most brilliant and lasting lustre known. Is absolutely waterproof, dustproof and finger 
mark-proof not affected by heat, cold, 
or dampness. Keeps indefinitely. Liquid 
Enamel's only rival is a large diamond 
under the rays of a powerful arc-light. 
Dries spontaneously with each stroke 
of the cloth. 
USES 
Admirabl y adapted for use on automobiles, 
exterior and interior of Pullmans and all 
steam cars, carriages, mahogany, wainscoating of hotels, hanks, office buildings, 
private residences, motor cycles, victrolas, 
desks, clocks, furniture, cabinet files, safes, 
book cases, exterior and interior surfaces 
of electric cars, violins, interior woodwork 
of stores and steamships, delivery wagons. 
PRIC E 60c PE R BOTTLE . 
W. AUGS. B. MATTHEWS 
79 Dexte r St. , Medford, Mass. 
Agent . 
YOUR FALL SUIT 
FREE 
Send postal today for full infor ­
mation how to get your Fall suit, 
made to measure, Without a penny's 
cost. $30 to $40 would not buy a 
better one. Simply wear it, tell your 
friends where you got it—take their 
orders—and make 
$10 to $15 
a Day 
in your spar e time . It is dead 
easy—you never saw a nobbier suit or 
a more stunning pattern, cut in very 
latest style. Your choice of 60 fabrics and 82 styles. Drop as a postal 
card for heavy pattern book, inside 
Information abou t styles. selfmeasuring blanks . etc. DON'T 
WAIT. Mail Postal NOW! 
We Pay Delivery Charges GET AHEAD OF THE OTHER FELLOWS, WRITE THIS MINU
American Woolen Mills Company 
Dept . 115 1 Chicag o 
Th e SLAUGHTE R SYSTE M introducin g 
LYDA'S HAIR BEAUTIFIER 
Guarantee d l o Gro w llal r i n SI X TREATMENT S 
o r Mone y Refunded . Pric e 3 0 cent s pe r box . 
Agents Wanted. System Taught by Mall or at College. 
Mrs. E. Slaughter Gamble 
300 1 LAWTO N AVENU E AT . IOUIS . MO . 
Mention TH E Crisis 46 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
19 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY a ATLANTA. GA. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
A n aggressiv e exposur e b y an Anglo-Saxo n champio n o f equa l rights. Startling facts an d crushin g 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessit y fo r 
clear understandin g an d up-to-date propaganda . Be ­
long s in the library o f ever y frien d o f socia l justice . 
Pric e 25 cents. Sen d orde r to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street •:• New York, N. Y. 
"GLEANINGS FROM DIXIE-LAND" 
Te n poems b y 
EFFI E T . BATTLE, A.M . 
"Mrs. Battl e has an individua l gift o f melody. " 
—Springfiel d Republican . 
"Yo u ow e it t o you r rac e to publish you r poems in 
boo k form."—Editor, Southwester n Christian Advo ­
cate. 
"Verse s are smooth , graceful, high-minde d an d clear, 
reverent to all truth, appreciative o f all beaut y and 
true inspiration."—Georg e W . Cable . 
PRIC E 25 CENTS . 
ADDRESS : OKOLON A INDUSTRIA L SCHOOL, 
Okolona , Miss. 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
may b e mad e in commission s by parties handlin g 
"Histor y o f Negr o Soldiers in Spanish-America n 
War " combine d with "Histor y o f the Negr o Race. " 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Pric e $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A . JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Stree t NE W YOR K 
If It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
W e manufacture Lodge Regalia for every 
Fraternal Society. Cash or Installment 
Plan. Cheapest Badge House in the Country. Catalogue for your Society FREE. 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES. Pres. 
N. E. Cor. 8th & Plum 
Cincinnati. Ohio 
Mention TH E CRISI S 
LET US SHOW YOU HOW TO GET FREE SUITS 
Here w e g o again, 
breaking all records for 
new, nobby, ahead-of-thetime styles. Be the first in 
your town to wear a suit 
that is ahead of time. Earn 
it while you wear it. W e 
send the suit complete. 
Yo u can mak e big money , 
too. Ther e is 
$50 to $100 a Week 
in it for you. Drop us a 
postal for our advance 
book, select the styles you want 
and the cloth. 
Let us prove our wonderful 
offer. Don't wait a minute. 
Costs you nothing to look into 
this. We send everything the 
day your request is received. 
We prepay delivery charges on 
everything. Simply send in a 
postal with your name and address on it. Do it right now. 
Paragon Tailoring Co. 
Dept. 1151 CHICAG O 
PEOPLE' S HAI R 
Natural Front Part 
Covers Entire Head 
Latest Style s o f Wigs, Plats, Transforma ­
tions, Puffs, Electri c Combs. W e ar e the 
largest firm in this line . Sen d 2c fo r ou r 
ne w Catalogue . 
Th e Ol d Reliabl e 
MME. BAUM'S HAIR EMPORIUM 
486 8th Ave., New York City THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 47 
$60 A WEEK and this free automobile 
Every agent can get an auto free no contest 
Tu b 
Guarantee d 
Fo r Te n Year s 
You— yourself—can positively make $60 a week and get a Free 
Auto . I want men. hustling, energetic, ambitious fellows, 
anxious to make money, who are willing to work with me. Not 
for me, but with me. Are you that kind? I want you to advertise. sell, and appoint local agents for the biggest, most 
sensational seller in 60 years—the ROBINSON FOLDING 
BATH TUB. Demonstrating Tu b Furnished. Here's an 
absolutely new Invention—nothing like it. Makes Instant 
appeal. Sells easily. Gives every home a modem up-to-date 
bathroom in any part of the house. No plumbing, no water 
works needed. Folds in small roll, handy as umbrella. Selfemptying, positively unleakable. Absolutely guaranteed for 
10 years. Remember, fully 70% of homes have no bath rooms. 
Sensational Sales Successe s 
Two sales a day means $300 a month. Breeze, of Idaho, made 
$400 profit in 30 days. Rev. Otto Schulre, Mo., got $1600 to date. 
Burkholder, Mont., orders $1072 In 17 days. Hamlinton. of 
Wyo., made $60 first two days. Hundreds like that. Pleasant, 
permanent, fascinating work. Write a postcard. Let me 
write you a long letter. No experience needed, no capital. 
Your credit is good if you mean business. But yon must be 
ambitions, you must want to make money. That's all. Write 
a postcard now. I want to pay you $60.00 every week. 
H. S. ROBINSON, PRES. THE ROBINSON CABINET MFG, CO. 
4285 Factories Building TOLEDO , OHI O 
Something New Under the Sun 
''Allianceskin Pants 
"Allianceskin" Pronounced 
Stronger Than 
A lion's Skin 
We Pay Express or Parcel Post Charges 
Made As You Like Them. A new cloth 
—beautiful finish and texture. Can be worn 
for dress or work and the formula (or 
weaving "Allianceskin" is our exclusive 
property. Wonderful value. Only $1.00. 
We make suits to measure from $7.50 up, 
alio overcoats and "Yearound" Raincoats 
at $3.85. Just mail us your name 
Agent s and address and we will send 
Wante d FREE all our catalogs, with real 
A T ONCE samples of cloths, illustrations, 
tape line, order blanks, etc. Biggest bargains you ever saw. Our prices save 
half. Satisfaction guaranteed. See all our 
references and with them Make Big Money, 
PRODUCERS & CONSUMERS ALLIANCE 
Dept. 179 Wholesale Tailors, Chicago 
$20.00 to $40.00 per week 
being made selling the new history of colored 
people; everybody buys; anyone can sell. A 
man or woman wanted for each county to 
work full or spare time. 
Write for terms and free outfit. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO., 7th Street, Washington, D. C. 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR..GERTRUDE E. CURTIS 
SURGEO N DENTIS T 
188 W . 135th Street New York City 
Telephone.: (Central 104-W 
1 Main 61 
HARRY E. DAVIS 
ATTORNEY-AT - LA W NOTAR Y Public 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohio 
Office L. D . Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L. D. Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORGE A. DOUGLAS 
COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St , Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROWN S. SMITH 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn. 
Tel . 5437 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
ATTORNE Y AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
34 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbie Hawkins George W . F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHEN 
ATTORNEYS-AT-LA W 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md . 
Telephone Central 3087 
HARRY M. COOPER 
Druggists' Specialties 
Chemicals, Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 
Write for Quotations 
Room 612, 58 W. Washington St. CHICAGO, ILL. 
FEET 
PAINLESS treatment for 
CORNS, BUNIONS. INGROWN NAILS, and ALL 
other AILMENTS of the FEET. 
DR. WILLIAM 1. CARTER 
CHIROPODIS T 
Registered in the States of New York and New Jersey 
Telephone 1284 Audubon. 167 West 136th St., New York City. 
LADIES WANTED TO TAKE THE QUINO COURSE 
tim e Be our agent. Sell our goods and mak e money . Quin o
 H 
75c . Try a box. Writ e QUINO , 636 Fogg Street, NASHVILLE , TENN . 
In Scalp Treatment. No 
mone y required. Just a 
Quin o Hair Grower , 50c , Templ e Oil, 
Mention TH E CRISIS 48 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
The NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to 
all who believe in the Negro race and in our obligation to 
help •promote its intellectual, moral and religious uplift." 
R EV . D R . C HARLE S H . P ARKHURST . New Yor k City. 
IT IS MORE THAN A MERE SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNITY OF SERVICE AND UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, 
Y. M. C. A. and Y. W. C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced coworkers and actual every-day practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE 
DEPARTMENT. 
A HIGH STANDARD COLLEGE DEPARTMENT has now been established. 
W e aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
Next School Term Opens Oct. 4, 1916. 
For catalog and detailed information, address: 
PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPARD 
NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOOL DURHAM, N. C. 
THE 
AGRICULTURAL AND 
TECHNICAL COLLEGE 
(Formerly A. & M. College) 
Fall Term begins September 1, 1916, 
Board, lodging and tuition $8.00 per 
month. 
Maintained by the Governments of 
the United States and of North Carolina. 
Short courses. 
Courses leading to the degrees of 
Bachelor of Science in Agriculture 
and Bachelor of Science in Mechanics. 
Writ e today for catalog. 
Address: 
PRESIDENT DUDLEY 
A. & T. College 
Greensboro, N. C. 
The Cheyney Training School 
for Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNSYLVANIA 
Under the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, healthful, well appointed. 
This school offers to young colored 
men and women who have a reasonable secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to 
become teachers, courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, manual crafts and 
agriculture. Tuition is free. Board, 
lodging, heat, light and laundry 
privileges are offered for nine 
months for Sioo. The entrance 
fee is $7. Fall term opens September 16, 191 6 . 
For full information, write to 
LESLIE PINCKNEY HILL, Principal 
Mention TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 49 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-seven years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxvill e College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High School, 
Grammar School and Industrial. 
Goo d water, steam heat, electric lights, 
goo d drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term Begins September 21, 191 6 
For information address 
President R. W . Mc GRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of the Sisters of St. Mary. 
Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
609 N. 43d St W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
TH E COLORE D TEACHE R 
A Monthly Educational Journal 
Frederick A. McGinnis, Wilberforce, Ohio, Editor 
Isaac H. Miller. Atlanta, Ga., / 
T. B. Steward, Kansas City, Mo . r Associate Editors 
W . H . Fouse, Lexington, Ky . ) 
$1.00 PE R YEAR—1 0 CENT S PE R COPY . 
AGENT S WANTED . 
Address: The Colored Teacher, Box 22, Wilber ­
force, O, 
TEACHER S A live agency furnishes the 
connecting medium in a business way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas. Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia. Illinois. Indiana. Kansas. Kentucky. Maryland, Mississippi. Missouri, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania. Rhode Island. 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West 
Virginia. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1403 New Yor k Avenue Washington, D. C. 
Books? See the Selected List on 
the Inside Front Cover 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANT A G A 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXA S 
RECOGNIZED AS A COLLEGE OF THE FIRST CLASS 
BY TEXAS AND LOUISIANA STATE BOARDS OF 
EDUCATION. HARVARD, YALE AND COLUMBIA 
REPRESENTED ON ITS FACULTY; STUDENTS GATHERED FROM TEN DIFFERENT STATES. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSIT Y 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
. High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE, President 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training, Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester begins Sept. 28th, 1916. 
For further information address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN, President 
BISHO P J. S. FLIPPER , Chairman Trustee Board. 
Mention THE CRISIS 50 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
MME. BRIDGES' SCHOOL OF 
French Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring and Millinery. 
Bridges System. 
Special Courses in Designing, Copying, Draping, 
Making, Trimming, Finishing, Cutting and. Fitting. 
Special reduction in tuition given to students entering in groups of three or more or to one student 
taking two or more consecutive courses. 
Individual Instruction. A Bridges Diploma means 
something to you. 
448 E. 35th St. Chicago, Ill. 
ROLAND W. HAYES, Tenor 
Recital s Concert s Oratori o Oper a 
"A n unusually good voice. The natural 
quality is beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr . Hayes sings freely and with good 
taste."—Philip Hale, in the Boston Herald. 
" A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre." 
—Chattanooga Times. 
Address : 3 WARWIC K ST. . BOSTON . MASS . 
Stenography Typewriting Book-keeping 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
1. Short Courses in Typewriting 
2. Shorthand made as easy as A. B. C. 
3. Brief Courses in Practical Book-keeping 
W e typewrite Letters, Postal Cards, Wills; fill in 
Deeds and multigraph Circular Letters cheap. 
EDWAR D T. DUNCAN, President 
1227 SO. 17TH STREET , PHILADELPHIA , PA. 
TEACHERS (al l subjects ) 
an d Interpreter s 
STANDAR D TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
Established 1897 
101 1 Ne w Yor k Avenu e Washington , D.C . 
Domestic Science Teacher (a graduate of Cheyney Institute, Cheyney, 
Pa.) wishes a position as teacher or 
matron. Address L. H., care of The 
Crisis, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
City. 
Picture s of Booke r Washingto n 
Sell like hot cakes; our special scheme of 
giving his book with picture sells everybody; 
we have the big book, both sell for $1.25; we 
pay express; all agents should write us; anybody can sell; two outfits, fifteen cents. 
AUSTI N JENKIN S CO. , 7th St., Washington, D. C. 
"The Truth About the Bible" 
This book deals with the sex of the Bible. "It 
will empty our jails, insane asylums and hospitals 
in time ; it should be in every home in the world." 
—J. H. Powell, M. D. "For ideas, it is the world's 
greatest book."—J. Silas Harris, A. M. "It is 
the world's most revolutionary book; it means a 
better race."—W. A. Swan, M. D. Read this 
book. Price $3.00. Address the Author, Sidney 
C. Tapp, Ph.B. , 601 Delaware St., Kansas City, Mo. 
F. J. MYLES CHAMPIO N PENMA N 
Roger William s University. Nashville. Tenn. 
"F . J. Mylc s is no doubt the most skillful and the most 
versatile colored penman In the world."—Nashvill e Globe . 
Mention TH E CRISI S 
Correct Calling cards 
POPULAR STYLES FOR LADIES OR GENTLEMEN 
100 FOR 50 CENTS OR 50 FOR 30 CENTS. NO 
EXTRA CHARGE FOR ADDRESS. ALL ORDERS 
FILLED PROMPTLY. ATTRACTIVE PROPOSITION 
FOR AGENTS. WRITE FOR SAMPLES AND TERMS 
TH E HOUS E O F CHOWNIN G 
INDIANAPOLIS. INDIANA 
Price only $8.50 express prepaid. made 
Special Offer 
to advertise our swell clothes. This handsome, handtailored $15 Suit, in 18 different new styles, special pric
We offer you the Biggest 
Values in Tailoring:, and please 
remember always: W e Will No t 
Keep One Penny Of You r Money 
Unless you are WEL L PLEASE D 
Big Pay-Easy Work 
Agents! Make $35 to $65 a week 
right in your own town. 
Part time or all. We furnish Tailor 
Book with styles, samples, wholesale 
prices, and all instructions FREE 
\ Write for it Today . 
I THE CHICAGO TAILORS ASS'N . 
j Dept. 89 515 So.FranKlin St., Chicago. I 
SPLENDID OPPORTUNITY 
for a Dentist desiring to locate in 
Philadelphia, Pa. For particulars 
address Frank Dawson, 1020 Chestnut Street. 
Mrs. Minnie C. Warwick 
Novelty Shop 
Novelties, Dry Goods, Toile t Articles, Lingeri e of 
all kinds in stock and made to order. "Wedding 
Outfits at reasonable rates, 
178 Northampton St., BOSTON , MASS . 
UNIVERSITY LITERARY BUREAU 
Manuscript CRITICIZED and Revised 
Poems, Short Stories, Novels, Scenarios, Magazine and Press Articles, 
Sermons and Addresses, Bibliographies and Debating Briefs Prepared. 
General Research Work. 
Advice of Publication. 
Correspondence Solicted. 
Strictly Confidential. 
Montgomery Gregory Alain Leroy Lock 
ADDRESS : Box 102 , Howard University, Washington, D. C. A Ne w Boo k b y Dr . D u Bois 
TH E NEGR O 
By W . E. BURGHARD T D U BOIS, author of "Souls of Black 
Folk," "Quest of the Silver Fleece," "Select Bibliography of 
the Negro American," etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. IT is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. Me is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa, America, and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
256 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
At the low price of 50 cents net—By mail 56 cents 
Dr. Du Bois's new book is the latest addition to a remarkable 
series of low-priced new books with which everybody should become acquainted. 
TH E HOM E UNIVERSIT Y LIBRAR Y 
9 4 VOLUME S NO W READY 
Published by HENRY HOLT & COMPANY, 34 West 33d Street, New York 
Is made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY, H. A. L. FISHER, W. T. BREWSTER 
and J. ARTHUR THOMSON. 
Cloth bound, good paper, clear type, 256 pages per CF\, » Jvolume. Each complete and sold separately - - 50C. NET 
POSTAGE EXTRA 
" A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 5 0 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES: 
EVOLUTION By J. A. Thomson LATIN AMERICA By W. R. Shepherd 
THE FRENCH REVOLUTION VICTORIAN LITERATURE 
By Hilaire Belloc By G. K. Chesterton 
ROME By W. Warde Fowler GERMANY OF TODAY 
PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY By Charles Tower 
By Bertrand Russell EURIPIDES AND HIS AGE 
NAPOLEON By H. A. L. Fisher By Gilbert Murray 
THE CIVIL WA R By F. L. Paxson UNEMPLOYMENT By A. C Pigou 
ORDER THROUGH TH E PUBLISHERS OR THROUGH 
The CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Mention TH E CRISI S SAMUEL COLERIDGE-TAYLOR : Musician 
HIS LIFE AN D LETTER S BY W. C. BERWICK SAYERS 
SAMUE L COLERIDGE-TAYLOR , the first compose r of classic music to 
come from the colored races, was born in Londo n forty years ago. His 
genius asserted itself at the early age of six when, as one of his admirers 
describes it, he was found "holding a very small-sized violin in one hand, and 
playing at marbles with the other." The real discovery was, however, made by his 
guardian, friend, and benefactor, Colonel Herbert, of the Queen's Regiment. 
At thirteen, he was a brilliant solo violinist. Entering the Roya l College of 
Music in 1890, three years later, he won an open scholarship for composition. His 
progress was marked by such landmarks as "Hiawatha's Weddin g Feast," known 
the world over, "Herod, " "Ulysses," "Nero, " "Faust," "Endymion's Dream," " A 
Tale of Old Japan," "Othello." 
The tribute we pay to the darker races of the world who have produced artists, 
thinkers, and composers is notorious by its absence. Proud of his race, it was 
indeed characteristic of the sturdy, honest nature of Coleridge-Taylor that he never 
sought to keep in the background his Negro origin, but, on the contrary, was 
thoroughly proud of it and of his own position. Of the fascination the tale of his 
life holds for a biographer, it is needless to speak. Mr. Berwick Sayers has 
brought to his loving task an enthusiasm which makes of his volume charming 
reading. 
Alfred Noyes, in the poem entitled "Samuel Coleridge-Taylor," writes: 
The spark that falls from heaven, not oft on earth, 
To human hearts its vital splendor gives; 
His was the simple, true, immortal birth! 
Scholars compose; but 
THI S MAN' S MUSI C LIVES . 
Price, $2.25. Postage Extra 
TH E CRISI S : : : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
The Journal of Negro History 
Published Quarterly Edited by 100 Pages 
CARTER G. WOODSON P 
TH E JOURNA L OF NEGR O HISTOR Y is the official organ of 
the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, which is now 
trying not to promote an isolated research into the history of the black race 
but to show how civilization has been influenced by contact with the people 
of color. This publication aims to popularize the movement to save and 
make available the scattered historical materials bearing on the Negro. In 
it appear scholarly articles and valuable documents giving information 
generally unknown. It is concerned with facts not with opinions. 
Subscription price, $1.00 per year. Foreign subscriptions, 25 cents extra. 
Single numbers, 25 cents; 30 cents by mail. . 
, - / 
Checks should be made payable to TH E JOURNA L O F NEGR O 
HISTOR Y and addressed to 
CARTE R G. WOODSON , 2223 12th St., N. W., Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 