Xmas = The Crisis = 1914 "Out of the House of Bondage" 
The latest and greatest book from the pen of 
PROFESSOR KELL Y MILLE R 
"No man of his race has so sure a power of prunning falacies with passionless 
intellectual severity."—Boston Transcript. 
"The man searches deeply into underlying causes."—St. Joseph, Mo., News-Press. 
"A philosophic treatise."—Charlotte, N. C , Observer. 
"No student of social conditions of America at the present time will want to fail to see 
it on his shelves."—Southern Workman. 
242 Pages. Price $1.50. 
Agents Wanted Everywhere 
Address: Prof. KELL Y MILLER, Howard University 
Washington, D. C. 
HAZE L 
The Story of a Little Colored Girl 
By MARY WHITE OVINGTON 
Author of "Half a Man" 
Price $1.00 net. Postage Extra 
For sale through our agents and at TH E CRISIS 
office, as well as at leading book stores. 
THE CRISIS, 70 Fifth Ave., New York City 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 7 0 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducted by 
W. E. BURGHARD T D U BOIS 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, Business Manager 
Contents Copyrighted, 1914, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for December, 1914 
PICTURES 
COVER PICTURE, "ANNUNCIATION." Photograph from life. By C. 
M. Battey. Page 
COLORED STUDENTS IN "THE TEMPEST" 60 
TH E PARADOX 68 
TH E ADORATION OF TH E KINGS. After Jan Gossart of Mabuse...78-79 
(Reproductions for sale.) 
ARTICLES 
TH E CHRISTMAS PRAYERS OF GOD. A Poem 83 
CONGRESSMEN AND TH E NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 85 
TH E DEBTOR. A Story. By Maynard Holbrook Jackson 89 
SCIENCE AND RACE. By Jacques Loeb 92 
DEPARTMENTS 
ALONG TH E COLOR LINE 59 
MEN OF TH E MONTH 65 
OPINION 69 
EDITORIAL 76 
N. A. A. C. P. NOTES 87 
TH E BURDEN 94 
TEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTRA 
RENEWALS: When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANGE OF ADDRESS: The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 56 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-five years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for self-help. 
Fall Term Began September, 1914. 
For information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE, TENN . 
The Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
Maintained by the governments of North Carolina and 
of the United States. Open 
all the year round. For 
males only. Fall term began September 1, 1914. 
Board, lodging and tuition, 
$7 per month. Best opportunities for Negro youth. 
Night school for indigent 
but ambitious young men. 
For catalog or further information, address 
PRESIDENT DUDLEY 
A. & M. College Greensboro, N. C. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President. 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding and day school for 
girls, under the direction of the Sisters of St. 
Mary. Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
611 N. 43d St. W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
AVOID BA D SCHOOLS 
Educate your children at home under our expert teachers 
Courses for Adults 
Pupils received at any time. Write to 
Educational Extension School, Box 3194 Station F, Washington, D. C. 
Highly Endorsed. Financially Responsible. 
TH E GENERAL 
HOSPITAL 
SCHOOL FOR 
NURSES 
Colored Department 
Moral atmosphere and home influences. Thoroughly modern 
training. Eight hour duty. Practical experience under Professional guidance. Laboratory, 
Surgical, Obstetrical, Medical 
and Contagious cases. Scientific 
instruction in Dietetics. Special 
private nursing. Graduates eligible to State Registration and 
National Red Cross Nursing 
Service. Address, 
MISS HARRIET LECK, Principal. KANSAS CITY, MISSOURI. 
Enroll now in the 
BEREAN MANUAL TRAINING 
and Industrial School 
SOUTH COLLEGE AVENUE, Opposite Girard College 
PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
Winter Term opens Monday, January 4th, 
1915; Spring Term opens Thursday, April 
1st, 1915. 
MATTHE W ANDERSON, D. D., 
Principal. 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 57 
The National Religious Training School 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to all who believe 
in the Negro race and in our obligation to help promote its intellectual, moral 
and religious uplift." 
—REV . DR . CHARLE S H. PARKHURST , New York City. 
IT IS MORE THA N A MER E SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNITY OF SERVICE AN D UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, Y. M. C. A. 
and Y. W. C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their 
studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced co-workers and actual every-day 
practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE DEPARTMENT. 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres ; ten modern buildings ; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
For catalog and detailed information address : 
PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPARD 
National Religious Training School Durham, N. C. 
The school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance fund 
of $15,000 for running expenses. Won't you help us this year? 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNSYLVANIA 
Under the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, 
healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach of a great variety of educational institutions, public and private, extending from West Chester to 
Philadelphia; representing a wide range of educational problems and 
practice. 
This school offers to young colored men and women who have a reasonable 
secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to become teachers, 
carefully graded courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, 
manual crafts and agriculture. For teachers of experience and intending 
teachers it offers also a six weeks' summer-school course during the months 
of July and August. Tuition is free. Board, lodging, heat, light and 
laundry privileges are offered for nine months for $100. The charge for 
the same during the summer-school course is $15. Write for particulars to 
LESLIE PINCKNEY HILL, Principal 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS 58 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OF INTEREST TO VOCAL STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACIN G AND 
VOICE - DEVELOPMENT 
Points explained, viz.: Breath in 
Singing, Trying the Voice, the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto, Tenor Leggiero or High 
Tenor, the Baritone, the Bass, 
Parts of the Vocal Apparatus, the 
Mouth, the Tongue, Position when 
Practising, Position when Singing, 
How to Practice, Good Rules for 
Singing. 
Comment from the conductor of the Paulist Choristers, the celebrated choral society which received 
the first prize awarded at the International Singing 
Contest held in Paris on May 25, 1912: 
"Dear Mr. Tinsley: 
"I take great pleasure in commending your very 
useful and succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development.' Your own appreciation of 
the psychology of singing and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly reduced to a 
simple system. Cordially yours, 
"Father WILLIAM J. FINN, C. S. P., 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N. Y. : "A very practical 
little book is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' 
by Pedro T. Tinsley. It contains some very excellent 
material and vocal exercises, and should be in the 
hands of all vocal students." 
From "Music News," Chicago, 111.: "Accordingly 
his 'Practical Method of Singing' is a most concise 
and practical little manual, containing many valuable 
vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be helpful to all 
ambitious vocal students." 
HELPED HIM GREATLY 
"Since I practised your exercises of 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' my voice is more resonant 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a new voice." Prof. John T. Layton, 
Director Coleridge-Taylor Musical Society, 1722 10th 
St., N. W., Washington, D. C. 
PRICE $1.00 
Address the publisher: Pedro T. Tinsley, 6448 DrexeJ 
Ave., Chicago, 111.; or Clayton F. Summy, 64 E. Van 
Buren St., or Lyon and Healy, Adams and Wabash 
Ave., Chicago, 111. 
Statement of the Ownership, Management, Etc. 
THE CRISIS 
Published monthly at 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, 
required by the act of August 24, 1912. 
Editor, W. E. Burghardt DuBois, 70 Fifth Avenue, 
New York City. 
Managing Editor, W. E. Burghardt DuBois, 70 
Fifth Avenue, New York City. 
Business Manager, Augustus Granville Dill, 70 
Fifth Avenue, New York City. 
Publisher, The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, 70 Fifth Avenue, New 
York City. 
Owners, The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, a corporation with no 
stock. 
Known bondholders, mortgagees and other security 
holders, holding 1 per cent or more of total amount 
of bonds, mortgages or other securities: None, 
A. G. DILL, Business Manager. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this thirtieth day of September, 1914. 
ROBERT N. WOOD, 
Notary Public, 
New York Co. 
Good Words for 
THE CRISIS 
The CRISIS is much in demand in both 
reading rooms of the University. It grows 
better each number. I take a number of magazines, but this is about the only one which I 
read completely through. 
THEODOR E B. LATHROP , 
Chaplain, Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
With the renewal of my subscription I take 
great pleasure in telling you how much I have 
enjoyed reading your splendid magazine during the past year. "Long live the CRISIS." 
Respectfully, 
MRS. WM. H. ROWAN, 
Cape Girardeau, Mo. 
Enclosed you will find one dollar for the 
renewal of my subscription. Yes, I have interested a number of my acquaintances with 
the magazine, and shall continue to do so with 
the greatest of pleasure. The magazine has 
been very satisfactory, interesting as well as 
educational, and I congratulate you on the 
same. Very truly yours, 
J. VINCEN T BELL, 
Atlantic City, N. J. 
MILES M. WEBB 
School of Practical Photography 
All branches of photography taught. 
Terms reasonable. Service efficient. 
Three courses: Amateur, intermediate, 
professional. REGISTER NOW. 
3519 So. STATE STREET CHICAGO, III . 
Telephone Douglass 6688 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS 
Vol. 9 -No. 2 DECEMBER, 1914 Whole No. 50 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 
MUSIC AN D ART . 
Mr. HARR Y T. BURLEIGH , baritonecomposer of New York, has completed 
his cycle of "Saracen Songs," published by 
Ricordi and Company. 
• Mr. W. J . Henderson, of the Sun, has 
written the prefatory note in praise of Mr . 
Burleigh's art and the fascination of the 
compositions. Concerning the cycle the following note appears in the Boston Symphony program book of October 30th. "This 
composer's real value as a musician is now 
causing a stir in England, where the stereotyped ballad has raged for time almost forgotten. The advancement in American musical compositions as demonstrated by H . T. 
Burleigh, over the average form of English 
ballad, has brought from the artists of Europe meritorious approval upon the American composer and his work, by using his 
compositions upon all suitable occasions." 
• On the evening of November 1 at Symphony Hall, Boston, Mass., the Municipal 
Band of Havana, Cuba, Guillermo M. Thomas, director, gave a farewell appearance. 
The band was brought to Boston in October, 
to fill a month's engagement of daily concerts at the Boston Domestic Science and 
Pure Food Exposition and has given much 
pleasure to the many visitors at the fair. At 
least twenty-five of the seventy musicians 
are colored. The band is now in New York. 
• Mr. J . Shelton Pollen, pianist of Boston, 
Mass., was heard in a diversified program at 
a piano recital given at Union Baptist 
Church on October 15 at Baltimore, Md., 
for the benefit of the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People. He 
was assisted by the best home talent. There 
was a large audience. The program included "Valse in A-Flat" by Mr. Pollen, whose 
serious work in the field of composition as 
well as his skill in improvisation is familiar 
to the music public of Boston. 
• "The Congo and Other Poems" is a recently published volume of poems by Nicholas Vachel Lindsay, the Illinois poet, who 
wrote the story in the November CRISIS . The 
book contains an unusual lyrical poem—"A 
Study of the Negro Race," which is divided 
into three sections. 
• Clarence Cameron White, who is touring 
the West, appeared in St. Paul October 21. 
This was his fourth appearance in that city. 
The concert was a success. 
• The white women's clubs of Minnesota 
rendered a program each day at the recent 
state fair. A number of colored. women 
were invited to take part on the musical 
program of one of the afternoons. They 
were heartily applauded. 
• The Renaissance Players of Philadelphia 
have opened the season with a number of 
one-act plays on racial subjects. 
• Mr. R. N. Dett, director of music at 
Hampton Institute, has just given a concert 
in the Hampton gymnasium before an audience of two thousand people. Mme. Anita 
Patti Brown sang and Joseph Douglass 
played. 
• Lois Depp, of Springfield, Ohio, is a 
baritone at the age of seventeen; he has a 
range of twenty-six notes and a voice of 
great volume. He is a pupil of Bernard STUDENTS OF TH E COLORED FLORIDA AGRICULTURAL AND MECHANICAL COLLEGE IN AN ELIZABETHAN PRESENTATION OF 
SHAKESPEARE'S "THE TEMPEST" ALONG TH E COLOR LINE 61 
Landino and has been favorably criticized by 
Wilson G. Smith, of Cleveland. 
• William B. Luckett, a Harrisburg, Pa., 
colored boy, was for several years a bootblack, but recently entered the Philadelphia 
Academy of Fine Art. He had three pieces 
hung in the John Wanamaker Art Exhibit 
for students in November. 
• The Victor Talking Machine Company 
has recently engaged Joseph H . Douglass, the 
violinist, to play for its records. 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
TH E cornerstone for the new $100,000 
armory, which the colored Eighth Illinois Regiment will occupy, has been laid. 
Gov. Dunne, Congressman Madden, Gen. 
Burt and Major John R. Lynch took part in 
the ceremony. 
• Two American colored men succeeded in 
rescuing the celebrated race horse Durbar 
II, winner of this year's Derby, from the 
Germans when they first invaded France. 
• Atlanta University announces the eighteenth of their annual studies of the Negro 
problem. This is entitled "Morals and Manners Among Negro Americans" and is written by Dr. W. E . B. DuBois and Augustus 
Granville Dill. 
• The $100,000 colored Y. M. C. A. building of Kansas City, Mo., was dedicated in 
October. It has dormitory accommodations 
for one hundred men, a restaurant, gymnasium, swimming pool and billiard rooms. 
• For the first time a few colored nurses 
are being employed at the State Hospital, 
Ossawatomie, Kan. 
• In the recent Texas examination for dentists 84 white men and four colored men applied. Fifty of the white and all of the 
colored men secured licenses. 
• The Cleveland Home for Aged Colored 
People reports assets of $11,725 and an income of $2,204 during the year. 
• At the athletic games held in Englewood, 
N. J., recently colored athletes were among 
the winners in three events : Peter J . Wright 
won the 100-yard handicap, Thomas I. Harris won the 6-mile road race, and the 1,200-
yard relay handicap was also won by a colored team. 
• In the recent athletic contest of the public schools of Greater New York, Paul R. 
Bolin won the first prize in the 90-yard dash, 
and Earl Andrews second prize in the relay 
race. Both are colored. 
• A Y. M. C. A. building was recently dedicated at Ramage, W. Va., in the presence of 
the governor of the State. Both colored and 
white men use the building. 
• By the sudden lurch of a train Miss Lucille Champaigne, a white school teacher of 
Baton Rouge, was thrown between the 
coaches; but for the strength and presence 
of mind of George Mack, a Negro porter, 
she would have been killed. Mr. Mack was 
not lynched. 
• Mr. Hugh Harper, of Weatherford, Tex., 
is the first colored man to be employed in 
Portland, Ore., as a clerk in a white shoe 
store. The colored people of Portland are 
making a point of trading at the store where 
Harper is employed. 
• Mr. William Stanley Braithwaite announces the second annual issue of his "Anthology of Magazine Verse." The issue of 
last year received much favorable mention. 
• Mrs. Ella Barksdale Brown, of Jersey 
City, has been invited by the Board of Education to deliver three lectures in the free 
lecture series. She will speak on Negro 
Folk-lore and Music, Negro Industry and 
Negro Education. 
• The annual meeting of the American 
Missionary Association held at Providence, 
R. I., devoted as usual one session to the 
Negro. Rev. W. N. DeBerry and Dr. Phillip 
H . Moxon spoke. 
• Mr. James H . Jones, a colored man of 
Raleigh, N. C., has presented the North 
Carolina Hall of History a walking cane and 
other memorials belonging to the late Jefferson Davis. 
• The Negro Baptist State Association 
meeting at Beaumont, Tex., decided to raise 
$5,000 for an old folks home and $5,000 for 
the Conroe Industrial College. 
m 
ECONOMICS. 
THE colored people of Des Moines, la., 
have organized a real estate corporation 
to build a business block for colored people. 
Attorney George H . Woodson is promoting 
the movement. 
• The colored people of Arkansas have secured a franchise from the Pine Bluff City 
Council for an electric light plant and ten 
miles of trolley road to connect two suburban points. 
• Fifty-seven stockholders have formed the 
Farmers' Co-operative Mercantile Company 
of Mound Bayou, Miss., the colored town. 62 TH E CRISIS 
The first day's sales amounted to $98 and 
they have averaged $100 a day ever since, 
besides handling several hundred dollars' 
worth of cotton drafts. They have paid two 
10% dividends and have at present $7,002 
in undivided profits. 
• The National Association of Colored 
Women reports a membership of 45,000 in 
700 clubs distributed through 28 states. 
• The National Benefit Association of 
Washington, a colored industrial insurance 
concern, has erected at Chester, Pa., its third 
new office building, worth $6,000. 
• Negro citizens of Columbia, S. C, have 
formed the Palmetto Kaolin Company 
which is developing deposits of commercial 
clays in lower Richmond County. The company owns 252 acres of mineral lands. 
• Mrs. C. J. Walker, a business woman of 
Indianapolis, Ind., has recently purchased 
"Bishop's Court," the beautiful home of the 
late Bishop Derrick at Flushing, L. I. She 
expects to remodel and beautify the place. 
• 
EDUCATION . 
NEARL Y the whole student body at the 
Colored State Normal School, Frankfort, Ky., revolted against the president and 
appealed to the governor. This is the culmination of a long continued effort to remove President Russell. The president is 
strongly supported by the governor. A 
large number of students have been expelled. 
• The Women's dormitory of Howard University was damaged by fire to the amount 
of $5,000. 
• The colored people of Norfolk, Va., are 
making a strong effort to get a high school 
for their children, which the City Council 
has refused. 
• New buildings have been dedicated at 
Roger-Williams University and Waiden University, Nashville, Tenn. 
• The colored people of Louisville, Ky., are 
aroused because of the colored children of 
school age, 4,000 are enrolled in the schools 
and 9,000 are not. 
• Avery Institute of Charleston, S. C , has 
a corps of colored teachers. It has usually 
been taught by white northern teachers. 
• The annual report of Tuskegee shows a 
total enrollment of 1,527 students from 32 
states and 17 foreign countries. Legacies 
amounting to $122,436 were received during 
the year. The year's budget calls for something over a quarter of a million dollars. 
The endowment fund amounts to $1,942,112. 
• The construction of the new Washington 
Colored High School is about to begin. It 
will cost $500,000, have a frontage of 450 
feet and a depth of 150 feet and will accommodate 1,500 persons. It is to be constructed 
of brick, with limestone trimmings, 4 stories 
high and in the Tudor-Gothic style. It will 
contain 48 classrooms, 2 gymnasiums, a drill 
hall and a swimming pool. 
• The Association of American Agricultural Colleges met in Washington during November. Seventeen colored schools were 
represented and these schools held a special 
conference at Howard University. President Byrd Prillerman, of the West Virginia 
Colored Institute, presided over the conference. 
• The annual meeting of the Missouri State 
Association of Colored Teachers was held at 
St. Joseph, Mo., November 12. President 
B. F . Allen is president of the Association. 
m 
MEETINGS . 
THE Negro Organization Society of Virginia met in Norfolk. Among the 
speakers and visitors were ex-President 
Taft, Mr. Booker T. Washington, Wallace 
Buttrick and Dr. Glenn. 
• The North Carolina Colored Fair was 
held at Raleigh and was very successful. 
The governor and state treasurer addressed 
the people and a "Better Babies' Contest" 
was held. 
• The Colored State Fair was held at Columbia, S. C. 
• Two colored fairs were held in Georgia; 
one at Augusta and one at Macon. The 
Macon fair was the eighth annual exhibit 
and offered a large and interesting premium 
list and other attractions. 
• The Farmers' Improvement Society of 
Texas held its nineteenth annual convention 
at Waco. There were 500 delegates representing 10,000 members, in 849 locals. They 
have a bank at Waco, have just launched an 
over-all factory and do an industrial insurance business. 
• President Wilson has promised to speak 
at the Negro Historical and Industrial Exposition to be held at Fort Lee, near Richmond, next summer. 
• The Rhode Island Union of Colored 
Women's Clubs representing nineteen bodies 
met in Providence. 
• The old Mennonite Church of German-ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 63 
town, where the first American protest 
against slavery was made, held a celebration 
of Emancipation recently with prominent 
colored speakers. 
• The annual meeting of the State Federation of Colored Women's Clubs took place 
at Louisville, Ky., in November. The federation has established a scholarship fund 
to assist worthy pupils in securing an education. The winner of the first scholarship 
is now in the State University of Louisville 
pursuing a college course. 
m 
TH E CHURCH . 
IT is reported that Dr. R. H . Boyd, secretary and manager of the National Publishing Board, has resigned. Dr. Boyd has 
organized the greatest business enterprise 
among Negroes in the United States, but has 
recently met strong factional opposition in 
his church. 
• A strong effort is being made to have the 
proposed colored Baptist Theological Seminary located in Memphis. Memphis colored 
people have already subscribed over $5,000. 
• The new colored chapel of St. Simon the 
Cyrenian, costing about $29,000, has been 
dedicated in Philadelphia by Bishop Rhinelander of the Episcopal Church. 
• A Negro Catholic Church, St. Catherine 
of Sienna, costing $50,000, has been dedicated in the same city. 
• The Allen A . M. E. Church of Indianapolis, Ind., has started a mutual aid fund 
for the sick and an employment bureau. 
• Andrew Carnegie has given a pipe organ 
to a colored baptist church in Braddock, Pa. 
• A n unknown philanthropist has given 
from time to time $10,000 for Lutheran missions among Negroes of Missouri. 
• The Baptist Sunday School Congress will 
meet in Birmingham, Ala., next June. The 
last meeting brought 2,500 delegates from 28 
states. 
• The Boston Guardian has succeeded in 
driving from his pulpit the Rev. Charles H . 
Johnson, a disreputable minister who was 
for some time pastor of St. Paul's Church. 
m 
POLITICAL . 
EDWAR D A . SAVOY , a colored messenger of several secretaries of state, 
has been promoted to a clerkship. Richard 
Green, a colored messenger in the treasury 
department, has also been made a clerk. 
• Caddo Parish, La., has 22,000 white inhabitants and 36,000 colored. Only 49 of 
the Negroes are registered voters. 
• The Republican National Committee has 
been authorized to cut 89 delegates from the 
National Convention. The cut will come almost entirely from the South. 
• Mr. S. Joe Brown, of Des Moines, Ia., 
published, just before the election, the records of the legislators of Ohio on the defeated intermarriage bill. 
B 
PERSONAL . 
MR. W. A. HUNTON, who has been critically ill since last March, is reported 
to have good chance for speedy recovery. 
• Mr. George W. Blount has been made 
general business manager of the Crown Savings Bank, of Newport News, Va . 
• Dr. John W. S. Beckett, a prominent colored physician of Pittsburgh, died recently. 
• Dr. Gilbert H . Jones, a graduate of Wilberforee, Dickinson and Jena, has been made 
Dean of the College Department of Wilberforce University and teacher of English and 
Philosophy. 
• Attorney William Harrison, of Oklahoma, 
who recently presented the case against the 
"Jim-Crow" car law before the Supreme 
Court of Washington, is said to have made 
a good appearance. 
• Judge R. H . Terrell, of the District of 
Columbia, has been lecturing in the South 
and West. 
• The Rev. Father Dorsey, colored Catholic 
priest, has been lecturing in Virginia. 
FOREIGN . 
MAJO R CHARLE S YOUNG, United 
States Army, has been conducting a 
military school in Liberia. Recently six of 
the students graduated and have been commissioned third lieutenants. Two of them 
plan to enter the military department of 
Wilberforce Universtiy. Among the American officers Capt. Newton died last July. 
Lieut. W. H . York has been made a captain 
and probably G. F. David will become a 
lieutenant. 
• The Hon. H . A . L. Simpson, a colored 
member of the legislative council of Jamaica, 
has for the third time been elected Mayor 
of Kingston, Jamaica. 64 TH E CRISIS 
GHETTO . 
A SPLENDI D fight is being made in 
North Carolina by the Colored Teachers' Association for better railway accommodation. They have sent out over 3,000 pamphlets and recently had a hearing before the 
corporation commission. 
• Separate colored schools are appearing 
here and there in the North in response to 
demands by colored people. A new one has 
recently been started in Cincinnati and also 
one in Ypsilanti, Mich. In the latter place 
a colored principal with white teachers has 
been appointed. 
• The "Full Crew Bill " has just been defeated in Missouri by popular vote. It was 
an attempt of the white railway unions who 
will not admit colored members, to do away 
with colored porters on railway trains. Similar laws have been successfully passed in 
Ohio, New York and other states. 
• The Louisville and Nashville Railroad is 
trying to better its service for colored people by giving them two toilets and a smoking room and arranging for meals. It 
promises to be careful with regard to section 
hands but has been unable to settle the question of sleeping cars. 
• White cap raids on Negro cotton pickers 
have been made in northern Texas. 
TH E COURTS . 
THE Supreme Court at Pretoria, South 
Africa, has delivered a decision adverse 
to the attempt of municipalities to run separate street cars for Europeans alone. 
• The Superior Court of Fulton County, 
Ga., has sustained the right of colored 
Shriners to use the titles, emblems and rituals of the order. 
• In the celebrated John Clement case in 
Richmond, Va., where a colored man was arrested for an attack on a white woman, the 
white jury has finally acquitted the man. As 
the Richmond Planet says: 
"When a Henrico county jury acquits a 
colored man of a charge of criminal assault 
upon a white woman, he is not only innocent, but there is not even the grounds for 
a suspicion of guilt." 
• The New York Supreme Court recently 
upheld the municipal court of the city of 
New York in the ruling that a saloon is a 
place of public accommodation, and that 
there must be no discrimination. This decision was the result of a case brought against 
Elsinger, a white saloonkeeper, by A . C. 
Babb, who was charged 50 cents for a drink 
because he was colored. The municipal 
court gave him a verdict of $100, and the case 
was appealed, upon the contention that the 
saloon was not a place of public accommodation, with the above result. 
CRIME . 
THE following nine lynchings have taken 
place since our last record : 
• At Percy, 111., an Italian because he 
asked for a cigarette. 
• At Hernando, Miss., Tom Burns, colored, 
for attacking a white merchant. 
• At Lake City, Fla., Tom Junior, colored, 
for an alleged assault on a white woman. 
• At Aberdeen, Miss., Maysho Miller, an 
18-year-old colored boy, for an alleged assault on a white woman. 
• At Newport, Ark., Howard Davis, a colored man, for killing a marshall after the 
marshall had shot him in attempting to arrest him. 
• At York, Ala., an unknown Negro porter, 
charged with pushing white women off the 
sidewalk. 
• At Osceola, Ark., two Negroes have been 
killed in the chase after a third one who had 
killed a plantation manager. The third Negro has not been caught. 
• At Angelton, Tex., Joe Durfee, a Negro, 
convicted of murdering a white woman, was 
respited by the governor for thirty days. A 
mob took him from the jail and lynched him. 
• A young white woman, in order to shield 
her Indian lover by whom she had been badly beaten, claimed to have been assaulted by 
a colored porter in the St. Regis Hotel, 
Tulsa, Okla. The colored man was arrested 
but the landlady, who knew all the facts in 
the case, went to the police station and told 
the true story. 
• When William Dwyer, a colored man of 
Philadelphia, insisted that he had a perfect 
right to unfurl a flag on Memorial Day, he 
was severely beaten by two white men, 
David Keith and Frank McShane, who were 
disputing his right to do so. MEN OF THE M0NTH 
A N ESSAYIST. 
ISAAC FISHER, editor of the Negro Farmer, which is published at Tuskegee Institute, has a remarkable gift of expression 
which has resulted in his winning about 
$1,500 in prizes during the last four years. 
Mr. Fisher was born in East Carroll Parish, 
La., in 1877, and was the sixteenth child of 
former slaves. He started his career in 
Vicksburg, Miss., and as an orphan at nineteen blacked boots, sold papers, and ran errands. He was a close student of the Hebrew scriptures, and in this way gained a 
remarkable command of English. 
He heard of Tuskegee Institute in 1893 
and immediately went there to work his way 
through, raising his railroad fare by a lecture. Graduating from Tuskegee he has 
taught in South Carolina and in Alabama, 
and was for nine years president of the 
Branch Normal College of Pine Bluff, Ark. 
He has a wife and a daughter of twelve 
years. 
His larger prizes are as follows: $100 
from the St. Louis Post-Despatch on "The 
Ten Best Reasons Why People Should Come 
to Missouri;" $400 on "German-American 
Methods of Regulating Trusts," given by 
Hart, Schaffner and Marx, and judged by 
leading economists of the United States including Laughlin, Clark, Gay and Horace 
White; $100 for " A Plan to Give the South 
a System of Highways," given by the Manufacturers' Record of Baltimore; $500 given 
by Everybody's Magazine for an essay on 
"What We Have Learned About Rum." 
MR . ISAA C FISHE R TH E LAT E MAJO R C. A. FLEETWOO D 66 TH E CRISIS 
MRS . REBECC A ALDRIDG E 
Beside these Mr. Fisher has won a dozen 
smaller prizes. He is undoubtedly a man 
of peculiar gifts. 
m 
A VETERAN . 
MAJO R Christian A. Fleetwood died 
September 28th in Washington, D. C , 
at the age of more than seventy years. 
Major Fleetwood was born in Baltimore 
and spent a part of his early life in Liberia 
and was once editor of a weekly paper. He 
became a clerk in the Freedmen's bank and 
later in the war department where he worked 
until his death. He is well known as a veteran of the Civil War. For distinguished 
conduct he received a medal of honor from 
Congress. The records say: "Seized the 
colors after two color-bearers had been shot 
down and bore them nobly through the 
fight." He was in the battles at Bermuda 
Hundreds, Spring Hill, Baylor's Field, Petersburg Mine Explosion, Fort Harrison, 
Chapin's Farm, Dutch Gap and sieges of 
Petersburg and Richmond. He also served 
in North Carolina and in Washington, D. C. 
He was strongly recommended for a commission but Secretary Stanton could find no 
warrant in law for granting a commission 
to a colored man. He was afterward connected with the militia of the District of 
Columbia and his system for rapid assembly 
was adopted by the National Guard. 
Major Fleetwood was a great lover of 
music and often helped in the promotion of 
concerts. In the social life of colored Washington he will be greatly missed. 
Ü 
TW O CLU B WOMEN . 
MRS. EVELY N D. SHAW , president of 
the Woman's Improvement Club of Al -
toona, Pa., has been entertaining the State 
Federation of Colored Women's Clubs of 
Pennsylvania. 
Mrs. Shaw was born in Philadelphia and 
is the grand-daughter of the Rev. Jeremiah 
Durham. She has had a long career in social service. 
The president of the Pennsylvania State 
Federation is Mrs. Rebecca Aldridge. Mrs. 
Aldridge has held this position for eleven 
years and was organizer of the first colored 
women's clubs in the state in 1895. She 
was born in Harrisburg and has been active 
in work for social uplift. 
MRS . E . D. SHA W ME N O F TH E MONT H 67 
TH E LAT E MRS . S. E . TANNE R 
A BISHOP'S WIFE . 
MRS. SARA H ELIZABET H TANNER, 
wife of Bishop B. T. Tanner of the 
African M . E. Church, died August 2, after 
a long illness. She will perhaps be best 
recognized by the public as the mother of 
Henry O. Tanner, the artist, who has won 
world-wide fame. Of her other children the 
Rev. C. M . Tanner is a pastor in Atlanta, 
Ga., and three daughters are married. 
Mrs. Tanner was born May 18, 1840, at 
Winchester, Va . She was educated in the 
public schools of Pennsylvania and at Avery 
College, In 1861 she was married to Benjamin Tucker Tanner, then a barber. He 
soon after entered the ministry, became editor of the Christian Recorder and afterward 
of the A . M . E. Church Review, and finally 
bishop of his church. 
Mrs. Tanner was little seen in public, being primarily a mother and home-maker. 
For a number of years she was president of 
the Women's Mite Society of her church. 
In all those years she collected pennies and 
dimes from thousands and turned the little 
sums with scrupulous care over to the treasury of the church. 
But after all Mrs. Tanner will be remembered for one thing—her great son, the 
artist. Many have seen his loving portrait 
of her, done in the style of Whistler's famous canvas. They will remember the golden 
glow of her dark face in the firelight, and 
know what she meant to the boy who has 
since made his mysterious sense of color and 
form speak to the civilized world. 
m 
A N ARM Y CHAPLAIN . 
CHAPLAI N Oscar J. W. Scott of the 
25th Infantry has been raised from the 
grade of First Lieutenant to that of Captain. Chaplain Scott was born in Galipolis, 
Ohio, July 31, 1867. He was educated in the 
public schools, at Ohio Wesleyan University, 
and Drew Theological Seminary. He was 
formerly a minister in the African M . E. 
Church and just before his appointment to 
the army was pastor of the well-known Metropolitan Church of Washington, D. C. He 
was appointed Chaplain by President Roosevelt and confirmed April 17, 1907. He has 
served with his regiment in- Texas, in the 
Philippines, in the State of Washington, and 
is now in Hawaii. He has been a successful 
preacher and has worked hard to improve 
the social and physical condition of his soldiers. 
It is a matter of deep congratulation to 
the Negro race in America that their army 
chaplains have almost without exception had 
so good a record for manliness and morality. 
CHAPLAI N O. J . W. SCOT T Courtesy of the New York Times 
TH E PARADO X 
A Black "Heathen" of the Congo, fighting to protect the wives and daughters of the white Belgians, 
who have murdered and robbed his people, against "Christian" Culture represented by the German trophy 
in his hand! OPINION 
TH E WORL D WAR. 
CAUSES AND 
EFFECTS. 
Dr. Jacques Loeb in the New 
"Review analyses with deep insight the "racial" problem 
underneath the present war. 
"The present generation of Germans has 
been raised in the creed of the superior character of their 'race' and civilization and it 
is a fact that even the most enlightened Germans are not free from such ideas. Is it a 
wonder that when the government made it 
plausible to them that this superior race, 
this superior civilization, nay their homes, 
were threatened by the barbarian Russian 
hordes, all degrees of freedom of will were 
wiped out in the inhabitants of Germany except the one, namely, to blindly obey the 
command of the military leaders who were to 
save the threatened civilization and homes? 
• ••**••• • 
"The danger lying in the fetish of racial 
antipathy and racial superiority is assuming 
threatening dimensions in this country. It 
is a matter of no small concern that the labor 
unions refuse to work side by side with 
'Asiatics' or Negroes, giving as an excuse 
racial antipathy; whereas the principle of 
brotherhood would demand that they should 
work with them, influence them, educate 
them if necessary and in this process learn 
to appreciate and respect them. Racial antipathy only thrives on aloofness and nonacquaintance. The Southerner, who knows 
the Negro, has, in the writer's opinion, no 
racial antipathy, but only social superciliousness towards the Negro, though this superciliousness is probably based on the claim of 
'racial superiority' of the whites. The mischief lies in the fact that the inhabitants of 
each country now seem to be convinced of 
their 'racial superiority' over the inhabitants 
of all other countries. It is hardly necessary 
to state that by fostering or even tolerating 
this fetish of racial antipathy we are making 
it easy for a future militaristic government 
to induce Americans to go to the front to 
fight the Japanese." 
The New Bedford Standard notes the effect of the war on Negro education : 
"One phase of the present southern education situation has its centre of misfortune 
in the war's effect upon the cotton market 
and the consequent elimination of a considerable amount' of labor from the southern 
cotton fields. . . . 
"One northern organization maintaining 
Negro schools in the South calculates that a 
considerable part of the pupils who have 
paid into its treasury more than one hundred 
and fifty thousand dollars in board money in 
the course of a year, in eight to twelve dollar monthly rates, will this season need assistance toward their living if they are to 
continue in school. Baptist, Congregational, 
Episcopal, Methodist, and Presbyterian 
church organizations all recognize that the 
Negro students will stand to an unusual degree in need of assistance this year—or that 
the schools back of them, which amounts to 
the same thing, will require greater funds 
than usual if they are to continue effective 
work." 
The Christian Express of Lovedale, South 
Africa, says: 
"Loyal demonstrations attended with much 
enthusiasm have taken place all over the 
country and generous donations have been 
made to relieve distress. It seems unfortunate that wealthy corporations like the De 
Beers and Premier Diamond mines, companies which have won for their shareholders 
many millions of South Africa's natural 
wealth, should have closed down with such 
scant consideration for their Native workers. 
It is not yet clear what the reconsideration 
of their action will amount to." 
The London Evening Standard says that: 
"For some years now it has been quite 
clear to colonial observers that in the event 70 TH E CRISIS 
of a European struggle there was every 
probability that the French armies in Africa 
would be dragged into the conflict." 
As a result of this need of Negro co-operation : 
"' A full-blooded Jollof of Senegambia has 
just been elected as a French Senator,' is the 
message which reaches me from West Africa 
this week, and this fact is declared to be one 
of the most momentous in African history. 
It is, beyond question, the biggest native 
landmark in the evolution of Africa since 
the Basuto King, Moshesh, hurled back the 
republican armies of South Africa." 
W. Steward, in the Philadelphia Evening 
Telegraph voices the colored Americans quiet 
chuckle over the incident of the Turkish ambassador : 
Ah, Rustem Bey ! Ah, Rustem Bey ! 
You touched our cancer spot, they say; 
And shamed us till we could not pray, 
0 Rustem Bey! 0 Rustem Bey! 
Go, Rustem Bey! Go, Rustem Bey! 
May peace attend you on your way, 
We trust you may return some day, 
A . Rustem Bey! A . Rustem Bey! 
LAW-SUITS 
AND 
DISCUSSION 
SEGREGATION . 
The Nation comments on the 
most recent Richmond (Va.) 
case: 
"That race prejudice should 
go so far as to prevent the sale of a white 
church to colored people because it is in 'too 
good a district' seems almost incredible; yet 
it has actually done so in Richmond. The 
Immanuel Baptist Church had sold its property to colored people, apparently in the 
belief that no place was too good to worship 
in. But the Common Council knew better, 
and promptly passed a special ordinance 
which, if upheld by the courts, will prevent 
the colored people from carrying on religious observances within the sacred precincts 
at Fifth and Leigh Streets. Thus we have 
another deliberate interference with personal 
liberty of both whites and colored people 
through special legislation of the most obnoxious kind. . . . 
"We do not know if the black reconstruction Legislatures, to whom the South owes 
its public-school system, ever did anything 
like this, but it is easy to imagine how they 
were portrayed as shamelessly abusing power 
and authority if they did. What an outcry 
would rise to high Heaven were colored people to interfere in the slightest degree with 
the desires of whites! This reaction in Richmond, when it desires to be known as a progressive, up-to-date city, recalls the fact that 
just now they are quoting in India these 
words of a distinguished native as a reason 
for the marked loyalty to Great Britain in 
its present distress: 'When I think of the 
large Negro populations in the United 
States, as the republican Americans treat 
and govern them, I thank God that I am a 
British subject.'" 
The Richmond Planet, a colored paper, 
says : 
"'Chickens will come home to roost,' is an 
old adage and it is proving true in this ease. 
White people will fight, for they know how 
to do so. They will not 'lay down,' like most 
of the colored folks are disposed to do. The 
congregation of the Immanuel Baptist 
Church will not permit themselves to be 
bankrupted and this statement is made upon 
the authority of this influential Richmond 
newspaper. The fight now is white folks 
against white folks, with the colored congregation as interested spectators. . . . 
"What is the indirect cause of all of this? 
Every representative in the City Council 
was elected to that position by white men's 
votes instead of by colored men's suffrage. 
Allegiance is given to those people, who 
have votes that can be made effective. The 
colored man being virtually voteless becomes 
like a Chinaman, who is booted from one end 
of this Continent to another by any one who 
feels disposed so to do. When colored men 
wake up, organize and systematically protest then some of these conditions will be 
remedied." 
The Atlanta Independent (colored) presents another ease: 
"In Proctor Park, a sub-division set apart 
by an enterprising and energetic real estate 
agency for the building of modern and upto-date colored homes. The white folks in 
the settlement took a notion that the subdivision was too good for Negroes, therefore, 
they went into court and enjoined the sale, 
not that the enjoiners could buy the property themselves, not that they needed it, not 
that they thought the Negro houses would 
not compare favorably with theirs in improvements and facilities; but deep seated 
in their soul and in their bones was that race OPINION 71 
prejudice. We are not able to have it ourselves, but we are opposed to Negroes succeeding, we are opposed to their progress, 
we are opposed to their uplift, we are opposed to them having decent homes, we are 
opposed to their children having an education, we are opposed to them having modern 
facilities; we would rather reduce them to 
serfs than to see them useful citizens, is the 
verdict of a white man's prejudice." 
Such daily occurrences have made the colored press so bitter at Mr. B . T. Washington's doctrine of submission that Mr. Washington has been compelled to make several 
explanations; but the Louisville News (colored) is not appeased : 
"The journalistic supporters of Dr. Washington have rushed forward with an explanation of what he 'did' say. An d this is 
what they are saying: Dr. Washington was 
misquoted by the Associated Press when it 
reported him to have said: 'The Negro 
should stop fighting segregation and lend his 
forces toward beautifying that part of the 
city i n which he can live.' According to them 
what he 'did' say was this: 'Let us, i n the 
future, spend less time i n talking about the 
part of the city that we cannot live in , and 
more time i n making the part of the city 
that we can live i n beautiful and attractive.' 
Where is the material difference in the two 
expressions? Each carries the idea of surrender, each suggests that colored people 
ought to be glad to stay on the earth at all, 
neither recognizes the principles of freedom, 
justice nor equality before the law. An d yet 
we are told to accept the author of these 
words as our leader and, with some, to criticize him is lese majeste. 
"When the committee of fifty colored men 
appeared before the City Council to protest 
against the segregation measure, how it 
would have delighted that narrow-souled 
body had one of our spokesmen come forward with such a speech. How glad the City 
Attorney would be to incorporate those 
words i n his brief i n favor of the measure. 
"Dr. Washington, time and again, has 
said things that have irritated that portion 
of the race which i n spite of all handicaps 
cannot but believe itself the equal of any 
other part of the Nation's citizens, but it is 
doubtful i f he has ever said anything that 
wil l so lower him i n the respect and estimation of the whole race as this advice on segregation. A s for the explanation—it does 
not explain and the 'corrected' version is 
more offensive than the misquotation." 
• ••••• • 
"Mr . Washington always refers sarcastically to the policy of protest followed by 
various organizations and 'hits' the thoughtless by talking about 'constructive work.' 
"Whic h is doing more 'constructive work,' 
organizations like the N . A . A . C. P . and 
the National Independent Equa l Rights 
League, or the National Negro Business 
Men's League? If the Equa l Rights League 
does naught but protest and resolute as 
charged by some of Dr. Washington's press 
agents, what does the Business League do 
but exaggerate and pretend? The tales of 
hardships overcome and wealth made 'in the 
sweat of their brows,' as told by some members of the Business League, would make 
Ananias blush for shame. . . . 
"We do not merely express our private 
opinion when we say that the younger men 
and women, on whom the mantle of affairs 
must soon fall, speak of Dr. Washington's 
leadership with contempt. Youn g men and 
women from Tuskegee, while praising Dr. 
Washington as an educator, as an executive 
and as a money-getter, express themselves 
strongly opposed to the pusillanimous advice 
he doles out to the race. A t a moving picture show the other night pictures of prominent Afro-Americans were run off and, 
would the Bee believe it, Dr. Washington 
was hissed! 
"These are bad signs and, even though 
Andrew Carnegie says Dr. Washington is a 
'Moses and Joshua combined,' we are afraid 
generations to come, when weighing the 
value of Tuskegee to the race at large and 
comparing that with the weight of the harm 
done by the speeches of our White-ManMade Leader, will class him, i f not with the 
man who sold his Lord , at least with him 
who sold his birthright for a mess of pottage." 
TH E CHURCH . 
CHRISTIANIT Y 
AN D FACE . 
The extraordinary heathenism of the white church i n 
its relation to Negroes is revealed 
by two recent pleas. A council of 
200 colored ministers and laymen of the 
Methodist Episcopal Church held recently i n 
Nashville, Tenn., declared unanimously: 
"We are neither unmindful nor unappreciative of the great services and personal 72 TH E CRISIS 
sacrifices of our General Superintendents in 
the interest of our work, and more especially 
of those whose episcopal residences are in 
the Southland; nevertheless it is our sincere 
and earnest conviction that indigenous and 
racial episcopal supervision is absolutely essential for the fullest development of the 
work of our field, and we therefore approve 
of the proposed amendments for Bishops for 
races and languages, and request our Board 
of Bishops to submit the same to the annual 
conferences of the Church during the fall of 
1915 and the spring of 1916, and earnestly 
pray their adoption." 
The same plea comes from colored Episcopalians. The Venerable Archdeacon, 
Henr y L . Phillips, of Pennsylvania, a colored man, says : 
"M y reason for asking for racial bishops 
i n the Southern States, is that it has been 
found impossible for the white and the colored people to worship i n the same church. 
The result is that the church i n the South 
among colored people is not going. The average self-respecting colored man wil l not 
go into the Episcopal church because he 
knows he is not wanted." 
The Baltimore white Ministerial Alliance 
invited the co-operation of the colored Min ­
isterial Alliance for moral uplift. The latter, while sympathetic, replied that they regarded the "white pulpit " as the "enemy of 
the Negro race !" 
The words of Dr. Vernon's war sermon at 
Brookline, Mass., seemed greatly needed : 
"Our duty at such an exposition of the 
inner meaning and logical outcome of the 
Spirit of Distrust is not merely to sit primly 
by and pray that its extreme horrors be 
cheeked by God's mercy, it is to root out 
whatever of it we can detect i n our hearts 
for the Negro and Mexican, for the Jew and 
Italian and Slav, for the employees in our 
factories and for the vulgar women who do 
not move in our set. It is only those who 
believe in the Brotherhood of Ma n and who 
have actually placed themselves humbly and 
reverently within it, that are the peacemakers and the peace maintainers of whom the 
world stands i n need to-day." 
The Hon . Archibald A . Grimke said recently i n Boston : 
"We are called a Christian democracy. 
Make us a Christian democracy by treating 
'the least of these' as political equals. God 
forbid that in some day of trial for this 
country it should be said, Depart from me, 
ye, accursed." 
TH E EMERGIN G SOUTH . 
A NE W 
KNOWLEDG E 
O F FACTS . 
One of the encouraging aspects 
of the South is the increasing 
number of white people who 
know something about the 
present-day Negro and his problems. In ­
stead of strutting about and assuming omniscence like most of their fellows, a few white 
southerners are learning. One writes to the 
New Yor k Globe and confesses: 
" I am a southerner by birth, but honesty 
compels me to express a change of conviction on a subject which has often cropped 
up in the columns of the Globe—the subject 
of the Negro i n America, and especially i n 
New York . I n our country we so often regard the whole race as inferior to ourselves 
that it comes to us as something of a shock 
to see any one of them on a plane of intellectual parity with us. Such a shock it has 
been my fortune to experience. 
" A month ago a friend who knew my pronounced views on the subject lured me into 
a Harlem lecture room to hear a lecture on 
'Modern Materialism.' Wha t was my surprise to find a large and respectable looking 
white audience listening to a Negro. 
" I was angry at first, but I made up my 
mind to see it through. A t the end of the 
lecture I discovered with amazement that I 
had been interested,' charmed, and instructed. 
I have heard the same lecturer three times 
since—on anthropology, economics, and religion—and I have felt thankful to New Yor k 
for widening my mental horizon. Think of 
it! A n audience (or congregation i f you 
choose) of white people—men and women— 
which turns out every Sunday afternoon to 
listen to a man who is not merely colored 
but black. An d they seem to glory i n it, as 
I have almost come to do myself." 
In Augusta, Ga., an Equa l Suffrage 
League of white women has been organized. 
Mrs. J. D. Hammond addressed them and 
said that white southern women should demand an adequate educational test for all 
women voters; and a law, as i n Idaho, disfranchising all women of known immoral 
life. An d having set this standard they 
should see to it that every woman who comes 
up to it, whatever her race may be, shall be 
allowed to cast her ballot for the welfare of 
her people's homes. 
Isma Dooley, a staff writer for the At ­
lanta Constitution, agrees with a correspondent that most Negro children must be train-OPINION 73 
ed as servants but knows enough facts to add 
that all cannot be: 
"The viewpoint is logical i f the Negro 
himself were not a taxpayer, and if there 
were not a constantly growing element of 
the race who are not equipping themselves 
for domestic service because they are not 
obliged to do so. I n discussing any phase 
of the Negro problem to-day it must be remembered they have been out of slavery i n 
the South fifty years; that, although many 
of them have made little strides in racial development, according to the ideal of the 
white men, there are some of them who are 
self-supporting through farming, through 
the trades, through business and through 
professions. Therefore the problem of the 
Negro can no longer be reckoned with on the 
idea that all Negroes expect to be domestic 
servants. There are those who, because of 
their advancement along other lines, are divided into classes and degrees." 
Cally Ryland says i n the Richmond News 
Leader : 
"Several years ago a Better Housing Association was formed here for the sole purpose of relieving these conditions. A n expert agent was employed at great expense 
by the association to investigate matters, and 
his report, which covered every phase of our 
housing conditions, was a shock even to those 
who were most conversant with Richmond's 
most unhealthy locality. 
"A t every step the efforts of this agent 
were combated by the very authorities which 
should gladly have co-operated with him. Indeed, so discouraging were the obstacles constantly thrown i n the way, that the Better 
Housing Association lost heart, allowed its 
agent to accept a government position i n 
Washington, and discontinued its meetings. 
"Our work for the Red Cross and Belgian 
sufferers is beautiful. So is our work for 
our various small local charities, and we are 
allowed to pursue it unhindered, and even, 
in some eases, aided by the authorities. 
"Bu t such work for the physical well being of the whole city as the stamping out of 
tuberculosis among the Negroes, and the 
movement to furnish them with more sanitary dwellings is, for some unaccountable 
reason, discouraged at every turn by the city 
government. 
"Not until we give the colored population 
of our city room to live decently and healthily can we feel that we are doing our duty 
towards them and to ourselves." 
Even southern business men are rubbing 
their eyes and realizing that the Negro 
spends money and spends it often intelligently. John D. Simmons, writing on newspaper circulation in the Fourth Estate, says: 
"We southern circulation managers realize 
this already in the increasing number of 
Negroes who read newspapers. 
". . . Wit h the right boy to look after the 
business, the Negro is a good subscriber. 
Wit h the right carrier on the route, the percentage of collections will be just as good 
on a Negro route as on any other in our 
city delivery." 
Even TH E CRISI S comes in for a bit of 
honor when the Tampa (Fla.) Daily Times 
allows a colored poet to apostrophize us in 
twenty-four lines of poetry as a "mighty 
champion of a race" who cannot "for one 
moment cringe or condone!" 
Of course, the old South is still alive and 
still dominant. I n Atlanta , a member of 
the Board of Education recently said of the 
schools "That many of the parents of white 
children are indignant because their little 
ones are subjected to conditions which very 
nearly approach conditions i n the Negro 
schools." 
Wha t these conditions are are revealed in 
part by a letter by one of the colored women 
principals i n the Atlant a Constitution: 
"Fo r fourteen years or more the colored 
schools have been doubled in grades below 
the fifth, and then came doubling of the 
sixth," i.e. , the children get but one-half a 
day's schooling; one set comes in the morning and another set i n the afternoon and the 
same teachers teach both. 
"This is a condition that is very dangerous, both to the pupil and teacher. The 
teacher has to report i n her door at quarter 
to 8 o'clock to watch the children coming in, 
etc.; and from 8 until 12 o'clock she is on a 
constant rush to get the various subjects 
treated before 12, when she dismisses; and 
has from 12 until 12:30 to eat her lunch. 
A t 12:15 she is in her door to look after the 
afternoon class coming in . . . . 
"It is absolutely absurd to undertake to 
teach fifty or sixty children i n so short a 
time, for you can't do the individuals justice. 
• •••••• • 
"The situation is certainly alarming, and 
something ought to be done to relieve it and 
give to the colored child an opportunity to 
get full benefit of days spent i n school, and 
also of health and strength so he can be a 74 TH E CRISIS 
good citizen. I earnestly beg the city council and mayor for an appropriation to build 
more schoolhouses or rent such adequate 
quarters as is necessary to accommodate the 
children, and also for the restoration of the 
eighth grade i n colored schools." 
POLITICS . 
REPUBLICA N S 
AN D 
DEMOCRATS . 
The South is gleeful over the 
disfranchisement of Negroes 
i n the Republican party. The 
Augusta Chronicle says: 
"It is not necessary to point out that reduction of southern representation i n a Republican nominating convention means reduction of the Negro representation. Whatever the Republican party officials may say, 
this representation reduction, at this time, 
wil l appear as a sop to the Roosevelt Republicans. Roosevelt Republicans coddle the 
Negro i n the North and slap him i n the face 
i n the South. 
"To deliver this sop, the Republican party 
is punishing the southern Negro i n a way 
the southern Negro wil l feel his punishment 
—punishing him for his steadfastness. For, 
say what you wil l of the southern Negro 
delegate to the average Republican convention, but for the allegiance of the southern 
Negro to home instructions at Chicago i n 
1912—at a time when money by the thousands was flaunted i n his face by Roosevelt 
advocates—there would be precious little 
Republican party to-day." 
Man y persons, colored and white, have 
wondered what Bishop Alexander Walters 
thought of President Wilson, whom he, as 
one of the leaders of the colored Democrats 
helped to elect. In the recent letter to the 
New Yor k World the Bishop says: 
"Mor e than a half-million Negroes are voting to-day, and they too must certainly be a 
factor i n the defeat of the Democratic party 
this year, for nearly all of them voted the 
Republican ticket. 
"I n the election of 1912 the Negroes gave 
the largest vote ever given by them to the 
Democratic party and helped to elect the 
national ticket. They were assured by Mr. 
Wilson before election that i n the event of 
his election he would give to the black man 
not 'meagre but absolute justice.' The Negro 
took him at his word, rejoicing that it was 
the first time since emancipation that a Democratic nominee had made so fair a promise." 
Afte r showing President Wilson's failure 
to keep his word, Bishop Walters adds: 
"Is it not time that our Democratic friends 
be awakened to the fact that the black man 
is a factor i n American politics? 
"There are ten or twelve millions of colored people i n this country, and not once i n 
two years has the President of this great Republic called i n a committee of this vast host 
without representation i n Congress to consult with them concerning their welfare. 
"Another thing which has caused us to be 
discredited i n the eyes of the world is that 
out of this ten million colored citizens not 
one is invited to a social function at the 
White House, and i n this said to be greatest 
democracy i n the world ! N o wonder that 
America throughout the world is branded as 
a nation of hypocrites." 
LA W AN D LAWYERS . 
TH E SUPREM E COURT 
AN D TH E 
BA R ASSOCIATION 
The Nation says on 
one of the questions 
before the Supreme 
Court : 
"Such laws as the Oklahoma 'grandfatherclause' law are not numerous, having existed 
only i n North Carolina, Louisiana, Georgia, 
and Oklahoma; while that i n Louisiana expired by self-limitation i n 1899, and that i n 
North Carolina i n 1908. The clause i n the 
State of Georgia wil l similarly expire on the 
first of January, 1915, and in Oklahoma 
alone has it been made permanent. There 
is therefore special reason, i n spite of the 
small Negro population, for contesting the 
indefensible distinction it makes. Lik e the 
others, it would permit literate and propertyholding Negroes and whites to vote alike, 
but while it excluded illiterate or propertyless Negroes—and only the justice of election officers would prevent the classification 
of almost all colored applicants under these 
heads—it would permit the registration of 
any illiterate or propertyless white whose 
father or grandfather had been a voter in 
1866. Such laws are deeply objectionable 
i n themselves, and i n the lesson they give the 
population in racial discrimination i n other 
matters; while they add new difficulties to 
the whole task of giving the Negro an adequate civic education." 
There is evidence, however, that the Supreme. Court wil l continue to dodge the Negro, problem. I n July, 1913, a Negro, Carl OPINION 75 
Oliver, of Galveston, Texas, found a white 
man i n his home. H e killed his wife and 
the white man. Texas justice acquitted him 
i n the case of his wife and convicted him for 
killing the man! The case came to the Supreme Court and was dismissed because 
Oliver's attorneys failed—to have the record 
printed ! 
The decision of the Ba r Association on 
"Negroes and Woman " does not satisfy papers like the New Yor k Tribune. 
"Whil e it has receded somewhat from its 
previous stand barring Negroes from membership, the American Ba r Association has 
not removed that issue by shifting responsibility for their admission or exclusion to its 
executive committee. Neither has it taken a 
square stand—or a sensible one—in placing 
women lawyers who seek membership in the 
same category of undesirables. Negroes, 
without regard to their sex may and do become useful and respected members of the 
bar under State laws. They have every right 
to aspire to membership i n what purports 
to be the leading and representative lawyers' 
association of the country. Fo r them to be 
held off i n this fashion i n this day of progress inevitably raises the query whether there 
is something i n the theory and practice of 
the law which causes a lawyer to be something less than a reasoning human being." 
The American Ba r Association has long 
been a social club of southern whites and is 
not taken very seriously by lawyers of high 
standing. 
TH E COLORE D PRESS. 
COMMEN T AN D 
DISCUSSION 
TH E CRISI S raises its hat 
to the fascinating St. 
Luke's Herald after reading its frank retraction of a statement about 
Howard University : 
"We have sinned, and i n sackcloth and 
ashes we bow our head. W e are guilty of a 
'curious error,' and we start off by humbly 
apologizing to Howard University for saying 
'the walls bear not one Negro face.' I n saying this, we did not say exactly what we 
meant, hence we committed a 'curious error.' 
Next, we go down before Dr. DuBois in sorrow and acute distress, and apologize for the 
loss of reliability i n his estimation. It is 
hard to bear such a loss, but we hope to 
retrieve our loss by being very, very careful 
ever hereafter." 
The A . M . E . Church Review shows courage and discrimination i n its criticism of the 
Bench of Bishops : 
"There are evidences which point to the 
fact that, at times, the 'Bench of Bishops' 
is itself leaderless. True, they are equals; 
we have no Archbishop; but a 'Bench of 
Bishops,' like a cabinet or the ministry of a 
government, needs one or more guiding spirits whose superior wisdom and largeness of 
vision command adherence. Take the matter 
of the proposed 'Centennial Fund.' It was 
attacked as not legalized and upon grounds 
that clearly showed an animus without foundation in the general sentiment of the church. 
Here was an opportunity that could only 
come once i n a century to strengthen our 
educational and other general interests. Bu t 
some of the Bishops were either timid or in ­
different; hence, as a connectional movement, 
it has fallen to the ground, but where properly presented it has met with prompt and 
generous response." 
The A . M . E . Church is probably the 
greatest Negro organization on earth but it 
needs for that very reason the fire of intelligent, internal criticism i f it is to survive 
and grow. 
The Afro-American Ledger says: 
"The time has arrived when the traveling 
colored people all over the country should 
make a strong protest to the powers-that-be 
of the conditions that we are compelled to 
undergo i n traveling i n the southern part 
of this country. It is almost impossible to 
secure decent accommodations, either in day 
coaches or i n Pullman cars. Ticket agents 
wil l deliberately lie when application is made 
for a reservation, and i f one wants a meal 
it is almost a matter of impossibility to secure it. Sometimes they wil l accommodate 
you, but when all the white people who are 
on the train have been served and not 
before." 
The Ledger then adds to the gayety of 
nations by concluding with this fine Irish 
bull : 
"Conditions are as bad as they can possibly be and we have got to do something 
about it in some way or it wil l i n all probability be worse." 
It is hardly necessary to add that the 
handsome brown-faced editor of the excellent Ledger rejoices in the name of Murphy. EDITORIAL 
"If You Wish to Avoid Criticism, Do 
Nothing, Say Nothing, Be Nothing." 
CHRISTMAS . 
THI S is the fifth Christma s 
season tha t TH E CRISI S 
has seen, an d it is the 
sixt h season of the active 
wor k o f the Nationa l As ­
sociation for the Ad ­
vancement of Colore d People . Surely , 
the world , the Unite d States, an d the 
Negr o race are better off fo r the wor k 
of these forces. W e cannot, to be sure, 
poin t to great an d definite accomplish ­
ments. Th e errors an d hatreds an d 
prejudice s o f three centurie s do not 
yiel d to the wor k of five littl e years, however earnest an d honest. Bu t we have 
made mor e tha n beginnings. W e have 
compelle d the worl d to listen, an d not 
simpl y the worl d tha t agrees wit h us bu t 
even some part of tha t worl d whic h passionately disagrees. W e have convince d 
man y doubtfu l American s tha t we have 
a case—a good, honest, sensible case— 
whic h deserves thought an d considera ­
tion ; tha t we cannot incontinentall y be 
pu t out o f court b y bein g dubbe d radicals or b y havin g our actions explaine d 
b y smalle r an d meaner motive s tha n 
those whic h we profess. 
Abov e all , our wor k shows that we are 
i n the field not to destroy bu t to fulfill , 
not to decr y or pul l dow n the wor k of 
others, bu t courteously an d firmly to 
poin t out the inadequac y of mere philan ­
throp y an d acquiescence an d desert as 
a means of settling the race problem i n 
America. 
In addition to this we have helped to 
force these problems mor e an d mor e before the courts an d brin g them to ju ­
dicia l decision. W e have gaine d a few 
cases, we have lost others ; bu t the gains 
are reasonably permanent, because the y 
are i n consonance wit h huma n progress 
to-day ; whil e i n every case the losses are 
retrievable . W e have i n a numbe r o f 
cases been able to brin g just decisions b y 
protest an d appeals to reason ; b y makin g people face the issue of race preju ­
dice instead of allowin g them silentl y to 
dodge it . 
Finally , we have pu t over 1,000,000 
copies of TH E CRISI S int o every state of 
the Unite d States an d int o most countries o f the world . Ther e ar e few in ­
telligent people i n Americ a wh o do not 
kno w o f the magazine an d have some 
ide a o f wha t it stands for. Al l this is 
wort h whil e an d a cause of rejoicin g i n 
this holida y season, but the rejoicin g 
ought not to stop wit h word s or feelings. 
It ought to induc e every reader of this 
editoria l to joi n the Nationa l Associatio n 
fo r the Advancemen t o f Colore d People , 
to subscribe for TH E CRISIS , an d to do 
both these things to-day. 
WAR . 
SOM E time ago we pub ­
lished a n articl e on 
Moshesh, the great blac k 
kin g of the Basuto s i n 
Sout h Africa . Recently 
there has come to ou r 
notice this passage i n Casalis', "M y Lif e 
i n Basutoland" : 
"It wa s a great stumblin g block to 
Moshesh whe n he learne d tha t the na -EDITORIA L 77 
tions whic h recognized Jesus Christ stil l 
loved war, an d applie d themselves to 
perfectin g the militar y art. 'It was excusable i n us,' sai d he, 'who ha d no other 
models tha n wil d beasts, but you , who 
profess to be the childre n of Hi m wh o 
said "Lov e you r enemies," for yo u to 
take pleasure i n fighting!' Al l tha t we 
coul d say to hi m about the alleviations 
whic h Christianit y ha d introduced , as, 
for instance, the case of the wounded, 
the absence of persona l hate, etc., onl y 
increased his stupefaction. 'The n yo u 
wor k this evi l withou t anger, mixin g 
wisdom wit h it ! I can make nothin g o f 
it, except that wa r must be a ro d whic h 
Go d does not choose to break, because he 
wil l make use of it stil l for the chastisement of me n !' " 
TH E SUPREM E COURT. 
IT is possible fo r the Su ­
preme Court withi n the 
next few months to go 
fa r towar d settling the 
race problem i n the 
Unite d States. W e confess we have littl e hope that the Court 
as now constituted wil l rise to this great 
opportunit y ; yet there is a possibility . 
Cases no w face the Court involvin g the 
"grandfather " clause of the southern 
disfranchisin g constitutions; the "Jim -
Crow " ca r law ; peonage on southern 
plantations ; the righ t of a colored ma n 
to defend his home ; an d discriminatio n 
i n cemeteries.' I n two o f these cases the 
Nationa l Associatio n fo r the Advance ­
ment of Colore d Peopl e has rendered 
aid , an d i n al l of them we are, of course, 
intensely interested. Wha t a forwar d 
step for Americ a i f the Court should decide that the "grandfather " clause was 
unconstitutional ; that at least, equa l accommodations unde r al l circumstance s 
should be give n citizens on al l railroad s 
payin g the same fare ; that the custom 
of sellin g a crimina l to a capitalist to be 
worke d at the capitalist's pleasure is 
slavery ; an d that injustic e cannot plea d 
race an d color as an excuse ! 
NEGRO . 
THER E are indication s tha t 
the custom of extendin g 
courtesy to 150,000,000 
of huma n beings b y capitalizin g the racia l name 
whic h is most i n use, is 
slowl y increasing. Th e manage r of the 
Associate d Press write s us: 
"W e have a broa d rul e to the effect 
tha t the wor d 'Negro ' shoul d be capitalized i n our service, bu t we do not contro l the typographica l appearance of the 
wor d as it appears i n the newspapers. 
" A littl e more tha n a yea r ago we sent 
out 900 copies of a letter from Mr . Lester A . Walton , of the Age, to the newspapers i n the Associated Press, an d T 
thin k the practic e of capitalizin g the 
wor d Negr o is ver y genera l so fa r as I 
have been able to observe." 
Y. M. C. A. 
WE gave last mont h considerable Space to the wonderfu l wor k of the colored 
Y . M . C. A . It is an extraordinar y growt h an d 
the colored secretaries 
lik e Mr . Hunto n an d Mr . Mooreland , 
an d whit e philanthropists lik e Juliu s 
Rosenwald , together wit h the governin g 
heads of the whole movement deserve 
undoubtedl y great credit. A t the same 
time it must be remembered that directl y i n questions of this sort lur k the most 
baffling difficulties of our race problem. 
Th e Y . M . C. A . movement i n Americ a 
is not actin g i n a Christia n manne r towar d colored folk. I n most cities colored people are, as i n Ne w York , exclude d from al l the well-equipped 
branches of the Y . M . C. A . an d herded 
i n a poorl y equipped "colored " branch . 
I n other cities like Bosto n an d Provi ­
dence recent attempts have been frustrated to do the same thing . I n stil l 
other cities the Negroe s are segregated 
but as we showed last mont h splendi d 
new accommodations have been erected "And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God and saying: 
"Glory to God in the highest and on earth PEACE, GOOD WILL TOWARD MEN." The Adoration of the Kings 
Afte r the painting b y Jan Gossart, of Mabuse . 
"Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod, the King, there came wise 
men from the East to Jerusalem ... . 
"And when they had come into the house they saw the young child with Mary, his mother, and fell 
down and worshipped Him; and when they had opened their treasures they presented unto Him 
gifts ; gold and frankincense and myrrh. ' ' 80 TH E CRISIS 
for them. Wha t now should be the attitude of colored people and their friends 
toward this movement? Manifestly, 
here is a case for niceness of judgment 
but unerring adherence to principle. It 
is a fine thing that the colored people 
have such well-equipped Y . M . C. A . 
buildings in Chicago and Washington 
and Philadelphia, but it is an unchristian and unjust and dangerous procedure which segregates colored people 
i n the Y . M . C. A . movement. However 
much we may be glad of the colored Y . 
M . C. A . movement on the one hand, on 
the other hand we must never for a 
single moment fail to recognize the injustice which has made it an unfortunate necessity. 
MURDER . 
WE are preening ourselves 
as a nation because we 
are now at peace while 
civilized Europe is at 
war; but we must remember that the wars of 
peace are often quite as horrible as the 
murder of war. The United States has 
the unenviable and shameful notoriety 
of being the country where murder is 
more prevalent than i n any other civilized land. There are i n this country at 
least six times as many murders each 
year as i n England, France and Germany; while Berli n has two murders for 
every hundred thousand of population, 
New Yor k has six, Chicago has nine, Atlanta has twenty-three and Memphis has 
fifty-eight: The influence of the race 
problem can be directly traced by comparing southern and northern cities. 
Memphis, Charleston, Savannah, New 
Orleans, Atlanta, Nashville, Louisville, 
St. Louis and Cincinnati are hot-beds of 
homicide. It is not merely the murder 
of black men by white men in these 
cities, but also the murder of white men 
by black men, of white men by white 
men and of black men by black men. It 
is the atmosphere of violence and hatred 
and these things grow i n the miasma of 
race prejudice. 
T O YOUN G CONTRIBUTORS . 
ANOTHE R word seems necessary to those young 
colored people who wish 
to write, and particularl y for those who would 
write for TH E CRISIS . 
We want articles, stories and notes of 
interest concerning the colored race and 
race relations i n general. Our only excuse for being is the publication of such 
matter. That is what we are here for. 
We cannot, however, publish but a 
small part of the matter that is sent to 
us : First, because of lack of space, and 
secondly, because so much that is sent 
is not well written. Fo r instance, a 
writer sends us a manuscript previously 
offered to the American Magazine and 
asks why it was rejected. The reason 
of its rejection is perfectly clear. We 
quote simply the first three lines : 
" I have no personal enthusiasm i n 
choosing this theme, but on the account 
of the present day controversy, which 
are so prevalent, I wil l reflect some light 
on the subject that will serve as guiding 
post." 
B 
TH E OL D STORY . 
WE publish verbatim a 
despatch from Conway, 
Ark. , published i n a Ft . 
Smith, Ark., daily: 
"Gertrude Hollinshead, about 16 years old, 
on whose testimony nine Negroes were 
convicted of serious charges and sent to. 
the penitentiary for terms ranging from 
19 to 35 years, now says that her testimony was false. She met Judge Eu ­
gene Lankford, before whom the case 
was tried at Conway a year ago last 
August, i n Littl e Rock last night by appointment, and said she wished to retract all the charges she had made 
against the Negroes and asked that they 
be pardoned. 
"A t the time of the crimes for which 
the Negroes were said to have been committed, the girl was under 16 years of 
age. She was an orphan and until a short EDITORIA L 81 
time before the Negroes were arrested 
was living with her step-mother. It was 
said that she was driven from her home 
and took refuge with a Negro woman 
named Luvide Simms, who was sentenced to 35 years for her part i n the 
case." 
MOR E CORRESPONDENCE . 
MR. J. McKeen Cattell, 
Sir: 
In Science volume thirty-nine, No. 1004, page 
five, I find the following 
statement made by you : 
"There is not a single mulatto who has 
done creditable scientific work." 
I beg to enclose clippings from TH E 
CRISI S Magazine and to call your attention to the scientific work of three colored men there mentioned. [Fuller, 
Turner and Just.] I am inclined to 
think that you owe some one an apology 
for the statement before mentioned. 
I am, sir, 
Ver y respectfully yours, 
TH E EDITOR . 
To the Editor of TH E CRISI S : 
In your November issue you quote a 
statement by me i n regard to the lack of 
creditable scientific work by mulattoes. 
If read i n the context of the paragraph, 
the sentence means that no mulatto has 
accomplished scientific work which 
would entitle him to inclusion among 
the thousand scientific men of the United 
States whose work has been the most 
creditable. This is true. Bu t instead 
of quoting a sentence apart from its 
context, it. would be of greater service 
to the cause i n which we are both interested to give the argument of that paragraph, which is an attempt to prove 
from biological evidence that the lack of 
scientific work by mulattoes i n the past 
has been due, not to their heredity or 
racial qualities, but to the unfavorable 
environment i n which they have been 
placed. "We may hope that i n the future the contributions of the colored 
races to science wil l be not only creditable, but distinguished. 
J. MCKEE N CATTELL . 
The reader would scarcely have gathered from Mr. Cattell's remark that he 
was referring simply to the thousand 
greatest American scientists. A less 
sweeping statement would have been 
wiser. 
PREJUDICE . 
WE quote from a letter i n 
the New York Times : 
"Easy to create, it is 
hard to destroy. Sinister of wit, it is weak of 
wisdom. Its preceptions 
are false. It sees i n darkness ; it is blind 
in the light. It nurtures lies and rejects truth. Breeding hatred, it blasts 
sympathy. It rules those who give it 
life. It is a conjured Frankenstein, 
dominating millions of men. It sits beside the gates of life and takes toll of 
all that pass. 
"It is the conservator of all that reason would destroy, the destroyer of the 
works of justice. It is the hand-maiden 
of error, the nemesis of knowledge. It 
feeds fear and poisons hope. It lives by 
the law of the dead. It thrives upon the 
meat of yesterday. It sickens on the sustenance of to-day. 
"It is the anarchist of the heart. It 
smothers faith. It gives love to the 
torch. It bemeans benevolence and 
shuns communion. It stills the sound of 
music and palsies the hand of art. It betrays belief and sets suspicion on a 
throne. It rejoices i n tears. Its mirth 
is i n misery. 
"It is the monster of the mind. It 
pollutes thought, serves despair, and 
ravishes right. It offends against fact 
and is a stranger to logic. Its soothing 
is i n sophistry. It divines the unreal 
and walks i n the way of phantoms. It 
drains the potions brewed by witches of 
the brain. It is a thing of charms and 
amulets. 
"It is prejudice! 
"NATHA N STRAUS. " 82 TH E CRISIS 
TH E BA R ASSOCIATION . 
I HAV E just returned 
from the meeting of the 
American Ba r Association at Washington 
where contrary to everybody's expectation I succeeded i n getting the resolution passed 
at Milwaukee two years ago (which declared that it had never been contemplated that colored men should be admitted) rescinded. 
I n its place a resolution was passed 
that applications for membership should 
hereafter state the race and sex of the 
applicant and such other facts as the 
Executive Committee should require. I 
stated that I did not object to this for 
if I were a colored man I should say to 
the Association : " I am not ashamed of 
my race but as proud of it as you are of 
yours. I come as a colored man to ask 
admission," and that I did not want 
either the colored man or women admitted out of any mistake. 
This was accomplished by a substantially unanimous vote. The bar to Negro 
membership is thus removed, and when 
a proper Executive Committee is elected 
and proper colored candidates present 
themselves, they wil l be elected. This 
may not be for some years but it wil l 
come. I hope this result wil l gratify you 
and my other associates of the N . A . A . 
C. P . 
Tours very truly, 
(Signed) M . STOREY . 
m 
TH E ELECTION . 
THE chief matter of comfort to colored folk i n 
the late election is the 
more evenly balanced 
power of the two great 
parties resulting from it. 
Neither Republicans nor Democrats can 
afford to defy 500,000 Negro voters i n 
the next two years. The Republicans 
have disfranchised them in party councils and the Democrats have segregated 
them. Wit h such a record both parties 
must do a lot of explaining. 
We see the decline of Progressivism 
with regret. It had some splendid personalities and high ideals; but on the 
greatest human problem of the day it 
went at the very beginning violently and 
inexcusably wrong. 
m 
COURTESY. 
A RETURNE D tourist who 
was stranded i n Europe 
says that the courteous 
person about the United 
States Embassy i n Berli n was a colored citizen 
of the United States of America who was 
also stranded and given employment 
there. He was educated at Columbus, 
Missouri. H e was polite even to the 
poorest applicant for information and 
seemed to have every detail at command. 
WILLIA M MONRO E TROTTER . 
WILLIAM MONROE 
TROTTE R is a brave 
man. Of his fearlessness 
and his unselfish devotion to the highest interests of the Negro race 
there can be no doubt. 
President Woodrow Wilson is a keenly 
sensitive man. He has high ideals and 
he is following them. On one subject 
alone he is by birth and education unfitted for largeness of view or depth- of 
feeling. His attitude on the Negro problem is essentially the attitude of the old 
philanthropic South of fifty years ago. 
He feels "kindly " toward Negroes, he 
wants to "help" them, he would not 
knowingly hinder them; but when it 
comes to treating black men as independent human beings, the equals of other 
citizens i n the United States, the thing is 
simply beyond Mr. Wilson's conception. 
Whe n two men like this come together 
to discuss segregation, granting them 
both honesty, good wil l and earnestness, 
as indeed we must, there is going to be 
trouble, if not anger and positive discourtesy. 
One thing is certain: Mr. Trotter 
voiced the feelings of nine-tenths of the 
thinking Negroes of this country. TH E CHRISTMA S PRAYER S O F GOD 8 3 
The Christmas Prayers of God 
Name of God's Name! 
Red murder reigns; 
Al i Hel l is loose; 
On gold autumnal air 
Walk grinning devils barbed and hoofed, 
Whil e high on hills of hate, 
Black-blossomed, crimson sky'd, 
Thou sittest, dumb. 
Father Almighty ! 
This earth is mad! 
Palsied, our cunning hands; 
Rotten, our gold; 
Our argosies reel and stagger 
Over empty seas; 
Al l the long aisles 
Of Thy great temples, God, 
Stink with the entrails 
Of our souls. 
An d Thou art dumb. 
Above the thunder of Thy thunders, 
Lord , 
Lightening Thy lightnings, 
Rings and roars 
The dark damnation 
Of this Hel l of war. 
Red piles the pulp of hearts and heads, 
An d little children's hands. 
Allah ! 
Elohim ! 
Death is here! 
Dead are the living, deep dead the dead. 
Dyin g are earth's unborn— 
The babes' wide eyes of genius and of 
joy ; 
Poems and prayers, sun-glows and earthsongs ; 
Great pictured dreams, 
En-marbled phantasies, 
Hymns of high Heaven, 
Al l fade, i n this dread night, 
This long ghost night— 
While Thou art dumb. 
Have Mercy! 
Have mercy upon us, miserable sinners ! 
Stand forth, unveil Thy face, 
Pour down the light 
That seethes above Thy throne, 
An d blaze this devil's dance to darkness ! 
Hea r ! 
Speak ! 
In Christ's great name— 
# # # * * 
I hear. 
Forgive me, God. 
Above the thunder I hearkened ; 
Beneath the silence, now, 
I hear. 
**** * 
(Wait, God, a little space. 
It is so strange to talk with Thee— 
Alone !) 
**** * 
This gold? 
I took it. 
Is it Thine? 
Forgive ; I did not know. 84 TH E CRISIS 
Blood? Is it wet with blood? 
'Tis from my brother's hands. 
(I know; his hands are mine.) 
It flowed for Thee, 0 Lord . 
War ? Not so, not war : 
Dominion, Lord , and over black, not 
white. 
Black, brown and fawn, 
An d not Thy chosen brood, 0 God, 
We murdered. 
To build Thy kingdom, 
To drape our wives and little ones, 
An d set their souls a'glitter— 
Fo r this we killed these lesser breeds 
An d civilized their dead, 
Raping red rubber, diamonds, cocoa, 
gold. 
Fo r this, too, once, and in Thy name 
I lynched a Nigger— 
(He raved and writhed, 
I heard him cry, 
I felt the life light leap and lie, 
I watched him crackle there, on 
high, 
I saw him wither!) 
Thou? 
Thee? 
I lynched Thee? 
**** * 
Awake me, God, I sleep ! 
What was that awful word Thou saidst ? 
That black and riven Thing—was it 
Thee? 
That gasp—was it Thine ? 
This pain—is it Thine? 
Ar e then these bullets piercing Thee ? 
Have all the wars of all the world, 
Down all dim time, drawn blood from 
Thee? 
Have all the lies, and thefts, and hates— 
Is this Thy crucifixion, God, 
An d not that funny little cross, 
Wit h vinegar and thorns? 
**** * 
Help ! 
I sense that low and awful cry— 
Who cries? 
Wh o weeps 
Wit h silent sob that rends and tears— 
Can God sob? 
Who prays? 
I hear strong prayers throng by, 
Like mighty winds on dusky moors— 
Can God pray? 
Prayest Thou, Lord , and to me? 
Thou needest me? 
Thou needest me ? 
Thou needest me? 
Poor wounded Soul! 
Of this I never dreamed. I thought— 
Courage, God, 
I come! TH E CONGRESSME N AN D TH E N. A. A. C. P. 85 
TH E CONGRESSMEN 
And the National Association for the Advancement of the 
Colored People 
Mr. PETE R TE N EYKE , representative 
from the 28th district, New York , 
writes: "It is my advice to you to drop 
agitating the things which you have outlined 
i n your letter until such time as you find 
that the wild rumors are liable to become a 
reality." This, of course, he says "i n all 
sympathy with your race," and it expresses 
exactly the attitude which the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People is fighting and which its questionnaire 
addressed to congressional candidates seems 
to prove is the right fight for us to make. 
First, of course, and foremost, we have 
come across the men who do not care. 
George Nicholas, of Kentucky, says : " I do 
not desire your support. I am indifferent 
to your opposition." 
Other congressmen are angry at the threat 
of non-support at the polls: Congressman 
Bathrick considers this "distinctly obnoxious and, I believe, liable to injure instead 
of help, the cause of the colored people." 
Others i n considerable numbers seek to 
dodge the issue. Charles F . Wilcox, of New 
York , a Republican candidate, gives this remarkable excuse: " I have relatives now at 
the head of colored schools in the South. 
Under these circumstances I think you wil l 
understand my attitude sufficiently so that 
you wil l pardon my declining to answer specific questions at this time!" Griest, of 
Pennsylvania, draws himself up indignantly 
and is "surprised that a successor to the 
seat o f Thaddeus Stevens should be subjected to this cross-examination." 
Of course, we encounter the breezy optimist: "Nobody is thinking," of abrogating 
the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendment, 
says a Pennsylvania Democrat. There need 
be no antagonism between the races and 
"there is none," says a Pennsylvania Progressive. Then right on top of these answers comes an Indiana Democrat who wants 
segregation and "Jim-Crow" cars i n the 
District of Columbia, and a Texan who 
wants not only this but the Fourteenth and 
Fifteenth Amendments repealed and the 
whole Negro race put out of the country. 
He adds gayly: "No Negroes vote in the 
Texas Democratic primaries, and very few 
Republicans vote in the general elections." 
He also sends a clipping from a Dallas 
paper entitled "Jump U p Nigger E n Crack 
Yo ' Heels." A native of North Carolina, 
running i n Montana, also refuses to pledge 
himself as to the Fourteenth and Fifteenth 
Amendments, wants segregation and "wil l 
not oppose making invalid marriages of colored and white people." 
Al l this indicates clearly the present problem, and it is pleasant to note that some politicians have clear ideas at least as to the 
general justice of our position. Phelan, of 
Massachusetts, says frankly: " I do not 
favor segregation, not 'Jim-Crow' cars nor 
anything of the sort. I believe the colored 
people should have the rights which our 
Constitution and laws give them." Osgood, 
a Massachusetts Progressive, is in favor "of 
equal social, legal and political rights for 
colored citizens." Niles, a New Yor k candidate, says : " I shall in the future, as I have 
always in the past, on every occasion public 
or private, social or political, assail AN Y 
and EVER Y measure, of whatever kind or 
nature, or description, that is inspired by 
hatred for, or opposition to, AN Y race, 
nationality or creed." An d Murra y Hul -
bert, of New York , says : "Talent knows no 
race or creed and I would accord to every 
man the full measure of reward which he 
merits." 
Radicals like the Socialists and others 
speak strongly but not always with full comprehension of what they are saying. Thus, 
a Socialist of Minnesota declares "there is 
no race problem," and a candidate of the 
Socialist Labor Party in Maryland, is fighting for a society "where economic equality 
will be for all irrespective of race, creed or 
color." Weinstoek, a Pennsylvania Progressive, says flatly: "The Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments are not enforced if social liberty as well as political liberty is not 
given to all our citizens irrespective of color 
or creed." 
A Pennsylvania Socialist stands squarely 
for the right but complains that colored 
voters always vote for the "common enemy." 
John Burt, of Pennsylvania, voices the same 
thing and says feelingly: "Oh, how I wish 
your organization could guide aright the 
large population of colored people in this 86 TH E CRISIS 
First Congressional District against the gang 
organization who has used them as so much 
merchandise for their own personal ends." 
What is it that makes colored people, and 
intelligent colored people, so often vote for 
bosses? It is undoubtedly the canny stand 
of men like Boise Penrose. Mr . Penrose 
stands right up and tersely says that he wil l 
support war amendments, that he is opposed 
to segregation and "Jim-Crow" cars, that he 
wil l vote against anti-intermarriage laws, 
and that he never justifies lynching. 
It is interesting to note, however, that 
there is disagreement among our political 
leaders even i n such fundamental matters as 
lynching. A Montana man confesses that 
he has sometimes justified lynching. A n 
Ohio Republican is i n favor of it i n "some 
cases." A Pennsylvania Progressive who 
lives on a "college campus" wants it "very, 
very seldom;" and Edwar d Hart, a professor i n Lafayette College, justifies it under 
certain "exceptional" circumstances! Wit h 
such leaders can we blame the mob? 
Perhaps the most striking thing about all 
these answers is the number of people who 
frankly say that they are not informed on 
the Negro problem; that they simply "do 
not know the facts." This is the severest 
condemnation of the past attitude of the colored people and their friends that could possibly be made. It is the business of people 
who want wrongs righted to let the world 
know just what the wrongs are. A Michigan man is "not at all familiar with these 
questions." Congressman Good has "not 
studied" segregation. A Pennsylvania man 
says his "information is too limited." A n 
Illinois Progressive is "not sure about his 
attitude." A Michigan Democrat is "not in ­
formed." A n Ohio Republican has not 
"fully considered the matter." A Minnesota 
Progressive wants "to know more," and so 
on through dozens of answers. 
Naturally, the greatest wavering is on the 
question of intermarriage and the wavering 
shows how remiss the colored people have 
been i n not making their attitude perfectly 
clear. It is a delicate and unpleasant subject which no one wants to argue and yet 
the results of not arguing it are so frightful 
that honest men are forced to state their 
opinion. The real problem is illustrated by 
a piece of news that comes to us this month 
from California : 
A white policeman, F . A . Winte r of Los 
Angeles, has been clandestinely meeting 
Juanita Nelson, an orphan colored girl. She 
has a child. The policeman, run to earth, 
acknowledges his fault and offers to marry 
the girl but TH E LAW S O F CALIFOR ­
NI A PREVEN T THIS ! 
Here, then, is the problem : Di d the colored people want this girl to have a white 
husband? They most certainly did not. Di d 
the white people want the policeman to have 
a colored wife? Evidently not. Bu t the 
fact remains that these people wanted each 
other and what is a civilized world going to 
do about it ? Of course, the first answer that 
rushes to the mouth of Gibbons, an Illinois 
Progressive, is " I am opposed to intermarriage on ethnological grounds as it deteriorates both races and is a stock process of 
extermination." 
This is absolutely false, as anyone may 
learn by reading Dr. Loeb's article i n this 
number of TH E CRISIS . We have a perfect 
right to oppose racial intermarriage, but we 
have no right, consciously or unconsciously, 
to lie about the reasons. 
Despite our predilections, the answer of 
Paxton Hibben, of Indiana, is absolutely the 
only decent answer: "I shall vote to make 
no woman's children illegitimate." It is not 
enough here to rely on general philanthropy. 
Linden Bates, of New York , states that "it 
is a basic Progressive policy" to protect 
women and children of "al l races." But 
Gulley, just as good a Progressive, from Indiana, says: " I will not oppose a law making such marriages invalid. " 
Here, again, a large number of answers 
waver. Some think it is sufficient to say 
that they are "opposed to anti-racial marriage" but are not clear as to how it is to 
be stopped. Others want to stop it by law 
but would not have the law retroactive. 
Wha t they would do i n the California case 
they do not say. 
Lee, of Colorado, expresses the attitude o f 
a man who needs enlightenment: " I oppose 
racial intermarriage. It would seem to me, 
without having an opportunity to examine 
the matter pro and eon, that a law making 
such marriage invalid is not a proper means 
of preventing the same and my present belief is that I would oppose it. " There 
are some men, however, who are square and 
clear. Hobart, of Ohio, says: "There 
should be no different rule when white and 
colored marry than when white and white N. A. A. C. P. NOTE S 87 
or black and black marry." A native-born 
southerner from Tennessee adds: " I am opposed to annulling any marriages anywhere 
by law." An d C. R. Lawrence, a Massachusetts Progressive, has this clear word: "One 
cannot look upon many of the faces of our 
citizens and be blind to the blending to a 
more or less degree between the colored and 
white people and I would rather see this in ­
evitable tendency accomplished rightfully 
than criminally. I fear no more affinity as 
to marriage between the white and colored 
people with the marriage bars down than 
up." 
Finally, a few, but a very few people, 
perceive that the fight that this Association 
is making is not simply "for colored people." 
It is for the whole nation. A s Representative Focht, of Pennsylvania, says: "Fift y 
or more members of Congress from southern 
states are there illegally; " and an Indiana 
Progressive adds, "The creation of rotten 
boroughs i n this country is a negation of 
Republican government." 
N. A. A. C. P. Notes 
ANNUA L MEETING . 
The Annua l Meeting of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People wil l be held on Monday, January 4, 
1915 , i n New Yor k City. There will be two 
sessions, an afternoon session at 2:30 o'clock 
and an evening session at 8 o'clock. The 
afternoon session wil l be a business session 
open only to members who have paid their 
dues. The evening session will be public, to 
which all are invited. A t this session the 
first Spingarn Medal will be awarded. 
BRANCHES . 
The response which has come from 
branches to the Association's appeal for assistance during these times of financial depression has been most encouraging. The 
District of Columbia Branch led with a generous contribution of $300. Substantial contributions have also been received from Baltimore, Seattle, and the Northern California 
Branch. The Board of Directors desires to 
thank these branches for their co-operation. 
Northern California: 
I n addition to the contribution mentioned 
above which the Northern California Branch 
donated to the legal fund, this Branch has 
been doing other important work. They 
have succeeded i n having signs, "Colored 
Patrons Not Solicited," removed from certain restaurants. The Branch has conducted 
a series of meetings throughout the year at 
one of which Mrs. Coolidge, formerly assistant Professor of Sociology at Leland Stanford University, spoke on "The Mexican Situation and Racial Antagonism." 
Cleveland: 
About 1,000 people attended a mass meeting held i n the auditorium of the Cory M . 
E . Church Sunday, October 11 . The chief 
address delivered by President Kin g of Oberlin College on "The Negro and Democracy" 
made a profound impression on the audience. This Branch has been working with 
several other organizations to secure the appointment of colored representatives on the 
Welfare Council of the city. A s a result 
both a colored man and a colored woman 
have been appointed. The Council is composed of the leading social and civic organizations of Cleveland and expects to take up 
matters of much importance. 
Providence : 
A t a rousing mass meeting held October 
27, i n the old historic First Baptist Church, 
the Lieutenant-Governor of the State, Hon . 
Roswell P . Burchard, presiding. The chief 
speaker was Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard , 
whose subject was, "The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
and what It Stands For. " Mr . Villard's address was enthusiastically received. Mr . 
Butler R. Wilson, Secretary of the Boston 
Branch, gave an able address on "Racia l 
Conditions in New England. " Many new 
members were added to the Branch. 
The Branch has succeeded in its effort to 
secure the admission of colored members to 
the Y . M . C. A . When their new building 
was completed the Y . M . C. A . sent out a call 
for new members. Two high school students joined and the Rev. Zechariah Harrison who had been a member for seventeen 
years renewed his dues. Afte r their fees had 
been accepted these three colored members 
were advised that the admission of colored 
people was under discussion. The officers of 
the Providence Branch of the National Association at once sent letters to prominent 88 TH E CRISIS 
men and women i n the city, to the pastors 
of the various churches, to the ministers' 
unions, etc. A s a result of the public sentiment aroused colored men are now eligible 
for membership i n the Providence Y . M . 
C. A . 
Newark : 
The Newark Branch held its first meeting 
at the Bethany Baptist Church, October 8, 
with Mr . Villar d and Mrs. Butler R. Wilson 
as speakers. A gratifying number of new 
members and subscribers to the CRISI S were 
received. The officers of this Branch are: 
Rev. Joseph R. Waters, President; Mr. R. 
W . Stewart, Secretary; Mr. John S. Pink -
man, Treasurer; Dr. W . R. Granger, Chairman Executive Committee. 
Kansas City : 
The Kansas Cit y Branch has gained an 
encouraging victory i n persuading the 
Mayor to veto an ordinance which was railroaded through the city council of Kansas 
City, Mo. , to prevent a colored Baptist College from locating in a white neighborhood. 
Shreveport : 
The Shreveport Branch which was recently organized, held a mass meeting at the C. 
M . E . Temple on August 28 at which Prof. 
William Pickens was the chief speaker. His 
address aroused great enthusiasm. The 
Branch has sent a protest to the Governor 
of Louisiana asking to end the mob law in 
that state where several lynchings occurred 
within a week without a semblance of investigation. 
Tacoma : 
Memorial services for Samuel ColeridgeTaylor were held by the Branch at the First 
Congregational Church on September 27. 
This is one of the largest white churches in 
the city and was filled with a cultured white 
and colored audience. The memorial sermon 
was given by Dr. Marshall Dawson, minister 
of the Ethica l and Unitarian Societies. 
Mrs. Mabel Davis and choir gave effectively several folk songs. Mrs. Asberry in an 
interesting talk compared Africa n folk 
music with European folk music, illustrating by piano selections from Negro melodies as transcribed by Coleridge Taylor. 
The following came to us Christmas Eve 
from a lawless section i n Louisiana near the 
scene of the recent lynching of two Negroes: 
"Please enclosed find $1.00 as a Xmas 
present to be spent i n any way that will 
help the cause of the association. There are 
hundreds and hundreds of dollars spent by 
the poor colored people here this week for 
Xmas turkeys, so I will do without my 
turkey and spend my dollor for the good 
of my Race. M y prayer to your national 
association is to think of us and help us 
to be a thinking people. I am thinking I 
would be hung i f some man with the socalled power at his back could read this 
letter. Here at this point I stoped writing 
and thought over the letter and I see nothing 
in it but good-will to all men and hatred to 
non. So i f my neck goes, let it go, since it 
goes for rite. 
" I think i f this world wil l be a good world 
your association is one of the ways that it. 
will be made better. Yo u can't make the 
Negro good without making his surrounding 
good. I am classed as an ignorant man. I 
have never gone to school but one week i n 
my life, but I can see where the national 
association is a blessing to the world. I 
haven't a dollar that is too good for this 
cause, i n fact I haven't but fifty cents, but I 
mean that I can't ern a dillor that is too 
good for this cause." 
DEA R SIR : 
I read with much interest i n the December number of TH E CRISI S a letter to you, 
graphically describing the terrors of Negrohaunted city streets to unprotected womanhood (white). This frightful condition, which 
has been mentioned once or twice before i n 
discussing the race problem, is always cited 
concerning some city conveniently distant 
from the wicked opponent. 
I, too, live i n Washington and am out 
almost every night till ten or twelve. I 
usually come home alone, and frequently 
walk. M y walk takes me through both a wellto-do and a poor colored section. On the 
innumerable occasions during the past six 
years, when I have so rashly risked being the 
"next victim, " I have never once been 
molested, nor have I even seen anything 
which could frighten the most timid. 
If the writer of that letter has an address 
less vague than Washington I would be 
glad i f you would forward this letter to her. 
Sincerely yours, 
ANOTHE R WASHINGTO N WOMAN . TH E DEBTOR - A Story 
B Y MAYNARD HOLBROOK JACKSON 
IT was Christmas time. "A t last!"—the 
words came in a sudden burst of joy and 
then in a subdued whisper—"At last!" An d 
Jean Lesage covered his wrinkled, old face 
with his huge, rough hands and bowed where 
he was, hidden by the tall cane,—bowed to 
thank the Virgi n for this answer to a half 
century of prayers ; wept with long, deep 
sobs; then laughed. 
He was an unusual picture—this old man 
—tall, still straight, his great head covered 
with a thick shock of hair as white as the 
neighboring field of cotton, his wrinkled, 
brown face lighted by a pair of black eyes 
that bespoke suffering and perseverance,— 
even victory. Now his face shown with a 
deep-souled happiness that overshadowed his 
proverbial good nature. His outward characteristics only bespoke the wonderful beauty of. the man's soul, tried and proven by 
the white heat of slavery and the insidious 
institution of peonage. The world in its 
vast expanse would give up very few Jeans 
who have the spirit of Christianity so truly, 
so deeply developed that they could have 
looked upon their tormentors with less than 
hatred—active, vindictive, hatred. 
Jean had decided to disgrace his slave 
fathers, nay more,—to sell his soul, for his 
chance had come to get the ever-elusive gold. 
Father Pierre carried a bag in his cape 
pocket, for had he not given Jean's sick child 
a few cents from it that very morning? An d 
now Jean had deliberately planned to steal 
the charity bag, to rob the Lord . Afte r all, 
none seemed to care for his troubles and to 
sympathize with him—unless it were Barbette and the "Mother Mary. " So it was 
that honest, old Jean freely doomed himself 
to perdition, to the unpardonable sin, for a 
paltry bit of gold. The priest would come 
that night to see the sick child, Marie ; then 
he would get the bag; he could feel it in his 
hands already, even stood smilingly weighing 
it, feeling the golden pieces. 
It had not been without effort that old 
Jean had come to his decision. H e had carefully weighed the two issues—weighed them 
with great precaution, and he had taken his 
choice. No r was it because Hel l was not a 
reality to him; he believed most vividly in 
the sea of fire and brimestone and dreaded 
most definitely the life of everlasting punishment. I n fact, Jean had always planned to 
spend eternity i n the land of golden streets 
and great white thrones and had long been 
an ardent devotee of the church. The decision had been deliberate. The choice included the damnation of his soul as well as the 
bag; Jean knew it and chose the bag unflinchingly. 
The life of Jean Lesage had been one of 
awful struggle against debt; not the sort of 
debt that causes business worry out in the 
great, open world or takes away a man's 
houses and lands; but debt that reaches out 
cold hands for the body of its victim, puts 
chains of iron upon him and, with him imprisoned by fens and bayous, drives him to 
work with a cudgel; debt that enslaves his. 
wife and prostitutes his daughters. If Jean 
had been out i n the big world, he would have 
done some wonderful thing but, as it was, he 
had struggled through all his life against one 
problem—the fact that he was a debtor. 
Old Jean was a Creole, a Negro; his 
mother was a slave of pure Africa n descent ; 
his father was her French master. He and 
his mother had been sold when the father 
found another favorite and when freedom 
came they were upon the Lesage plantation, 
far down into the rich Mississippi delta, 
which smiled with almost extravagant 
bounty. 
Probably the most vivid memory of Jean's 
life was the time, a few years after the war, 
when his mother died and left him, a youth 
of sixteen summers, to face the world and 
win from it a paltry existence. She had so 
often called him at twilight, the tasks all 
finished, the shadows playing through the 
wisteria vines that covered the cabin porch 
and then falling across the uplifted face of 
the eager boy, making strange lights come 
and go in his longing eyes, and there told 
him the story of their existence, always finishing: "Jean, boy, you aint no slave;" and 
he could not forget it. Yet he had often 
asked himself wherein a man profited by 
freedom if he were a slave to debt? 
When the glad word came to the Lesage 
place, a year after the Emancipation Pro-90 TH E CRISIS 
clamation had been published, Francois Le ­
sage, owner and operator of a great sugar 
plantation, had magnanimously offered his 
assistance to his former bondsmen i n that 
they might remain upon his place and work 
for him at a "reasonable" consideration. 
An d his logic seemed fair to those poor, 
credulous gropers, for it was as he said, " I 
have the land, the plows, the cattle, the seed 
—everything; you have nothing; now, I am 
willing to give you all you may need i f you 
will stay and help me." An d Jean and his 
mother had remained, toiling, suffering, always looking forward to the time when they 
might escape the wolf. 
Then, when the mother had died, Jean decided to leave the fields of cane and cotton 
and seek the great, strange world where 
money was to be found everywhere and 
where, he had once heard from some mysterious and unauthentic source, there was 
even a black man who owned the land which 
he cultivated. But he would stay and save 
a little money with which to make the journey ; then he would go to the great city, New 
Orleans, of which his mother had so often 
spoken. 
It was a painful task, this saving of 
enough to get some tough shoes and a new 
pair of cotton breeches so that he might go 
to the far-off world. The generous employer, Lesage, paid him twenty cents a day for 
his nominal wage and i n turn had given him 
permission to run an account at the Lesage 
grocery so that "he need never feel the pangs 
of hunger." The poor fellow began to save 
some of his twenty cents; it took ten cents 
a day for rice and beans and then there was 
the bread, the occasional tobacco, the clothing, and other little items. He cut the tobacco from the list; a cotton jacket was 
made to last twice as long; then, too, he began to eat less,—but a huge frame like his 
called for much food; he began to make his 
supper upon the sugar cane and Barbette, 
the hand's cook, was kind, helping him with 
a pone of bread at intervals. So it was that, 
after four years, he finally saved ten dollars—enough to give him his desire. Ver y 
likely he owed for a bit of cotton cloth, a 
sun hat or some such trifling article, at the 
Lesage store; he would pay this and then 
make his way to the land of plenty. H e 
would ask but one thing of the master— 
permission to go. H e went to the store at 
Christmas time. The owner heard him with 
uplifted brows, startled at finding that 
monster, Ambition, upon his estate; but his 
answer showed no surprise or indicision: 
"Jean, you are a debtor now. Yo u cannot 
leave until you pay me all. " 
"But, Master, I has something fer to pay 
yo now," Jean answered i n his broken accent which smacked of his French forefather. 
"Wha t have you, Jean? " 
" A bag full, Master ; I don' know jes' how 
much, but you ki n count it. " 
The rich Lesage took the greasy little bag 
and counted—one, two, three, four paper 
dollars; a five-dollar gold piece, and a dollar 
i n pennies and nickles—ten dollars. 
"Take what's yo' part, Master, and I'l l 
take de' rest and go." 
"Jean," came the cold judgment, "Yo u 
lack five dollars. Yo u must pay me all. " 
Jean was brave and began the old, painful process all over again. H e would work 
harder this year that he might wring some 
extra profit from the acres entrusted to him. 
He worked i n the dusky hours of early dawn 
and far into the moon-lit night. The other 
year had found him lazy and extravagant, 
he argued, but this year he would do his 
best; yet, at the end of the year the debt 
was still on the side of the owner. 
A t last the Christmas came when Jean 
made up his mind to leave by stealth. He 
had often seen the great ships going on to 
New Orleans and he had planned, more than 
once, to steal aboard along with the barrels 
of molasses and sugar that formed a regular 
shipment from the Lesage wharf. So it was 
that he hid himself in the hold of the big 
barge that came at the week-end and started 
for his land of promise. Bu t they found 
him, the free slave, and took him back; and 
the kindly Lesage reasoned with him: "M y 
son, why should you leave such a gracious 
employer, such a comfortable home? Have 
I not always given you food, clothing, shelter, although you owe me much? Woul d 
you leave such a master, and you, his debtor? 
Think well, boy ; make yourself satisfied with 
such good fortune ! Get yourself a wife and 
I wil l make you an overseer; even give you 
more money !" 
Jean went again to his work, but with a 
broken purpose. H e felt he could never 
save enough to free himself of the pernicious 
debt. H e began to get tobacco again, to eat 
more of the fine, white bread from the Le ­
sage commissary. Once he even took a day 
off to make love to Barbette from sun-rise TH E DEBTO R 91 
to twilight; i n fact, Barbette was a great 
check upon Jean for he feared to leave her 
with those dancing black eyes and winning 
smile, while he sought his fortune i n the 
country over beyond Bayou D ' L a Fouche. 
What was the use of trying to do impossible 
things, after all? Jean and Barbette became one; then there were two mouths to 
feed and the dream-world began slowly to 
fade. 
Then the children came—two robust boys 
and a beautiful, black-eyed girl. As soon as 
they could toddle they were i n the fields with 
the father, sowing, plowing, reaping,—sowing, plowing, reaping. Once again the 
youthful fire was kindled i n Jean's bosom, 
and he swore by the Hol y Virgi n that he 
would leave his innocent children free to go 
into the great world and perhaps some day 
they would learn to read from the great 
books that looked like huge catechisms—like 
those of the master. So they labored and 
stinted and suffered, but the pennies accumulated more and more slowly, until Jean, now 
old and silver-headed, feared that he should 
die before the debt was paid ; and then— 
Jean's thoughts were no longer of himself; 
he had given up his fond dreams of the 
golden world, sadly, unwillingly; he thought 
now of the children and prayed that they 
be not subjects of the Lesage debt. 
Thus Jean Lesage had deliberately chosen 
to send his soul to the world of shades for a 
bag of gold, for means to pay the perpetual, 
ever-increasing debt. When the priest came 
that night, Jean was, as ever before, talkative, even severely loquacious—but every 
word, every act, was a lie and guilt was 
written deep in his aged heart. When the 
priest knelt to pray, the old sufferer slipped 
from the room unnoticed and tremblingly 
got the longed-for gold into his hands—felt 
it,—hard, chill, gold, yellow tyrant that rules 
the world and tortures its subjects at will. 
The old man paused for the first time; how 
could he explain to Barbette and the boys? 
Would they know he was a—a thief? Wha t 
would Barbette say? Dear, faithful, bentbacked, old Barbette! How would the lads 
feel when he was gone? Would they know 
he had been dishonest—a thief? The die 
was cast! He must be a debtor no longer! 
His children must reach the wonderful 
world ! 
The next morning Jean added his little 
savings to the stolen gold and made his way 
to the administrator's office. If they asked 
about the money he would say he had found 
it hidden i n the old marsh or that he had 
saved it through many years. 
The manager of the estate smiled as Jean 
entered. Everyone respected the worth and 
honesty of this old man and gave him some 
sort of deference. The manager's voice had 
the suggestion of warmth in it as he spoke. 
"Mornin ' Jean, what can I do for you so 
early?" 
"I've done come to pay my debt Mars 
Roland, and here's de money!" 
H e spread the coins out upon the old stone 
table that would have cried out i n behalf of 
perjured freedom, had it a mouth. He 
spread them out tenderly, lovingly, stopping 
often to count on his fingers or to fondle 
some shining piece. 
"Now, gimme my papers, Mars Roland! " 
He said it joyfully. 
"When I have counted your money, then 
I shall give you a receipt—your receipt in 
full. Give me Jean's bill, Francis! " 
He counted the golden pieces and then 
the others; ninety dollars in all. Finall y the 
clerk handed him a slip, with a knowing 
glance. The administrator labored over the 
calculation, counted and recounted. So 
much figuring on such a small account! 
Jean was dreaming ; he was far away from 
the administrator's office, wandering in fields 
of his own, his children happy and free, 
Barbette bustling i n their own cabin; he 
would die and go to purgatory, thankful. 
The manager was speaking in the sonorous 
voice which he assumed for official matters: 
"Jean Lesage—'one hundred and fifty 
dollars.' Jean, you are still in debt!" SCIENC E AN D RAC E 
B Y JACQUES LOEB, M.D. , Ph.D. (Leipzig) 
Hon . D . Sc. (Cantab.) 
[Dr. Jacques Loeb, head of the Department of Experimental Biology i n the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research, New 
Yor k City, is one of the best known scientists i n the world. H e was born i n Germany 
i n 1859, educated at Berlin, Munich and 
Strassburg, and has held chairs at Strassburg, Wurzburg, Geneva, Bry n Mawr, Chicago, and California universities. He is the 
author of numerous books and articles and 
speaks, therefore, with unusual authority.] 
1. Civilization a Question of Science. 
I n former ages civilization was a question 
of speculation, of poetry and philosophy, 
and any enthusiast could add what was considered a contribution. I n our present, and 
i n the future still more, that which we call 
civilization wil l be based on knowledge, not 
on sentiment, not on speculation, and not on 
poetry. Science is a matter of method; it 
does not require genius to be a scientist, but 
you must have the scientific method and i n 
addition simple common sense, the power of 
application and consecutive thought. From 
my experience with pupils I have found that 
the number of those who are not fitted to 
work out a problem and make a contribution to science is extremely small i f they only 
are taught the proper method, i f they only 
realize that what they have to use i n addition to the method is common sense. On this 
basis I venture to say that i n a short time 
everything that is considered to-day as a 
special race or nation wil l have its share i n 
the development of science, and I am firmly 
convinced that the conditions that will be 
found in the different scientific contributions 
will depend not so much on the question of 
races and nations as on the question of the 
dominance of the war power. People who 
have money to apply to education, i f they 
are taught the methods of scientific research, 
if they are not impoverished by excessive 
armaments and wars, will rapidly make contributions to science. The fact that America, 
i n spite of its youth, goes ahead so rapidly 
is to some extent due to the fact that we have 
not an oppressive army. France, once the 
leading nation in science, has gone back i n 
comparison to other nations for the reason 
that the army devours the money which 
should go to universities. I have friends i n 
Austri a who write me that their universities 
suffer because there is no money. Civiliza ­
tion to-day is not a race question; it is a 
question of the application of the energy of 
nations or communities to the development 
of science and its applications. 
2. Assumption of Race Supremacy Bests 
on no Scientific Ground. 
We have heard a good deal about inferior 
races, the white races being superior, the 
Negro being inferior, and similar things. 
Biology has not i n a single case been consulted, and i f it had been consulted there are 
no data to-day to confirm any such sweeping 
statement. Each character is inherited individually. The pigment of the skin and the 
shape of the eyes or nose have absolutely 
nothing to do with the intellectual power. 
They are inherited independently of each 
other, as those of you who may have read 
about Mendel's laws of heredity are well 
aware. We do not even know the mechanism 
of that what we call mental power and the 
mechanisms which determine the heredity of 
the mental and moral faculties. Ho w i n the 
world can anybody stand up to-day and say, 
"We believe the Negro is incapable of development; among the races of India only the 
so-called Aryans are capable of development"? Or by what right can they say that 
the Aryan s of India, i f they are colored 
brown, are as different from the white Ar ­
yans as the Negro, as far as intelligence and 
the possibility of progress is concerned? I 
protest that there is absolutely no basis for 
saying that the color of the skin or the shape 
of the eyes, or any other bodily characteristic 
has anything to do with the intellectual or 
moral inferiority of an individual or a race. 
Moreover, we know this, that talent is not a 
question of race but of strain or family. 
Fo r instance, talent for music, talent for 
drawing, talent for mathematical work, literary talent, may occur i n any race. These 
belong to special strains. We cannot say 
anything definite as to how they originate. 
It is possible, according to some experiments, 
that we are dealing in such eases with hereditary mutations. The main fact is that you SCIENC E AN D RAC E 93 
find talented strains, as far as our experience 
goes, in different races. That is a principle 
which must not be overlooked. It is contrary to science to say that, "Yo u are Negroes, you are inferior; do not mind i f we 
put you into a 'Jim Crow car.' " I think 
the dignity of humanity is hurt by such an 
attitude. 
3. The Blight of Oppression. 
In any community where one group tries 
to oppress another group the remedy has to 
be applied primarily to the oppressing 
group, not to the oppressed group. How to 
educate the Negro? Wha t have we got to 
do? Why , treat the Negro as a human being, give him justice. But the question is, 
what are we going to do with the oppressor? 
That is a serious problem. Let me point out 
to you one fact which I think is not a mere 
accident. We have had in history a number 
of cases where one group oppressed another. 
Look what it has led to. A wonderful example is Spain. In Spain, through the dominance of the Catholic Church, as you know, 
the Jews were expelled in 1492. Spain has 
never amounted to much since. On account 
of the vengeance of the gods? Scarcely ; but 
on account of another fact. The group that 
was capable of doing that thing was an in ­
ferior group, a group of oppressors. They 
are usually a mentally and morally deficient 
group. Spain has suffered from the domination, not of its best elements but of those 
elements which were at the time the most ignorant, the most cruel. Yo u have a similar 
case in Russia to-day, and Russia has a similar problem. Al l these problems of oppression of one group by another are economic 
in their last analysis. Wherever you find 
such oppression as exists in Russia to-day 
you also may be sure that the ruling element 
is morally and intellectually the weakest in 
the country. 
We come to the South: I do not know 
whether there is a connection, but if you 
compare the North with the South and take 
the statistics of contributions to scientific 
development you will notice that the universities in the South have contributed considerably less than the northern universities. 
The solution of the Negro problem lies in 
this fact: when the South gets ri d of its 
Bleases and similar unspeakable personalities, and when it strengthens its universities 
and encourages productive scholarship, as it 
should, when it builds up from the higher 
state universities the rest of the school system, then the Negro question will be partially solved too, because it is the problem 
of the ascendancy of the morally and intellectually strong element in the South. The 
problem of racial prejudice is part of the 
problem of the oppression of the many by 
a parasitic minority. 
4. Bacial Intermarriage. 
I have been thinking about this matter in 
connection with the situation in California, 
where I understand that they are trying to 
pass a law making it a felony for a white 
person and a Japanese to intermarry. An d 
I was asked whether there was any biological 
reason to show that such intermarriage 
would have bad results. It has been stated 
that the mixtures between white and black 
are an inferior breed ; that the pure breeds— 
the pure black and the pure white breed— 
are superior to the mixed race. As a matter 
of fact, biology has nothing in support of 
that position, but we have some definite facts 
which show that in certain cases the hybrid 
is superior to both parent races. Such experiments have been reported by Shull, East, 
and Burbank. When we cross two breeds of 
fishes we get in some cases an offspring 
which is much hardier than either of the 
parent races. So you have a number of 
eases i n which it is found that the offspring 
is superior to the pure breed. 
It would be wrong to say that i n each 
case the result of a mixture of races is better 
than the pure breed. That is true in some 
cases, i n other cases the opposite is true. 
But the fact that in a number of cases the 
mixture yields results that are superior to 
both parent breeds is enough to show the 
absurdity of the sweeping statement that the 
intermixing of races should be considered a 
felony. Laws on these topics should rest 
on careful experiments and not on fanatic 
sentiments. TH E BURDE N 
COLORED MEN AND WOMEN 
LYNCHED WITHOUT TRIAL 
1885 78 1900 107 
107 
86 
86 
83 
61 
64 
60 
93 
73 
1886 71 1901 
107 
107 
86 
86 
83 
61 
64 
60 
93 
73 
1887 80 1902 
107 
107 
86 
86 
83 
61 
64 
60 
93 
73 
1888 95 1903 
107 
107 
86 
86 
83 
61 
64 
60 
93 
73 
1889 95 1904 
107 
107 
86 
86 
83 
61 
64 
60 
93 
73 
1890 90 1905 
107 
107 
86 
86 
83 
61 
64 
60 
93 
73 
1891 121 1906 
107 
107 
86 
86 
83 
61 
64 
60 
93 
73 
1892 155 1907 
107 
107 
86 
86 
83 
61 
64 
60 
93 
73 
1893 154 1908 
107 
107 
86 
86 
83 
61 
64 
60 
93 
1894 134 1909 73 
107 
107 
86 
86 
83 
61 
64 
60 
93 
73 
1895 112 1910 65 
63 
63 
79 
1896 80 1911 
65 
63 
63 
79 
1897 122 1912 
65 
63 
63 
1898.. 102 1913 79 
65 
63 
63 
79 
1899 
Total 
84 1914,10 months 44 
2,707 
IN the Jul y CRISIS we published a most 
diverting tale from Kentucky of a colored man who was to define "jeopardized." 
H e answered after thought that the word 
"would refer to any act committed by a 
jeopard." 
We have since received this letter: 
"Dear Sir : 
"I n your Jul y issue of TH E CRISIS under 
the topic 'Opinion,' you say that the answer 
to jeopardize, according to the Saturday 
Evening Post, was given by a Negro. 
"It was given as you have stated it, but 
by a white man, Orville Stivers, who was or 
is county superintendent of schools for Jefferson County. "S . BOARD." 
We beg Mr. Stivers' pardon. 
From a Shreveport, La. , daily paper : 
"Sept. 19, 1914. 
"I n justice to the voters of the Cit y of 
Shreveport, and especially to the laboring 
class, as well as Mr . Leon I. Kahn , who is 
running for Superintendent of Public Utilities, to be voted upon next Thursday, the 
24th, I would like to ask Mr . Kah n as to 
whether or not he has always used union 
labor i n the building of and repairs to the 
different property in the city which he controls. 
"It has been persistently rumored upon 
the street that he has used non-union and 
Negro labor wherever it was possible to do 
so or, i n other words, he has not used union 
labor except i n such eases as it was impossible to get the work otherwise done. I n 
further justice to himself would appreciate 
a reply from him i n these columns. 
"Sincerely yours, 
"T . J . LYTLE." 
Ma y I submit to you an incident occurring 
on Tuesday following Emancipation Celebration i n this city? I am employed as 
chemist for Glenn and Selzer i n the heart of 
the city who are reliable i n ever sense, and 
it is a credit to be connected with such a 
firm. The employees had repeatedly used 
the word "nigger" and "coon" i n my presence after learning why I lost my previous 
position. Man y of my Negro friends followed me to the Glenn and Selzer store to 
deal with me. On the above morning a 
clerk came to me soon after I went on duty 
and said, "Every nigger i n town was at Lun a 
Par k yesterday." I asked him not to speak 
of them i n such terms and walked away; 
fifteen minutes later he came up to me again 
and said, "Al l the coons were out at Lun a 
yesterday," and as he said it I quickly gave 
him a punch in the nose and eye. The proprietors gave him so many hours to apologize or go home. When he did I took his 
hand saying, " I accept your apology i n behalf of the 20,000 Negroes i n Cleveland; as 
for myself a man like you can't insult me." 
A delegation of prominent Negroes here 
in connection with the Negro State fair, 
with President J. E . Dudley of the A . and 
M . College for Negroes at Greensboro, called 
on the Corporation Commission to-day to 
make formal complaint as to the "Ji m Crow" 
service that the railroad companies are furnishing Negroes who travel. 
Their principal complaint is that the railroad companies are using old wooden cars 
for the "Ji m Crow" service and sandwiching 
them between the big steel coaches for the 
white people and the steel express and mail 
cars and powerful locomotives where, i n case 
of wrecks, they are smashed and the lives 
and limbs of the Negroes far more greatly 
imperiled than any others on the train.— 
Norfolk (Va.) Pilot. TH E BURDE N 95 
The local republican campaign folder is 
being issued this week by the county central 
committee, distinguished by a further affront 
to the colored voters of the county and by 
several bits of humor. 
The folder has the picture of every candidate for county and legislative office, with 
two exceptions. One is C. J . Karbach, candidate for senator, who is not being enthusiastically supported by some of bis colleagues. The other is J . W . Lon g for state 
representative, the sole Negro candidate on 
the republican ticket. 
"Oh, Lon g couldn't take time to have his 
picture taken," was County Chairman Thomas' explanation. "He's very busy as porter 
on the Burlington and couldn't get to it."— 
Omaha (Neb.) World-Herald. 
m 
"A t Albany, Ga., some days ago I went 
into the lunch room at the railway station 
and at the news counter—not at the lunch 
counter—requested a purchase. The white 
girl i n charge looked up and with all the 
contempt possible pointed to the door and 
said: 'Get out of here.' I asked if Negroes 
were not allowed to make purchases at the 
news stand and she said, 'Get out of here.' 
I went. 
" I immediately wrote the Parke r News 
Agency enquiring whether she interpreted 
the policy of the company toward its Negro 
patrons. The enclosed is the company's reply. "WM . H . HOLLOWAY. 
Talladega, Ala. " 
"The treatment accorded you, as described 
i n your letter, is not at all i n line with the 
Company's policy concerning its Negro customers. It is the purpose of the management to extend a friendly reception to Negroes desiring to purchase such things as 
are sold at our several places of business, 
which do not require service at our counters 
and tables. W e note from your letter that 
you did not expect service of this latter character. An y Negro entering any of our places 
of business is welcome to check parcels, purchase any articles of merchandise, and such 
articles of food and drink as can be taken 
from the place so as not to be served at the 
counter or the tables. 
"We regret very much that any employee 
of ours has acted in any measure offensive, 
and the incident reported will receive our 
careful attention, and be thoroughly investigated. 
"TH E PARKER RAILWAY NEWS CO. " 
'We are unable to compose an altogether 
satisfactory comment on this matter. 
m 
In the July, 1913, number of TH E CRISIS 
is the story of a colored teacher. The author, 
a white man of wide experience and sound 
judgment, calls Laurence Jones "well educated" and "thoroughly equipped." Mr . 
Jones is a graduate and honor man of the 
Iowa State University and he has, to quote 
Mr . B . T. Washington, done at Braxton, 
Miss., a "big definite piece of constructive 
work." 
Now read this from the Mankato, MINNE ­
SOTA, Morning Journal: 
"Laurence C. Jones, a colored gentleman 
from Mississippi, arrived i n the city at a 
late hour Monday night, for the purpose of 
doing a little work i n Mankato for a school 
at Braxton, Miss., of which he is principal. 
Upon seeking a hotel, or room for the night, 
Mr. Jones was refused admittance at the 
various hotels, also the Y . M . C. A . Not 
wishing to wander the street he preferred to 
go to the police station where he put up with 
the iron bunk the best he could." 
The Journal says, sympathetically, "It 
seemed a little rough." A little rough! 
"When the black man is being kicked 
around like some hound dog, I am often in ­
clined to give him just a few kicks myself, 
for I know that, i n many instances he 
brought it upon himself. . . . 
"I f the average Negro were permitted to 
do so, he would climb right out of the ditch 
into a Pullman Palace Car, and fight the first 
man who even looked as if he didn't like it. 
H e is under the impression that i f he pays 
his fare or rides on a pass, that he is not 
required to be decent in dress and conduct, 
and mindful of the rights and feelings of 
others, but that a ticket or pass gives him 
permission to trample upon other people's 
rights and make a general fool of himself." 
—Dr. Socrates i n St. Luke's Herald. 
"We are deeply indebted to the ladies who 
were the instigation of such good books falling into our hands as was landed at our 
office a few weeks ago. It brings tears to 
the eyes on nearly every page. It will be a 
more splendid day for our race, when more 
of us wake up to feed the intellect on good 
christian reading-matter"—Colored Churchman, Luray, Va . 96 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
How Much Is 
Your Life Worth? 
If you had to sell your chance of living and following your business, or 
providing for your family as long as you expect to live, how much would you 
take for your chance? 
Yo u earn, say, one thousand or two thousand dollars a year. If you 
knew that at a certain time you must lay down your work and die, and you 
were given the privilege of collecting as many years' salary in advance as you 
thought your wife would need to keep her and the kiddies going, how many 
years' salary would you collect? Would you stop at just one thousand or just 
two thousand as the case may be? Don't you think right now that you are 
worth more than one year's income to your family? Of course you do. But 
if you should die this year, next month, next week, tomorrow or today, how 
much of your next year's income and the succeeding years' income have you 
left your family? Yo u ought to begin right now to make advance collections 
on your next year's income. You can do this only by procuring life insurance 
to the limit of your ability to pay the premiums. 
A t age 35, for instance, a Twenty-Payment policy for $1,000 would cost 
only $32.25 a year. This is less than $3.00 a month. If you died the next day 
after you received this policy and paid the first premium, your beneficiaries 
would immediately receive $1,000. You would have collected your income in 
advance for one year at a discount of $32.25. You r widow and the kiddies 
would be well provided for. 
Maybe you have some insurance already. If you have, it means that you 
have been thinking just along the line that we are discussing, of trying to 
provide certainly a competency for your loved ones. Wh y not go a step 
further? Go to the logical end of your thinking and carry ENOUG H insurance to make YOU R FOLK S FOREVE R INDEPENDEN T FINANCIALLY . 
If your life is worth anything to anybody, keep it fully insured. 
Our parents didn't know as we know; they didn't have the opportunity to 
leave for us as we can leave for our children. Think what even $1,000 would 
have meant to you when your own father died. Think what it would have meant 
to your blessed mother ; how much care and worry it would have saved her, 
and how much longer she might have lived ! Your boy will feel the same 
toward his mother ! 
No matter where you live we can protect you. Fil l in the coupon and write 
TODA Y stating your name, age, occupation, and what amount you want, to 
STANDAR D LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
200 Auburn Avenue 
ATLANTA , :: :: GEORGI A 
Please 
send me 
particulars 
about 
insurance. 
Amount $ 
Sex 
Age 
Occupation 
Name 
Address 
(C. Dec. 1914) 
Capital Fully-Paid - - $100,000.00 
Over One Million in Insurance in force 
Issues Policies from $250.00 to $5,000.00 
HEMA N E. PERRY , President 
HARR Y H. PACE , Secretary 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 97 
TH E FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTIO N 
By MAJOR JOHN R. LYNCH 
What some of the readers of this wonderful book say about it 
"I am prepared to say with all candor that 
your book contains the clearest, most unbiased, 
comprehensive and satisfactory narrative of the 
Reconstruction period and its happenings that I 
have ever read."—Bishop George W. Clinton, 
Charlotte, N. C. 
"It certainly embodies a plain and unbiased 
statement of the facts of Reconstruction."— 
Bishop C. S. Smith, Detroit. 
"To the charm of a singularly lucid and vigorous style you have unconsciously added the literary beauty that comes from an intimate personal acquaintance with the facts narrated, 
viewed with unprejudiced eye and with the 
wide sweeping vision that notes their correlation to the evolution of our National life."— 
Rev. John Albert Williams, Omaha. 
"The author sweepingly refutes the claim that 
the party in power at that time blundered by 
making the Negro a fellow citizen of the Republic with the same measure of rights, privileges and prerogatives enjoyed by all others."— 
Rev. J . C. Anderson, D. D., Chicago. 
"I regard your book on Reconstruction as the 
best I have seen upon that subject. I consider 
it so important a contribution to that period of 
our National history that I shall recommend its 
adoption here as a book to be especially reported 
on by our classes in American history."—Prof. 
T. G. Steward, Professor of History, Wilberforce University. 
"The value of this book lies in its careful 
statements and verified facts; an unusual phenomenon when dealing with subjects pertaining 
to the Reconstruction. I read it and immediately 
re-read it, which is the highest compliment I can 
pay any book."—Dr. Charles E. Bently, Chicago. 
"I have read with great pleasure your well 
timed and valuable presentation of The Facts of 
Reconstruction. * * * In judicial temper and 
accurate statement, you have justified the high 
esteem with which you were regarded during the 
eventful period by both parties."—Prof. Richard 
T. Greener, Chicago. 
"In The Facts of Reconstruction by Major 
John R. Lynch, we find that rare combination of 
memories verified by facts and impressions, supported by both logic and history. A n up-to-date 
book written by a scholar and a patriot."—Dr. 
George C. Hall, Chicago. 
"Your book gives me information I have been 
searching for over twenty-five years."—Dr. A . 
Wilberforce Williams, Chicago. 
This book ought to be in every home. It is suitable for a Christmas, New Year, birthday or 
wedding present. 
Price $1.50. By mail $1.65 
Address: Major John R. Lynch, 4321 Forestville Ave., Chicago, 111. 
Publisher's Chat 
In these hard times do not forget TH E CRISIS . Do not forget to renew your subscriptions and try to get us new subscribers. This is Wa r Relief at home. 
The January CRISI S cover will carry an unpublished portrait 
of the late Aid a Overton Walker, 
"The twinkle of whose dancing feet has given joy to thousands." 
The February Number will be 
Knoxville Number 
Mention TH E CRISIS 98 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The Story of 
TYPEWRITE R 
SUPREMAC Y 
is the History 
of the 
UNDERWOO D 
Winner in all Contests for 
Speed 
Accuracy 
Stability 
Proved by all International Typewrite r Records 
UNDERWOO D 
"The Machine You Will Eventually Buy" 
TEACHERS—ATTENTIO N ! 
Competent teacher* can secure good positions in the South. The demand for teachers who can hold 
positions as Principals or Department Heads is greatly in excess of the supply. We make it our business to 
find the place for you that you have prepared yourself to fill. Send stamp for further information with 
registration Manic and contract. Address: 
TEXAS COLORED TEACHERS' AGENCY, P. 0. Box D 1099, DALLAS, TEXAS 
Ship your Yam Sweet Potatoes, Poultry, Eggs and other Farm Products to 
GHOLSON and COTTMA N 
TH E MOS T RELIABL E PRODUC E HOUS E 1S32 South St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 99 
"EIGHT NEGRO MEN OF MARK" 
A JUS T OF F TH E PRES S NE W WINNE R Ou r pictures are protected by copyright. 
An y infringement will be prosecuted. 
Feature s Frederic k Douglas, Booke r T . Washington , Pau l Lawrenc e Dunbar , Coleridg e 
Taylor , W . E . B . DuBois, Crispu s Attucks, Alexandr e Duma s an d Henr y O . Tanner . 
Beautifull y finished, high grade in every particular , photogravur e effect, size 18 x 22 inches. 
Price $1.00; 30% discount to Agents. 
We have six new pictures ready for agents, the finest ever published with colored subjects. 
Writ e us for terms an d circula r reproductions, free. Fo r 15c. stamps we will send Agent's 50c. 
sample copy of A Joyfu l Welcom e Into Heaven, " the pictur e which our agents have sold 50,000 
copies of m six months. Writ e today. 
AGENTS WANTED EVERYWHERE 
DOUGLA S SPECIALTIE S CO . Dept. K . 3548 Verno n Ave. , Chicago, III. 
MAN Y MOR E TEACHER S 
are needed to supply the demands upo n us. Hundreds of 
experienced or well-prepared teachers can join us to their 
advantage. W e can place yo u if yo u can be placed. 
TH E NATIONAL TEACHERS* AGENCY 
B . F . BOWLES . Manager 
273 9 CONVERS E AVE . EAS T ST. LOUIS . ILL. 
OPPORTUNIT Y 
they say, comes once to every man. Her e is your big 
chanc e now. I wil l show yo u how to make the easiest 
$25.00 yo u ever did or ever will. M y offer is pleasant as well as profitable. Don't miss it. Writ e at 
onc e fo r particulars. 
Sen d 10 cents (in coin) to cover cost of mailing . 
A . C . MARSHALL , 
313 Willoughb y Ave. , 
Brooklyn , N . Y . 
SPECIA L OFFE R 
A year's subscription will be given free 
to anyone sending in at one time five 
paid-up yearly subscriptions to TH E 
CRISIS. This offer holds good until 
mid-night, December 31, 1914. 
TH E CRISI S 
One Dollar A Year 
70 FIFT H AVENU E :: NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISIS 100 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
SCHOO L O F BEAUT Y CULTUR E AN D HAI R DRESSING 
Kelsey's Hai r Dressing, Hai r Grower, Scalp Toni c an d Face Lotio n have no equal. Price , 50c. each. 
Guaranteed under Foo d and Dru g Act , Jun e 30, 1906. 
Manicuring , Shampooing, Hair Dressing, Marce l Wav ­
ing. Facia l and Body Massage, Hai r Making , Chiropody, 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimite d practice i n parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summe r Course , $7.50 up. Sen d for 
booklet. Mme . A . Carte r Kelsey , Gen' l Instr.; Dr . Samue l 
A . Kelsey , Chiropodist, President and Gen' l Manager. 
KELSEY' S 
Telephone, Morningsid e 8162 
143 West 131st St. 
NE W YOR K 
TEACHER S Th e new efficiency era calls 
for the modern way of 
selecting teachers, through a live agency that furnishes 
the connecting medium i n a business way, saves time 
o f school officials, relieves teachers of the embarrassment of job huntin g and covers the whole country. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama , 
Arkansas, Delaware , Distric t of Columbia , Florida , 
Georgia , Illinois, Indiana , Kentucky , Maryland , Mississippi, Missouri , Nort h Carolina , Oklahoma , Rhode 
Island, Sout h Carolina , Tennessee, Texas, Virgini a 
an d West Virginia , 
Ou r list of teachers covers even a wide r territory. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1335 T Street, N . W . Washington , D . C. 
Onl y 
$65.00 
No. 34 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A Value Unequaled. Soldonfx.oo 
Profit Margi n From 
Factory to User 
Writ e for prices 
an d other styles. 
Send for catalogs 
C . R. PATTERSO N 
& SONS, 
Greenfield, Ohio 
Largest Negro Carriage concern In the Unite d States. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
Yo u can operate i n you r own home durin g spare 
time. Th e parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU . Others are makin g $20 to $500 
a week. Wh y can't you? B y our method yo u can 
start wit h $5 an d up. W e offer yo u thirt y live , 
money-making mail order plans. Yo u can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. W e furnish circulars, printed matter an d place you r advertising at 
lowest rates. Sen d 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today—Now l 
MAI L DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
517 Dearborn Street Chicago, 111. 
PROFITABL E SPAR E TIM E WOR K 
Colore d agents wanted to take orders for our high 
grade calling cards. Bi g demand everywhere. Ex ­
clusive territory. Writ e now for samples and terms. 
TH E HOUS E O F CHOWNING, Indianapolis, Ind 
Th e Crisis Calendar for 1915 
Containing a quotation from a Negro writer for 
each week in the new year and historic dates in 
each month which will be of especial interest to 
you. 
Price, Twenty-five Cents 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fift h Avenu e :; Ne w Yor k 
Your Next Suit 
Made to Your Measure 
$30 t o $40 woul d no t 
buy a better one, but you 
get it for nothing . .Not a 
cent to pay. Simpl y wear 
it, tell your friends where 
you got it, and make 
?
10to$15aDay 
taking thei r orders. It is 
dead easy. You never saw a nobbier suit or a more stunning pattern, cut in strictly Tango style (3 
months ahead of the times) ."Your 
choice of 60 patterns and a dozen 
different Styles to choose from. 
Drop us a postal card for heavy 
pattern book, inside information 
about styles, self-measuring, 
blanks, etc., etc. Don't wait. 
Everything free—We pay expressage. Get ahead of the other 
fellows—write this very minute. 
A postal will do it. 
AMERICAN WOOLE N MILL S CO . 
Dept . 125 1 CHICAG O 
Han d Tailored -
Class y Linings -
Millionair e Trim -
mines—Swell Cut -
Guaranteed FitBEHOLD. (Sacred ) 
A ver y high class sacred song whic h will please the 
Musicia n who loves good music . Pric e 38 cents. 
L a Bonita , high class tango. Pric e 25 cents. 
Dreamlan d Waltze s an d B e M y Littl e Poog y Woo . 
Pric e 10 cents each. Anthems, Orchestra l Music , etc. 
BURKE S & ARBUCKL E CO. , 
800 Tremon t St., Boston , Mass. 
$25.OO PE R WEE K 
may be made i n commissions by parties handling 
"Histor y of Negro Soldiers i n Spanish-American 
War " combined wit h "Histor y of the Negr o Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Pric e $1.25 net. 
Address: E . A . JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street NE W YOR K 
REGALIA 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalog upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L. Jones, Pre.. 
N. E . Corner 8th and Plum Streets, Cincinnati, Obi * 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 101 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
17 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY :: ATLANTA . GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A . M . 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxo n champion of equal rights. Startlin g facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Be -
longs i n the library of every frien d of social justice. 
Pric e 25 cents. Sen d orders to 
JAME S F. MORTON , JR. 
211 West 138th Street -:- New York, N. Y. 
Th e Poems of Phillis Wheatley 
the early Negro poetess collected by 
RICHAR D R . WRIGHT , JR. , an d 
CHARLOTT E CROGMA N WRIGH T 
an d arranged in an attractive volum e suitable for a Xma s 
gift. 
Price, One Dollar 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fift h Avenu e :: :: :: Ne w Yor k 
TH E BOOK OF THE CENTURY 
A Pullman Porter's Memoirs 
By 
JACK THORNE 
A collection of original Short Stories of 
Travel, written in an entertaining and attractive style, covering a period of ten years in the 
Pullman Service. 
Cloth Bound $1.00 
Good Commission to Agents 
Address: ARTHU R A. SCHOMBURG , 63 
West 140th St., New York City, or JOH N E . 
BRUC E (Grit), 146 Warburton Ave., Yonkers, 
N. Y . 
WANTE D 
A Negr o business partne r with $6,000 capital an d 
a practical knowledge of agricultur e an d stock raising 
to take full charge of an d live on a 326-acre improve d 
farm , located 5 miles fro m the thrivin g town of Bo w 
Island, Alberta . Plac e is level, free fro m stone, 
well watered an d soil of rich chocolate loam producin g the best cereal an d root products in the world. 
Coal , $2 per ton at mine 4 miles distant. Bo w Island 
is the center of the world's greatest natura l gas field. 
School, one-half mile . Mixe d settlement of Belgian, 
Scotch, English , Swedish an d Canadia n farmers. N o 
race prejudice . Climat e modified by winds fro m the 
Pacific an d especially adapted to stock raising. Win -
ters are often open. Growin g season Apri l 1st to 
Septembe r 15th. Averag e rainfall, 17 inches. Di -
rect transportation facilities east to Ft. Willia m mar -
ket an d west to Lethbridg e and the minin g an d lumbe r 
centers of the rich Cro w Nest Pass. Lan d in this 
district brought $30 per acre at auction in 1910 an d 
is assessed at $24, 1914, without improvements. Wil l 
accept "clean cut" ma n of famil y with above required 
experience and capital as full partne r in ownership 
of lan d an d invest $3,000 o f the $6,000 i n silos, root 
cellars, sheds an d youn g hogs, calves, brood mares an d 
poultry , mutuall y sharing the ownership of an d profits 
therefrom. Hav e 25 acres especially prepared fo r alfalfa, 100 acres prepared for barley, oats, wheat an d 
root products for general stock food; 200 acres of 
especially fine meadow pasture. Thos e without the 
"goods" will save time an d embarrassment. A s a 
recommendation to the right party will say I tackled 
opportunity in this district eight year s ago with pluck 
an d perseverance as m y onl y capital and have witnessed a broa d expanse of prairi e blossom into an 
improve d farm district whil e acquirin g this estate, 
ill health and a multitude of discouragements notwithstanding. 
Address: L . D . BROWER . 
5109 Frant z Ave. , So. , 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
PIANOS - PLAYER PIANOS 
Factory to Home 
$110.00 
B Y M Y PLA N 
of selling direct from factory to home. \ can save you 
from $110 to $200 on my celebrated Evans Artist 
Mode l Pianos. 
TWO to Four Years to Pay 
Thë'teasiest kind of terms, weekly, monthly, quarterly or yearly payments to suit your convenience. 
Al l middlemen, jobbers, dealers and agents 
'profits cut out. Nocharge for salesroom expense for my 
office is in my factory. These are some of the reasons 
Why I can sell the Evans Artist Model Pianos for such little 
money. Let me send you the other reasons Write today. 
30 Days Free Trial 
W e allow all freight charges, let you use the 
beautiful Evans Artist Model Piano for thirty days 
free. If you are not entirely satisfied, we will taRe/> 
it back without any cost to you—you are the sole 
judge to decide. If you want to keep it, you may 
do so on our low factory wholesale price on£ 
most convenient terms. 
Free Music Lessons 
To the first customer in each locality 
we will give a two years course of piano 
Instruction free. Ask about our (nsuf . 
ance plan and our method of uvlnjT 
you money. Writ * today. 
F. O. E >s Piano Co. 
'»«pt- SI cfa 
Mention TH E CRISIS 102 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
LEGAL DIRECTORY 
Telephones: Central 104-W 
Main 61 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
1607 Williamso n Buildin g Cleveland , Ohi o 
Office L . D . Telephone 3297 Marke t 
Residence L . D . Telephone S277-M Marke t 
GEORG E A . DOUGLA S 
COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolita n Buildin g 
113 Marke t St., Cor. Washington , Newark , N . J . 
Genera l Practic e Notar y Publi c 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
1020 Metropolita n Lif e Buildin g 
Minneapolis Minn . 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
Offices: Suit e 802 Syke s Bloc k 
Nea r Thir d an d Hennepi n 
Minneapolis Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
908 Walnu t Street 
Philadelphi a Pa . 
Tel . 5437 Fort Hil l Cabl e Address, Epbe n 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
34 School Street Boston , Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbi e Hawkin s George W . F . McMeche n 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
ATTOR N E YS-AT-LAW 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore , Md . 
Phones: Office, Bel l 4059; Ne w 420-M 
Residence, Ne w 733-A 
THOS . E . GREENE , JR. 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
NOTARY PUBLI C 
Malone y Bloc k Youngstown , Ohi o 
B. F . BOOT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
57 N . Second Street 
Memphis Term. 
THOMA S W . HOLME S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
•3J4 Decatur Street Atlanta , Georgi a 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephone 5277 Morningsid e 
DR . GERTRUD E E . CURTI S 
SURGEON DENTIS T 
188 W . 135th Street Ne w Yor k Cit y 
WILLIA M L . BEL L 
ARCHITEC T 
13&$Z Aubur n Avenu e Atlanta , Ga . 
E. ALDAMA JACKSON 
Graduate Institute of Musica l Art , Organist and Directo r 
of Musi c St. Mark's M . E . Churc h 
Teacher of Theory and Piano 
Theor y course embraces elementary and advanced 
Harmon y o r Counterpoint. 
Private or Class Work 
Studi o : 30 W . 132d STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Ope n for 
engagements Jul y an d August 
Bo x 25, Wilberforc e Universit y 
Wilberforce , O . 
Telephone 4214 Greeley 
BRANIC' S EXPRES S 
ANDRE W J. BRANIC , PROPRIETOR 
Packin g and Shipping—Goods Forwarde d to Al l Parts 
of the Worl d 
Orders by mail or 'phone receive prompt attention. 
Trunk s stored, 25c. per month. 
459 Seventh Avenu e Ne w Yor k 
WANTED 
Agents for THE CRISIS. Dignified work. 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
ADVANCE STYLES 
FRE E 
Suits 
T o Introduc e 
Her e we go again , break -
ing all records for new, 
nobby, ahead-of-the-tirae 
styles Be the 6rst in your town 
to wear a suit that is ahead of the 
time. You can do it FREE. To 
introduce these Btylea quickly 
we will irivt* you a complete euit 
free, ana by your wearing it you 
can make 
$50 to $100 a Week 
Drop usa postal forouradvance 
book, select the styles you want 
and the cloth, and get 
Your Suit FRE E 
Don't wait. Don't delay. Write rij-ht aw.iv . A postal w I do. We 
send everything toe day your 
request is received. We pay express on everything. Get busy. 
Himply send ua a postal with 
your name and addreas on it. 
Paragon Tailoring Co. 
Dept. 1251 CHICAG O 
Wear Next 
Season's 
Style 
NOW 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS To the Masonic Fraternity 
The CRISIS has the honor to announce the 
publication of the most important book on 
Negro Masonry since Upton's epoch-making 
work; and the only book written by an authority from our own point of view. 
TH E AUTHO R 
is 
George W. Crawford, 32° 
A graduate of Tuskegee, Talladega and Yale , formerly 
clerk of the Probate Court of Ne w Have n and no w a 
practicing lawyer there. Mr. Crawford is one of the best 
informed masons i n the country. 
TH E BOO K 
is 
Prince Hal l and His Followers 
An d is a carefully argued defense of the legitimacy of 
Negro Masonry i n the United States, wit h notes and 
documents. 
READY NOW 
Price One Dollar. Postage Extra. 
ORDE R NO W . . AGENT S WANTE D 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
TH E QUEST OF TH E SILVER FLEECE. (W. E . B. D U Bois) $1.35 
HOUSE BEHIND TH E CEDARS. (Charles W . Chesnutt) 1.50 
HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF AN EX-COLORED MAN . (Anonymous) 1.20 
LYRICS OF LOWLY LIFE. (Paul Laurence Dunbar) 1.25 
TH E MARROW OF TRADITION. (Charles W . Chesnutt) 1.50 
TH E SPORT OF TH E GODS. (Paul Laurence Dunbar) 1.50 
NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY. (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
A NARRATIVE OF TH E NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W. E . B. D U Bois) 1.25 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.00 
HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley) 1-25 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
MIND OF PRIMITIVE MAN . (Franz Boas) 1.50 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
JOH N BROWN. (W. E . B. D U Bois) 1.25 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W . Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINCE HAL L AND HIS FOLLOWERS. (George W . Crawford) 1.00 
LIBERIA. (Frederick Starr) 1.00 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R. Lynch) 1.50 
STORY OF TH E NEGRO. 2 Volumes. (Booker T . Washington) 3.00 
MASTERPIECES OF NEGRO ELOQUENCE. (Alice Moore Dunbar, Editor) 2.50 
POEMS OF PAU L LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.00 
TH E AFRICAN ABROAD. 2 Volumes. (William H . Ferris) 5.00 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.00 
OU T OF TH E HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
TH E COLORED INVENTOR. (Henry E. Baker) 15 
A CHILD'S STORY OF DUNBAR. (Julia L . Henderson) 25 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: New York City 
Mention THE CRISIS 