The Crisis 
Ten Cents January 1918 
Frank 
Walts President 
M00RFIEL D STORE Y 
Vice-Presidents 
ARCHIBAL D H . GRIMK E 
REV . JOH N HAYNE S HOLME S 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
JOH N E . MILHOLLAN D 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
Executiv e Officers 
MAJO R J . E . SPINGARN , Chairma n of Boar d 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , Treasure r 
DR . W . E . B. DUBOIS , Directo r of Publications and Researc 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSON . Fiel d Secretary 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
Chicag o 
JAN E ADDAM S 
DR . C . E . BENTLE Y 
Boston 
JOSEP H PRINC E LOU D 
BUTLE R R. WILSO N 
Baltimor e 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
DR . F . N . CARDOZ O 
Springfield, Mass. 
REV . G . R . WALLE R 
DIRECTOR S 
Washingto n 
PROF . GEO . WILLIA M COO K 
Brookly n 
DR . V . MORTO N JONE S 
DR . O . M . WALLE R 
Ne w Have n 
GEORG E W . CRAWFOR D 
Philadelphi a 
DR . WILLIA M A . SINCLAI R 
Ne w Yor k 
REV . HUTCHIN S C . BISHO P 
MRS . FLORENC E KELLE Y 
PAU L KENNADA Y 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
ARTHU R B. SPINGAR N 
CHARLE S H . STUDI N 
DR . JOH N G. UNDERHIL L 
LILLIA N D . WAL D 
WILLIA M ENGLIS H WALLIN G 
Th e N . A . A . C . P . ha s secure d th e best lega l 
talen t i n th e countr y t o defen d th e colore d me n ac ­
cuse d o f murde r i n th e Eas t St . Loui s rac e riots an d 
t o preven t th e responsibilit y an d blam e fo r tha t horro r 
bein g place d upo n th e America n Negro . 
I n this cas e th e rac e is o n trial , 
i t b y joinin g th e N . A . A . C . P . today . 
Hel p t o wi n 
Date , 1917. 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
The Crisis is sent without further charge to members paying two dollars or more. 
O SWAL D G ARRISO N V ILLARD , Treasurer, 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
S IR : 
I desire to become a member of the Nationa l Associatio n fo r th e 
Advancemen t o f Colore d Peopl e and to receive Th e Crisis. 
In payment of my dues for one year, I enclose dollars. 
Name 
Street 
$ City and State 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S NEW YEAR'S NUMBER—Edition 56,000 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 7 0 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CONDUCTE D B Y W . E . 
BURGHARD T D U BOIS ; AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINES S MANAGE R 
Contents Copyrighted, 1917, by the Nationa l Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for January, 1918 
PICTURE S 
Page 
COVER . A STUD Y FRO M LIFE. By Frank Walts 
ME N O F TH E MONTH . Drawn by Hilda Wilkinson 128-129 
TH E HOUSTO N TRIAL. Photograph by W. C. Lloyd 130-131 
NEGRO LABORER S AN D SOLDIERS 132 
NEGRO BUILDINGS 140 
ARTICLE S 
TH E CONGRESSIONAL INVESTIGATION OF EAST ST. LOUIS 
By Lindsey Cooper 116 
TH E WA Y OF TH E TRANSGRESSOR. A Story. By Wallace Green 121 
A MOTHER' S NE W YEA R RESOLUTIONS. By Josephine T. Washington 124 
'TAINT NO NEED O' WOME N WORRIN'. A Poem. By Waverley T. 
Carmichael 133 
DEPARTMENT S 
EDITORIA L Il l 
TH E OUTE R POCKE T 125 
MEN OF TH E MONT H 128 
TH E LOOKIN G GLASS 134 
TH E HORIZON 139 
TH E CRISIS FOR FEBRUARY 
Th e Editor's Jubilee Number ; Annua l Report of the N . A . A . C . P.; A Review of Jones' 
"Negro Education"; Special Lynchin g Statistics* with a map; a reproduction of Turner's 
"Slave Ship," and other pictures. 
TE N CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Th e date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
I n ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the tost office at New York, New York, 
under the Act of March I, 1879. 108 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
THE NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL 
DURHAM , N . C . 
Open to Students of Either Sex. 
It is more than a mere school. It is a community at service 
and uplift. Its influence is destined to be felt i n all sections 
of the country in improved Negro community life wherever 
our trained workers locate. 
The following departments are already in successful operation: Teac
Collegiate, Commercial, Missionary, Theological, Household 
Economics and Departments of Music . 
In equipment and teaching it is not surpassed by any School for 
the Education of Negro Youth in the South. 
The next term opened Monday, October I, 1917. For catalog 
and detailed information, address 
President, JAME S E . SHEPARD , 
DURHA M - - - NORT H CAROLIN A 
The Agricultural and 
Technical College 
Twenty-fourth Annual Session. 
Fall term began Sept. 1, '17. 
Three Strong Departments: Ag ­
ricultural, Mechanical and Aca ­
demic. 
Short Practical Courses of 
Three Months; Maintained by 
the Governments of North Carolina and of the United States. 
Special training for teachers of 
vocational subjects. 
Board, Lodging and Tuition, 
$9.00 per Calendar Month. 
For Catalog and Further 
Information, address 
President Dudley, 
A. and T. College, 
Greensboro, N. C. 
THE CHEYNEY TRAINING 
SCHOOL FOR TEACHER S 
CHEYNEY , PENNA . 
Fo r reasonably matur e students who have 
a good secondary school preparation, and who 
desire to become teachers, courses ar e offered durin g the regula r ter m in academi c 
work, domestic science, domesti c art, physica l training , elementar y school methods, 
wood and meta l working , and agriculture . 
Boar d and laundr y privilege s for the year 
$100. Fal l ter m began Wednesday , September 19, 1917. 
Th e Summe r School for Teachers, fro m 
Jul y 5 to August 2 inclusive , wil l this yea r 
offer primar y methods, English , mathematics, 
history, civic s and geography , plai n sewing 
and dressmaking , raffia wor k and basketry , 
art needle work, cookery, wood and meta l 
working , physica l training , and gardening . 
Dormitor y space is limited , and applications 
should be mad * early . Cost for the four 
weeks $16.00. 
Fo r furthe r Information writ e to 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , 
Principal , 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 109 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifull y located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga. 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School, Norma l 
School and College , wit h manua l trainin g and domesti c science. Amon g the teachers are graduate s 
of Yale , Harvard , Dartmout h and Wellesley . Forty -
eight year s of successful wor k have been completed. 
Students come fro m al l parts of the South. Grad ­
uate s ar e almost universall y successful. 
Fo r furthe r informatio n address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautifu l Situation. Healthfu l Location . Th e 
Best Mora l and Spiritua l Environment. A Splendid 
Intellectua l Atmosphere . Note d for Honest and 
Thoroug h Work . 
Offers ful l courses i n the following departments: 
College , Normal , Hig h School, Gramma r School and 
Industrial . 
Good water , steam heat, electri c lights, good 
drainage . Expense s ver y reasonable . 
Fal l Ter m Bega n Septembe r 19, 1917. 
Fo r informatio n address 
President R. W. M c GRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
STRAIGHT COLLEGE 
New Orleans, La. 
Situate d on the mai n thoroughfar e of the 
largest cit y of the South. 
Thoroug h trainin g i n Hig h School, Teach ­
ers' Cours e and College , wit h special work 
i n Musi c and Manua l Training . 
Teacher s represent some of the best universitie s and musi c conservatorie s of the 
country . 
Fo r ful l information , address 
7. T . Cater , Registrar . 
1870 CLAR K UNIVERSITY 1917 
SOUT H ATLANT A GEORGI A 
Most beautiful campus of 70 acres, commodious buildings with modern conveniences. 
Hig h Scholarship — Talented Facult y — Wel l 
equipped library and laboratories—Literary 
societies—Athletics—Co-educational—Expense s 
ver y low. $100 per year of eight months 
will pay tuition, board, room, etc. 
Comfortabl e dormitories with steam heat 
and gas light. 
COURSE S O F STUD Y 
Domestic Science fo r girls, cooking, sewing, 
dressmaking and embroidery. 
Pre-Academy—7th and 8th grades. 
Academy—Fou r years with diploma. 
Pre - Medical— Tw o years above academy. 
College—Fou r years leading to A . B. degree. 
Normal—Fiv e years above grades with diploma. 
First Semester opened Octobe r 3, 1917. 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING , President. 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, 
under the direction of .the Sisters of St Mary. 
Address: 
TH E SISTER -IN-CHARGE 
609 N. 43d St W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA, G A 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M . W . DOGAN , President 
FISK UNIVERSIT Y 
NASHVILLE . TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE, President 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
Th e largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Facult y of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
Nort h and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Wel l equipped dormitories; Bane 
athletics unde r faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Preparatory, Nor ­
mal, Commercial, Musical , Domestic Science, Nurs e 
Training , Sewing, Printin g and Tailoring . 
First Semester began September J7, 1017. 
Fo r further information address 
W. A . FOUNTAIN , President 
Bishop J . S. FLIPPER, Chairma n Trustee Board. 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 110 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LIVINGSTONE COLLEGE 
SALISBURY, N. C. 
A Religious Co-Educational School with a 
Tradition 
Open to All Negroes: Only Merit Counts 
Students come from Twenty-nine 
States in the Union, from Canada, 
Africa, the West India Islands and 
Central America. And Graduates Make 
Good. 
Salisbury, North Carolina, an Ideal 
Place for Study with a Mild, Equable 
Climate, Pure Water, Breezes from 
Pine and other Forests a Constant 
Tonic—the Greatest Degree of Healthfulness. 
New Girls' Dormitory with all Modern Conveniences Accommodating 210 just Completed 
and Ready 
Courses of Study : Gramma r School, Academy, 
Normal , College, Divinity , Musi c and 
Industries for Boys and Girls. 
Expenses Moderate. 
Thirty-sixt h Session Opened Wednesday , October 3, 1917. 
For Further Information Address 
D. C. SUGGS , President or 
J . E . Aggrey , Registrar . 
Don't Waste Your Evenings 
Neve r before in the history of the race has 
the demand for skilled colored help been 
so great as at the present time. Fal l in 
with the spirit of the times for preparedness and learn a useful trade for the demand is greater than the supply. 
Enroll at BEREA N SCHOOL 
Stenography, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, Up ­
holstery, Woodworking , Plumbing , Dressmaking, Tailoring , Printing , Cooking , Waiting, Millinery , or Powe r Machine operating. 
19th year and Fall Ter m opened 
Tuesday, October 2nd, 1917. 
Lat e afternoon and evening sessions, twice 
a week, specially adapted for the convenience 
of the day wage earners. Painstaking and 
efficient teachers, specialized training in all 
departments a marked feature. 
Efficiency our aim Helpfulness our object 
Th e doors are open now. Wil l you enter ? 
Visitors welcome Gymnasium Beautiful location 
Writ e the Principal of 
Berean Manual Training and Industrial School 
MATTHE W ANDERSON , D.D . 
1926 S. College Avenu e Philadelphia , Pa . 
ROLAND W. HAYES , Tenor 
Recitals Concerts Oratori o Oper a 
"An unusually good voice. Th e natural 
quality la beautiful. It is a luscious yet manly 
voice. Mr . Haye s sings freely and with good 
taste."—Philip Hale , In the Boston Htrold. 
" A voice of unusual sweetness and calibre.' 
—Chattanooga Times. 
Address 3 WARWIC K ST. . BOSTO N MASS . 
THE FLORIDA A. & M. COLLEGE 
Tallahassee, Florida 
Offers long and short courses in 
Mechanic Arts, in Home Economics, 
in Agriculture, in Education and in 
Science. 
For Catalog Address 
NATHA N B. YOUNG , President 
P . O . DRAWE R 52 4 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND , LA . 
Supported by Baptist Stat e Woman's Hom e 
Missio n Society of Chicag o and Bosto n an d 
A . B . H . Society of Ne w York . Students 
fro m six different states. Graduate s exempted on first grade b y Louisiana , Arkansa s 
and Oklahoma . 
O. L . COLEMAN , President 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTE D 
Al l Race s 
Prepar e in the best school of its kin d i n the State 
Subjects 
Shorthand, Typewriting , Bookkeeping, English, Penmanship, Civi l Service Training , and SPANISH . 
COMMERCIA L CLAS S 
Leno x Communit y Center—at 
PUBLI C SCHOO L 89 
Leno x Avenu e and 135th St., Ne w Yor k City . 
Open All Year—Four Evenings Weekly. 
Fit z W . Mottley, President. 
The Slater Industrial and 
State Normal School 
: For Colored Youth of Both Sexes 
WINSTON-SALEM , N . C. 
T. Offering Standard Courses 
In .Academic Subjects, 
Tn Industrial and Vocational Subjects, 
In Education. 
11. Graduates receive the Teacher's Cer ­
tificate. 
III. Located amid the foothills of the mountain section of Western Nort h Carolina and the health conditions arc ideal. 
IV . Accommodations excellent and expenses 
moderate. 
Fo r furthe r informatio n communicat e wit h 
S. G . ATKINS , Principal 
SLATE R STAT E NORMA L SCHOOL , 
Winston-Salem , N . C . 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS. Dignified work 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
LUL U ROBINSON-JONE S 
Soprano 
Available for Concerts 
Telephone 6393 Morningside 
126 W . 134th Street New Yor k Cit y 
Mention TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS 
Vol. 15-No. 3 JANUARY , 1918 Whole No. 87 
Editorial 
The Year of God 1917 
In Account with the American Negro 
East St. Louis 
Houston 
Chester 
Thirty-six Persons Known to be 
Lynched in ten months, beside the 
Unknown 
The Lynching of Haiti 
Colonel Young's Retirement 
Refusal of Negro Army Volunteers 
Dead-lock on Negroes Among the 
White Methodists 
Split Among Colored Odd Fellows 
Widening Rift Among Colored Baptists 
Atlanta Fir e 
"German Plots" Libel 
Court Decisions Against Colored 
Masons 
Death of Prominent Negroes: Bishop 
Walters, J. D. Corrothers, H . S. 
Cummings, J. E . Bush, J. H . Hayes, 
P. A . Payton, M . W. Gilbert, C. M . 
C. Mason, J. L. Curtis, H . W. Bass, 
W. P. Hall, W. Bishop Johnson, R. 
S. Lovinggood, Ellen C. Crum, A . 
S. Gray 
Death of White Friends: J. B. Foraker, F . B. Sanborn, Caroline Putnam
Stuart, C. F . Ryder 
Total: Oppression, Murder, and Disunity 
Segregation Decision 
678 U . S. Army Officers, and Scott 
Hegira from The South 
New Employments and a Chastened 
A . F. of L. 
New High Schools in Washington and 
Louisville 
455 Bachelors of Arts and 2500 High 
School Graduates 
$500,000 to Educational Endowment 
and $500,000 to New Negro Schoolhouses 
National Ai d to Vocational Training 
Howard, Morehouse, Biddle, Talladega, 
Years Old 
New Appreciation of Negro Art 
Frederick Douglass Home Saved 
Hapgood-Torrence Plays 
Virgin Islands Annexed and Citizenship for Porto Ric
Civil Rights Victories in New York 
and Other States 
Harry Burleigh, Spingarn Medalist 
Silent Protest Parades in New York 
and Other Cities 
75,000 New York Colored Women Enfranchised; 
Widening Work of Y . M . and Y . W. 
C. A . 
New Alderman in Chicago 
Pollard on "All-American" 
Payton's Expansion of Harlem 
Five New Hospitals and Several Publi
Total: Courage to Fight, Sympathy, 
and Progress 
Carry Forward to 1918—Determination 
111 112 TH E CRISIS 
SPINGAR N 
MAJO R J . E . SPINGAR N 
ha s undergon e a severe 
operatio n at the Ne w 
Yor k Hospital , bu t is, w e 
ar e thankfu l to say, rapidl y recovering . N o mor e earnest an d sincer e 
frien d o f th e Negr o people ha s arise n 
sinc e the Civi l War , an d twelv e mil ­
lio n people watc h above his bed wit h 
deep sympath y an d infinit e hope . Fo r 
wh o ca n replac e the fe w whit e 
friend s wh o ar e willin g to wor k 
WIT H us an d not merel y FO R us ? 
AMERICA N CHRISTIANITY 
ONE of the most despicabl e 
traits i n huma n natur e is 
the disposition , i n an individual or a class o f indi ­
viduals, to stan d i n the wa y o f an ­
othe r individual , o r class of indi ­
viduals, wit h a vie w o f preventin g 
them fro m gettin g on i n the world , 
fro m betterin g their condition ; suc h 
as -we find manifeste d b y a larg e class 
o f white s i n this countr y against the 
advancemen t o f the colore d people. 
It is purel y an d simpl y the instinc t 
o f the brute ; an d it shows ho w nearl y 
on the leve l wit h the brut e suc h 
people are. It is conduc t utterl y un ­
worth y o f men , created i n the imag e 
o f God ; an d suc h outbreak s as we 
have been havin g i n the South , i n 
East St. Louis, an d elsewhere , show 
ho w littl e remove d fro m savages we 
are, an d ho w grea t is the need fo r 
missionarie s wh o wil l no t onl y preac h 
the gospe l of Christ , bu t wh o wil l 
follo w Hi s nobl e exampl e i n their 
dail y walk s an d conversation . 
Nothin g shows the utte r hollowness 
o f the bran d o f Christianit y repre ­
sented b y the whit e America n Churc h 
tha n the fac t tha t it ha s had , apparently, no effect whateve r i n curbin g 
this bitte r an d wicke d rac e feelin g 
i n this country . It has ha d no in ­
fluence i n betterin g conditions, eithe r 
because it approve d o f this wicke d 
rac e feeling , o r because it wa s too 
cowardly , i n th e midst o f a n advers e 
publi c sentiment, to stan d up fo r the 
principle s whic h it professes to believe in . Instea d o f helpin g to bette r 
conditions, i t ha s helped, an d helpe d 
mightily , i n the opposit e direction , b y 
the discriminatio n whic h i t make s 
against colore d people. It professes, 
i n word , to believe i n the Fatherhoo d 
o f Go d an d the Brotherhoo d of man , 
bu t i n ac t denies both . Its professio n 
is one thing , its actio n another. 
Wher e ar e the 40,000,000 professin g 
Christian s i n this land , an d the 
182,000 preachers o f the gospel, an d 
the 225,000 churche s tha t conditions, 
suc h as confron t us today , hav e been 
allowe d to gro w up ? Ther e is some ­
thin g w
r
ong , radicall y wrong , about 
these churches, these ministers, these 
whit e Christians. Eithe r the y ar e a 
set o f hypocrites, o r the y hav e been 
woefull y neglectfu l o f their dut y as 
ambassadors o f Christ . 
I receive d recentl y a circular, issued b y the "Grea t Commissio n 
Praye r League, " wit h headquarters 
at Chicago , callin g fo r " A Worl d 
Wid e Simultaneou s Intercession. " I n 
readin g it over, I foun d i t condemn ­
in g ver y strongl y an d ver y properl y 
discriminatio n i n churche s betwee n 
ric h an d poor; bu t i t ha d no t one 
wor d to sa y about discriminatin g betwee n whit e an d black , as i f the one 
wa s an y mor e opposed to the spiri t 
an d teachin g of the Lor d Jesu s tha n 
the other. It is take n fo r granted , 
even i n a solemn appea l lik e this, tha t 
ther e is nothin g wron g abou t discriminatin g against peopl e on th e 
groun d o f color. An d i t is because 
o f this attitud e o f the churc h an d the 
attitude o f suc h organization s as this 
Grea t Commissio n Praye r Leagu e 
tha t thing s ar e as the y are . 
Thes e outbreak s o f savager y an d 
o f rac e hatre d cal l attentio n no t onl y 
to the debased mora l conditio n o f 
masses o f whit e peopl e i n this coun ­
tr y bu t speak i n thunde r tones to the EDITORIAL 113 
whit e Christians, wh o alone ca n 
reac h these debased whit e masses, to 
wak e out o f the sleep whic h has falle n 
upo n them an d whic h has enabled 
them to go o n quietl y acquiescin g i n 
this conditio n of discriminatio n an d 
rac e hatred , an d to ge t to work , wit h 
a vie w o f bringin g about bette r con ­
ditions, b y preachin g the gospe l o f 
love , o f huma n brotherhood , an d b y 
livin g it, as wel l as preachin g it. Wha t 
has the churc h been doing , wha t is 
i t doin g tha t thing s shoul d be n o bette r tha n the y are ; tha t suc h condition s shoul d no t onl y exist bu t shoul d 
be steadil y growin g worse ? N o 
wonde r people ar e saying , "Christianity is a failure, " wit h these awfu l 
condition s existin g i n the midst o f 
40,000,000 professin g Christians, an d 
182,000 preachers, an d 225,000 
churche s as centers o f Christia n in ­
fluence. And , judge d b y the recor d 
whic h i t ha s mad e i n this country , as 
a n antidot e fo r rac e prejudice , i t ha s 
been a failure,-—a pitiabl e failure . 
An d the shame o f it al l is tha t it ha s 
faile d not because o f inabilit y bu t because o f the unfaithfulness o f its pro ­
fessed followers, because the me n an d 
wome n wh o ough t to stan d u p fo r 
Christia n principle s hav e surrendere d 
them throug h weakness, throug h 
cowardice . 
"Awake , awake , pu t on th y 
strength , O Zion ; pu t on th y beautifu l garments, O Jerusalem, the hol y 
city. " This is wha t the churc h needs 
—t o awake ; to pu t o n its strength , 
to ge t ri d o f its weakness; to arra y 
itself i n its beautifu l garments—th e 
garments o f righteousness, instea d o f 
the filthy garmen t o f rac e prejudice , 
i n whic h it wrap s itself an d o f whic h 
i t doesn't seem to be ashamed , bu t 
rathe r to glor y i n its shame . A 
Christianit y tha t does no t includ e 
this principl e o f huma n brotherhood , 
no t as a mer e abstractio n bu t as a 
living , workin g principle , is a spurious Christianity . F . J . GRIMKE . 
PRECIOUS 
HOW precious the Negr o is whe n 
| society wants to use him ! 
Ho w invaluabl e is his servi
i n the fields to be picked , rolle d into 
bales, an d transporte d to the world's 
markets! Ho w indispensabl e is his 
loyalty , whe n the arm y is recruite d 
fo r the grea t wa r to mak e " the worl d 
safe fo r democracy ! " Ho w welcome 
ar e his dollars, whe n a $5,000,000,-
000 Libert y Loa n is floated b y the 
government! Doe s anybod y thin k o f 
denyin g the blac k ma n the opportu ­
nit y to do the wor k tha t nobod y else 
wil l do? Ha s anybod y urge d tha t the 
black ma n be exempte d fro m militar y 
service ? Ha s an y blac k ma n lai d 
dow n his fifty dollars i n a Libert y 
Loa n booth, an d been refused a bond ? 
Just to suggest such possibilitie s is to 
revea l their inheren t absurdity . I n 
these an d countless othe r directions, 
the Negr o is usable, as a shove l is 
usable to di g a ditc h or a truc k to carr y a burden ; an d society pay s tribut e 
to his worth . 
Bu t wha t happen s whe n the Negr o 
asks fo r reciprocit y i n this matte r o f 
service—seeks as a retur n fo r dutie s 
done the free exercis e of privilege s 
conferre d ? 
Wha t i f he wants to use the publi c 
schools, the publi c libraries, the publi c 
parks, the. theatres, hotels an d rail ­
roads, publi c institution s an d utilitie s 
generally , on a n equa l footin g wit h 
othe r me n ? Wha t i f he buy s rea l estate an d build s a home i n a neighborhood whic h wil l provid e the best possibl e condition s fo r the rearin g of his 
children ? Wha t i f he enters not a 
Libert y Loa n booth bu t a votin g boot h 
an d seeks not to purchas e a bon d but 
deposit a ballot ? This is different, is 
i t not ? Th e Negr o is suddenl y no t 
so preciou s as before . O n the contrary , he is worthless; or, wors e tha n 
worthless, dangerous, an d therefor e 
not merel y to be cast aside bu t trod ­
den unde r foot. 114 TH E CRISIS 
The situation is interesting, and, if 
the whites be wise, to be enjoyed while 
it lasts. Fo r not always wil l the Negro, for all his patience and good 
cheer, be willin g to recognize the validity of this onesided compact. Some 
day he wil l learn that rights are the 
complements of duties, and freedom 
the reward of service—at least in a 
democracy! An d then wil l he insist 
upon knowing whether or not " a nation conceived in liberty and dedicated 
to the proposition that all men are 
created equal," has perished from the 
earth? JOH N HAYNE S HOLMES . 
THIRTEE N 
THE Y have gone to their death. 
Thirteen young, strong men ; 
soldiers who have fought for 
a country which never was 
wholly theirs ; men born to suffer ridicule, injustice, and, at last, death itself. They broke the law. Against 
their punishment, if it was legal, we 
cannot protest. Bu t we can protest 
and we do protest against the shameful treatment which these men and 
which we, their brothers, receive all 
our lives, and which our fathers received, and our children await; and 
above all we raise our clenched hands 
against the hundreds of thousands of 
white murderers, rapists, and scoundrels who have oppressed, killed, 
ruined, robbed, and debased their 
black fellow men and fellow women, 
and yet, today, walk scot-free, unwhipped of justice, uncondemned by 
millions of their white fellow citizens, 
and unrebuked by the President of 
the United States. 
BARNARD' S LINCOL N 
I
T is to laugh. The fact is we 
civilized folk, particularly if we 
are white, are used to strutting ; we pose in carefully 
pressed pants and serious expression, 
—even in our statues. When, then, 
one comes with a human study like 
Barnard's Lincoln and gives us a man 
with big feet and bagging trousers 
and a thought rather than a smirk 
upon his lips, Lord , how we protest! 
That Lincoln ? Never. Why , there is 
no nobility i n his clothes or shoes! 
TH E FUTUR E O F AFRIC A 
THI S wa r ought to result i n the 
establishment of an independent Negro Central Africa n 
State composed, at least, of the 
Belgian Congo and German East 
Afric a and, if possible, of Uganda, 
French Equatoria l Africa , German 
Southwest Africa , and the Portuguese 
territories of Angol a and Mozambique. Such a state should be under 
international guarantees and control. 
JAPA N 
BE it known to all men that a 
certain great white nation 
called Americ a has seen fit to 
admit, for divers reasons best 
known to itself, that Asi a is primaril y 
for the Asiatics. This is the real 
meaning of the Lansing-Ishii Agreement, shorn of all America n "camouflage" of explanation. 
A PRAYE R 
A
NCIEN T O F DAY S that 
shudderest through Death 
and Birth—grea t Dream of 
Perfect Things, too perfect to 
be true! Wil d Wil l to Do and Be — 
Eterna l Beauty, Just and Free ! Incarnate Wor d of Isis, Mahmud, Saint 
Buddha, and Lor d Christ, sweep 
through our voices these drear days 
when Eart h is Golgotha and when in 
midday darkness we Crucify our 
Souls amid the Thieves of Migh t and 
Greed on this great cruel Cross of 
Brass. Peace, send Peace, 0 God ; 
annex, repay, restore; but before all, 
Justice, even though the way leads on 
through all this blood-soaked Hell. 
Justice—not the heights, not yet 
the heights, 0 God, but where 
their peaks burn clear against Th y 
Heavens! Justice for the poor and 
the blind, the weak and the black; 
Justice for woman, man, and child, 
and with Th y Justice, Peace—Peace 
and Silence to weep and bind these 
awful wounds. EDITORIAL 115 
TH E ROCHDAL E PIONEERS 
IN 1844 twenty-eigh t Englis h 
weavers subscribe d five dollars 
a piec e to start a cooperative 
store . The y lai d dow n fou r 
principles: first, sales wer e to be mad e 
at curren t marke t price s an d al l pro ­
fits wer e to be divide d amon g the customers accordin g to the amoun t o f 
their purchases; second, sales wer e to 
be mad e fo r cash ; third, no goods wer e 
to be misrepresente d o r adulterated ; 
fourth, the stor e wa s to be governe d 
b y th e stockholders an d ever y stockholde r wa s to hav e one vote. 
I n 1916 this stor e ha d 18,924 mem ­
bers an d a capita l o f $2,000,000. This 
an d simila r stores i n Englan d ha d 
3,150,000 members i n 1916, di d a business o f $700,000,000, an d distribute d 
profits o f $76,000,000. 
Doe s anyon e doubt tha t we Negroe s 
o f the Unite d State s coul d paralle l 
this success, i f w e would ? 
EFFICIENC Y 
THE NATIONA L ASSOCIATI0N F0 R TH E ADVANCEMENT O F COLORE D PEOPLE 
brie f career, dealt Bourbonis m i n the 
Unite d State s thre e tellin g blows. 
First: b y helpin g to secure the celebrate d Grandfathe r Decisio n before 
th e Supreme Court , it bega n the overthro w o f Disfranchisemen t an d secure d th e first official affirmation o f 
the validit y o f the Fifteent h Amend ­
ment. 
Second: it dealt Cast e i n the Nation a tellin g blo w whe n it secured th
admissio n o f nearl y seven hundre d 
Colore d Officers of the Unite d States 
Army . 
Third: i n securin g the Segregatio n 
Decisio n befor e the Supreme Court , i t 
stoppe d th e most outrageous invasio n 
o f the Negro's rights ye t attempted. 
I n additio n to these thre e blows, it 
ha s fough t fo r Civi l Rights, encourage d abilit y throug h th e Spingar n 
Medal , defeated Anti-Intermarriag e 
Laws, watche d Legislation , mad e 
Lynchin g a Nationa l question, an d 
publishe d the Truth . 
It di d not do these thing s single -
hande d bu t has worke d alway s wit h 
al l persons minde d to wor k wit h it. 
I n each case, however, it has furnishe d suggestion , encouragement, 
funds, an d activ e organization . 
This is surel y a recor d whic h 
prove s TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION 
O F COLORE D PEOPL E the onl y na ­
tiona l organizatio n i n the field to-day 
whic h ca n fight efficiently fo r the 
rights of the Negr o an d the one on 
whic h twelv e millio n Negroe s shoul d 
concentrat e wit h membership , encouragemen t an d funds. 
TH E MID-WINTER CONFERENCE 
THE seventh' annua l conference o f the N . A . A . C. P . 
wil l be hel d i n Ne w Yor k 
durin g the holida y season. 
Arrangements have been mad e fo r 
recreation , as wel l as information , i n 
the most interestin g time of yea r an d 
i n the greatest cit y i n the world . 
Amon g the speakers wil l be persons 
o f nationa l renown , includin g Colone l 
Young , Mis s Lathro p of the Nationa l 
Children's Bureau , Florenc e Kell
Ashbi e Hawkins, Archibal d Grimke , 
an d man y others. Ther e wil l be mass 
meetings, conferences, a luncheon , a 
dinner, a specia l theatr e party , an d 
visits to points o f interest. Th e cost 
wil l be kep t low, an d ever y membe r 
o f the Associatio n an d frien d shoul d 
mak e it a poin t to atten d this whic h 
promise s to be the most interestin g 
o f a lon g series of conferences. 
Th e conferenc e wil l be i n session 
fou r days, beginnin g Thursday , Dece
Thos e wh o attend shoul d mak e 
ever y effort t o be her e the mornin g 
of. the first da y an d stay ove r the 
nigh t o f the last. National Association for the Advance
CLER K FOS S RAKE R CHAIRMA N JOHNSO N COOPE R FOSTE R 
OFFICIA L REPORTE R 
TH E CONGRESSIONAL INVESTIGATION 
OF EAS T ST. LOUIS 
By LINDSE Y COOPER, 
Special Representative of TH E CRISIS . 
THE committee appointed by Congress to 
investigate the East St. Louis riots 
met in East St. Louis, October 18, 1917. It 
was composed of Representatives Ben Johnson, of Kentucky; Martin D. Foster, of 
Illinois; Henry A . Cooper, of Wisconsin; 
George A . Foss, of Illinois; and John D. 
Raker, of California. 
Witnesses were heard from all classes. 
Many came voluntarily to tell what they 
knew of the rioting. Others were subpoenaed. Every side of the East St. Louis 
matter was presented for consideration. 
Heads of manufacturing plants, labor 
union representatives, East St. Louis business men, Negroes from all walks of life, 
professional men, policemen, and day laborers, civil and military authorities—all appeared before the inquiry committee. 
The primary business of the committee 
was to ascertain whether or not the laws of 
interstate commerce were broken, or interstate travel interfered with by the rioting 
of May and July. Having established these 
facts, it was then at liberty to push the inquiry into details of labor and race conflict. 
In view of this provision, the first witnesses called before the committee were 
those parties whose business was of a nature such as to experience interference in 
a case of interstate violation. 
The heads of the large East St. Louis industries, the traffic manager of the St. 
Louis Chamber of Commerce, and the manager of the East St. Louis Relay Depot 
testified to the fact that commercial traffic 
and personal travel had been interfered 
with by the rioting. 
Each of these witnesses told the committee what he knew of the rioting, in addition to detailing the effect the conditions 
had upon individual business. It was 
116 N. A . A . C. P. 117 
learned that in a number of instances contracts with the Federal Government had 
been delayed because of shortage of labor, 
due to the Negroes having- been so thoroughly intimidated by the rioting as to be 
unwilling to return to the city. One manufacturer stated that he had offered his colored men higher wages than they had ever 
received before if they would return, but 
that he was unable to get them to do so. 
In those cases where they did come back to 
the city to work, they insisted on retaining 
St. Louis as their place of residence and 
demanded that they be released from work 
an hour sooner than customary, in order 
that they might be out of East St. Louis 
before dark. 
It was one of these witnesses, Charles 
Roger, of the J. C. Grant Chemical Company, who first told the committee of the 
shooting of Negroes by the soldiers. 
Upon being asked by the committee if 
he had seen any soldiers on the day of July 
2, Mr. Roger replied that he had. Inquiry 
was made as to what the soldiers were doing. Mr. Roger replied: "Shooting Negroes." 
He then related that he with several 
others was standing at a window of his 
plant when a soldier came out of a near-by 
door. A crowd was in the street below 
and a group of Negroes was standing not 
far away. The soldier was armed. Someone in the crowd taunted him, saying: "Yo u 
can't shoot!" The soldier replied: "Like 
hell I can't!" and, raising his rifle, fired 
into the group of unmolesting Negroes. 
One of the Negroes fell. 
The story of the race riots as revealed 
through the mass of evidence procured by 
the investigating committee is almost the 
history of East St. Louis itself. 
Twenty years after the establishment of 
the city, she had the reputation of being a 
centre of lawlessness. Conditions seem not 
to have improved since that time. 
Although the seat of immense moneymaking industries, East St. Louis has been 
forced to support herself by means of 
saloon licenses. The population of the city 
is 75,000. A t the time of the July riots she 
maintained, or was maintained by, 376 
saloons. Over thirty of these have been 
closed since the July riots. Barrel-houses, 
gambling resorts, and dives of all descriptions were allowed open operation in the 
city. While some of these places have been 
closed, others may continue to exist. 
Situated on the Mississippi River, and 
the terminal of twenty-eight main lines of 
railroad, it is only natural that East St. 
Louis should attract a large floating population. Such a population requires the 
most efficient government. East St. Louis 
has had the worst. 
The immense plants of Swift, Armour, 
and Morris are not technically located in 
East St. Louis and pay no tax to the city. 
They were originally established just outside the city limits. Upon being threatened 
with absorption by the neighboring town 
of Lansdowne, they procured a charter 
from the State of Illinois and became incorporated as a village. This village is 
called National City, and in addition to the 
great plants named includes the National 
Stockyards, owned by Morris and Company. 
The territory covered by National City 
is not more than two miles square and includes not more than thirty-two residence 
houses. The heads of the great plants live 
in St. Louis, and the majority of the laboring men in East St. Louis. 
The result is that National City bears 
the distinction of being the richest municipality per capita in the world. While her 
population is only two hundred, the property included within her limits has an aggregate value of not less than $10,000,000. 
These plants maintain open shop, and 
since the strikes of 1916, the majority of 
their employees have been Negroes. 
A n immense industry of East St. Louis, 
which is not in National City, is the Aluminum 
the Aluminum Ore Company of America 
popularly known as the Aluminum Trust. 
The plant of the Aluminum Ore Works in 
East St. Louis is valued at over a million 
dollars. The Aluminum Ore Company of 
America was capitalized at $20,000,000 and 
now has an investment of $80,000,000. 
It would seem that the seat of such industries would be able to maintain a properly 
paid police force and would be, at least, 
comfortably independent as to funds wherewith to meet her community responsibilities. 
Yet such has not been the case. East 
St. Louis has had to depend on the proceeds of her saloon licenses, and her government has been so corrupt that the entire truth of its viciousness will probably 
never be revealed. 
It is necessary to understand these conditions in order to grasp the truth of the 
Negro's situation in the city. 
Dating from the packing house strikes 
of 1916, and continuing through the Alu ­
minum Ore strikes of October 1916 and 118 TH E CRISIS 
Apri l 1917, labor conditions in East St. 
Louis have been desperately tense. 
In order to combat such powerful employers, the laboring men were obliged to 
make a vigorous fight. None of the great 
plants is completely unionized. The men 
of the Aluminum Ore Company were unionized in an independent group, not affiliated 
with the American Federation of Labor. 
Organized labor has been made to bear 
much of the blame of the riots of May and 
July, but it is only fair to the unions to 
look to the deeper causes of the trouble. 
Alois Towers, a labor organizer of Belleville, Ill., told the committee that the labor 
unions recognized that there was no law 
to prevent the Negro from coming North, 
and that organized labor had no desire to 
prevent individuals from doing so. It was 
with the forced condition of thousands of 
these colored folk being brought into a 
community, where the laboring population 
was already equal to the number of jobs to 
be had, that the labor unions were at war. 
There is no more tragic pilgrimage in 
history. Working under unfair conditions, 
denied his rights of citizenship and education, hounded by race prejudice, the southern Negro listened eagerly to the tales of 
prosperity and opportunity for his race 
which flourished in the nearest northern 
city. 
The relation of the Negro and the labor 
union has been difficult. The percentage of 
skilled colored labor in East St. Louis is not 
large and there is no organization for unskilled or common labor. The skilled Negro has felt himself discriminated against 
by the crafts unions, and to the unskilled 
or uneducated Negro the purposes of labor 
organization are obscure. 
It is fairly certain that the employers 
of the large industries gave the preference 
to colored workers for the reason that they 
felt these men would be slower to organize 
than white unskilled laborers would be. If 
they did undertake to organize, more men 
could be brought from the South to take 
their places. Thus, the employer had in 
his grasp a solution of the problem which 
from his point of view was quite satisfactory. If the men of his plant went on 
strike, he ignored the strike, filled their 
places with Negro workmen, and went on 
with his business. 
It is an interesting fact that one company 
of Negroes, which was brought up during 
the strike at the Aluminum Ore Company, 
refused to accept the positions which had 
been promised them when they learned that 
the reason for these jobs being vacant was 
that their regular occupants were out on 
strike. 
The situation as it existed was deeply 
unfair to the Negro laborer. Instead of his 
cause being the cause of the working class 
at large, the two became separated and pitted against each other, the employer, of 
course, being on the side of that form of 
unskilled labor of which he felt he could 
for the longest period of time take advantage. 
It must be remembered that as a background for all of this industrial discontent, 
the worst of municipal conditions existed. 
With three men for every one job, with 
saloons and gambling houses operating on 
all sides, with an administration which, 
under Mayor Fred Mollman, winked at any 
crime as long as it was committed by a 
friend of those in office, with pawnshops 
displaying in their windows a variety of 
fire-arms accompanied by the sign "Buy a 
Gun for Protection," it is small wonder that 
eventually every semblance of law and 
order broke down, resulting in the desperate 
events of July 2. 
In this terrible crisis, the innocent were 
made to suffer for the guilty. Every instinct of brutality which had been allowed 
to grow up in East St. Louis sprang fullfledged into expression, and because members of his race who had had no chance for 
enlightenment had been used as tools in 
the hands of despotic employers, great 
numbers of Negroes were burned and shot 
and persecuted by a fiendish mob which 
cared nothing for labor principles or for 
industrial justice, but seized the opportunity to exercise its degraded sense of race 
prejudice and gratify its gluttony for bloodshed. That the rank and file of labor did 
take part in the riots of May and July is 
not to be denied. 
The spring of 1917 was a crucial time in 
the labor activities of East St. Louis. In 
addition to the large strike which was 
called at the Aluminum Ore Works, contracts which the employees of the street railway system had made with their employers 
some two or three years before reached 
expiration. The men were dissatisfied 
with their wage rate and a strike was in 
prospect. N. A . A. C. P. 119 
In view of this occurrence, the superintendent of the street railways system procured two companies of Federalized militia 
which were quartered within the precincts 
of the car company's property. Many of 
them were housed in the car barns and the 
remaining number pitched their tents near 
by. These troops, also, had under their protection the plants of the packing houses, 
the Aluminum Ore Company, and the National Stockyards. 
A t the time of the May riots, when the 
Mayor appealed to the commander of these 
troops for assistance he was told that the 
mission of the soldiers in East St. Louis 
was of another nature, and assistance in 
restoring the city to order was refused. 
On the day of the opening hearing of the 
Congressional Committee, Mrs. Lena Cook, 
of St. Louis, who lost her son and her husband in the riots of July 2, told the jury at 
Belleville, Ill., the story of her tragic experience. She was called as a witness in 
the trial of John Dow, Charles Hanna, and 
Harry Robinson for the murder of William 
Keyser," a white man who was killed by a 
bullet which had previously passed through 
the body of Mrs. Cook's son, Lurizza 
Beard, killing the boy. Mrs. Cook's husband was also killed by these men, but the 
case under consideration at that time was 
the murder of William Keyser. 
Mrs. Cook, her husband, Ed Cook, her 
son, Lurizza Beard, and her thirteen-yearold daughter were on their way back to 
their home in St. Louis, Mo., from a fishing 
trip at a lake some miles above East St. 
Louis, near Alton. 
As the car of which they were occupants 
passed through East St. Louis, it was 
stopped at Collinsville and Illinois Avenues. 
Mrs. Cook testified that Hanna reached 
through the car window and caught her by 
the shoulder, partly tearing her dress off. 
Using an abusive term, he ordered her to 
get out of the car, as he was going to kill 
her. Then Hanna and Dow came into the 
car and told the white people to get out, 
as they were going to kill the Negroes. The 
white people left the car. The Cook family 
tried to explain that they did not even live 
in East St. Louis. The excuse was of no 
avail. Hanna pulled Ed Cook to the back 
platform of the car, threw him off, and shot 
him. Dow started to drag the Beard boy 
from the car. His mother begged for his 
life. Dow jerked the boy away and the 
last his mother saw, the white man was 
beating the colored boy over the head with 
his revolver. Then Mrs. Cook was dragged 
from the car, beaten with clubs, and kicked. 
A group of white women fell upon her and 
tore her hair out by the roots. 
Mrs. Cook lost consciousness. When she 
regained her normal senses, she found herself lying in an ambulance along with three 
bodies of Negroes. Wiping the blood from 
her eyes, she turned to find that two of 
those bodies were her dead husband and her 
son. 
When this story was repeated to the Congre
moved, made the comment: "Indians could 
have done no worse." 
Dow and Hanna received a sentence of 
fifteen years each in the penitentiary. 
Robinson pleaded guilty and was sentenced 
to five years in the penitentiary. 
Dr. Thomas G. Hunter, a prominent colored doctor of East St. Louis, was the first 
eye-witness to tell the committee of the 
joy-riding automobile which passed through 
Market Avenue, shooting into the houses, 
on the evening of July 1. His testimony 
was verified by other witnesses, one of 
these being a Negro policeman whose sister's house was one of the number shot 
into. 
The killing of detective-sergeants Copp
scribed to the committee by Roy Albertson, 
a newspaper reporter for the East St. Louis 
Daily Journal, who was in the car with 
the police officers when they were shot. 
Albertson described the events surrounding this killing of the detectives very vividly. A point in his testimony which did not 
agree with the account given by Dr. Hunter, of the weather on the same evening, 
was that Albertson testified that it was a 
very dark night. 
Dr. Hunter, on the other hand, described 
the evening as one of bright moonlight. 
The committee, upon looking the matter up, 
found that there had been in fact a moon, 
almost, if not quite full. 
Much interest was manifested in the 
courtroom on the morning of October 24, 
when it was learned that Colonel S. O. 
Tripp, who had been in command of the 
militia on the day of July 2, had come 
voluntarily to testify before the Congressio
No witness had been on the stand who 
had not described the cowardly conduct of 120 TH E CRISIS 
the militia during the rioting. Many had 
told of the militia taking part in the activities of the mob. No one could tell of 
having seen them do any part of their 
duty. 
When Colonel Tripp assumed the stand, 
he carried under his arm a substantial 
document. Upon being sworn in, he proceeded to open this document and began to 
read. The committee objected strenuously, 
and the Colonel was obliged to depend on 
his mind. 
He told the committee of being called 
out of bed early on the morning of July 2, 
of leaving Springfield at four o'clock, and 
of reaching East St. Louis at eight. Upon 
reaching East St. Louis, he said he went 
straight to the office of Mayor Mollman. 
There he was informed by the Mayor 
that he himself was not feeling well that 
day and had been advised not to go out. 
Considerable amusement was expressed 
in the courtroom at this statement from the 
Mayor. The committee asked Colonel Tripp 
if he thought the Mayor's indisposition 
were physical or mental. Colonel Tripp replied that he thought it was mental, that 
the Mayor was ''laying down on his job." 
Mayor Mollman appointed City Attorney 
Thomas Fekete to act in his place that 
day, and co-operating with Mr. Fekete, 
Colonel Tripp took charge of the situation. 
When the officer told the committee that he 
spent the entire morning at the City Hall, 
mapping out a plan of campaign, Mr. 
Cooper ejaculated: "You could have 
planned half the battle of Verdun in that 
time!" 
Colonel Tripp strove manfully to make 
the committee understand that he was not 
in active charge of the militia that day, 
that he was present in an administrative 
capacity only, leaving Colonel E . P. Clayton, the commanding officer of the field 
forces. It is clear that Colonel Clayton 
did not understand this arrangement, for 
it was under his command that the militia 
had controlled the May rioting so effectively. When Colonel Tripp endeavored to 
make it clear to the committee the character of his position, he said: "It is like 
the President. He doesn't go out on active 
duty." Mr. Johnson replied caustically: 
"We see. You and the President don't go 
out." 
Of the few companies of militia which 
straggled into East St. Louis during the 
morning of July 2, none was properly 
equipped. Ammunition was scarce among 
them —a fact the mob was not slow to find 
out. It was learned later that the majority of them had been enlisted only a few 
days. Many of them came from counties 
adjoining St. Clair County and shared the 
sentiment of East St. Louis toward the 
Negro. 
The September issue of TH E CRISIS , containing the East St. Louis Supplement, 
played an important part in the investigation by the Congressional Committee. Its 
sweeping data, with pictures, gave the committee the best available publication to 
study in connection with its inquiry. 
The representative of TH E CRISI S had obtained the original of the photographs published by the magazine and submitted them 
to the committee. After hearing Colonel 
Tripp's account of the competent behavior 
of the soldiers, a member of the committee 
confronted the officer with a photograph 
showing the militia standing by in large 
numbers while the mob assaulted a Negro 
in front of a street car. Colonel Tripp 
stated that he was unable to place1 the locality shown in the picture. Paul Y . Anderson
Dispatch who had given the committee 
valuable evidence, was called to assist the 
military officer. Mr. Anderson told the 
committee that the picture was taken at 
the conjunction of Broadway and Collinsv
Colonel Tripp testified that after spending the morning at the City Hall, planning 
a campaign by which the city might be restored to order, he then spent an hour at 
lunch. By comparing evidence it was ascertained that while the commanding officer of the military forces was at lunch, 
three men were killed at a distance of not 
over three blocks away! 
During the afternoon, a meeting of the 
Mayor and a number of business men was 
held, at which the Mayor called Governor 
Lowden by long distance telephone and 
begged him to have martial law declared 
in the city. Speaking on the same call, 
Colonel Tripp took the receiver and assured the Governor that he had the situation well in hand and that martial law was 
unnecessary. Colonel Tripp gave as his 
reason for this statement the fact that had 
martial law been declared, the military 
forces would have been deprived of the assistance of the police force, whereas if 
civil law were maintained, the military and TH E WA Y OF TH E TRANSGRESSOR 121 
police forces could both operate to quell the 
riot. 
Considering that only fifteen out of the 
forty men which constituted the police force 
of East St. Louis had reported for duty 
that morning, one cannot but feel that 
Colonel Tripp's loss in the matter of police 
assistance would have been light. 
It is a fact, however, that with the 
declaration of martial law complete authority would have devolved upon Colonel Tripp, 
just as under civil law it devolved upon 
Mayor Mollman. Consequently, each desired the form of government which relieved him of responsibility. 
Colonel Tripp assured the committee that 
he had never before heard the stories of 
the militia shooting Negroes, and that he 
had made no investigation of the subject. 
He also stated that he at no time saw any 
occasion for firing on the mob, taking the 
chance of wounding and perhaps killing 
innocent by-standers. 
Evidence as to the participation of the 
militia in the rioting was given the committee by any number of witnesses, yet in 
no case can there be found any indication 
that acts committed by the militiamen have 
been punished by the military authorities. 
Most of these soldiers have been sent to the 
Border. They have been Federalized and 
will from now until the close of the war devote their talents to making the world safe 
for democracy. 
It was under the command of Colonel 
Clayton, at seven-thirty in the evening of 
July 2, that the riot was finally controlled 
and several hundred persons were arrested. 
Most of these were turned loose by the 
police as soon as they reached the police 
station. Of the number who were held 
until the next day, few were indicted. They 
were dismissed as rapidly as they could 
walk out. 
When Colonel Tripp had completed his 
testimony, Representative Raker, of Califo
has a poor, innocent Negro in a place like 
this?" 
TH E WA Y O F TH E TRANSGRESSO R 
A STOR Y 
By WALLAC E GREE N 
SAY , have you 
heard about 
that great "come 
off" that too k 
place out on Bi g 
Sandy a few days 
ago at Uncle Tom 
Morgan's house? 
Now lest you 
should try to find 
the way to Bi g 
Sandy and get 
lost, let me direct 
you. After you 
pass a little country store not far 
west of here, you 
follow the road 
that leads toward 
the north a few 
hundred yards and 
the n westward 
again until you 
pass Bob Goodgame's house , 
which has a patch 
of corn next to it, 
and just beyond 
the com patch 
that foolish man 
has a fine watermelon patch. Here 
you will see many 
a big saucy melon 
peeping up at you 
from among the 
vines, and those 
delicious mus k 
melon s sending 
forth into the road 
a sweet smell . 
Tur n northward 
here again and 
you will see from 
th e downward 
slope of the road 
and the sudden increase in the number of black-jack 
and elm trees that 
you are nearing 
some creek. When 122 TH E CRISIS 
you will have passed Uncle John Henderson's ribbon cane patch which lies 
snugly beside the road in a little field 
surrounded by the oak and elm trees, 
then you will come to Sandy Creek where 
brushes grow thick and trees high and 
dense, making it somewhat dark here even 
in the day time. Then there is that haunted bridge you must cross where that little 
spotted dog and man with no head on 
scared poor Frank Johnson half to death 
one night and made old man Bil l Totten 
outrun his own horse, although Uncle Bil l 
had suffered with rheumatism for thirty 
years. After crossing the bridge you find 
yourself passing that old house where 
Mandy Cane saw that two-headed woman 
in broad open daylight. Here the road 
begins to climb upward, leading you to a 
little wood-covered hill, on the summit 
of which is a stumpy field; in the field 
near the road stands a big two-room log 
house with a long front porch. Know now 
that you are in the heart of Bi g Sandy and 
at Uncle Tom Morgan's house. 
Now Uncle Tom Morgan is hardly worth 
describing. There was nothing in his appearance that would have made you either 
laugh or cry. He was just an ordinary' 
looking old gentleman about five feet seven 
inches in his stocking feet, had long black 
whiskers on his face and his head not the 
least bit gray notwithstanding his toes had 
been bitten by the frost for fifty-five winters. But there was something very sad 
in Uncle Tom's character. He was a hard 
old sinner. He was a transgressor. One 
foot in the grave and the other no business 
out, he was as rowdy as a sixteen-year-old 
boy. An d do you know that Uncles Mark 
Anderson and Dave Medlock and Aunt Peggie Pinchback, who had grown up with him 
(Uncle Tom) from slavery had been pleading with him for many years, trying to get 
him to turn from his wicked ways and cast 
his lot with the heaven-bound. But Uncle 
Tom had to have his "good whiskey" to 
drink and delighted as much in dancing as 
a college boy does in stealing a kiss from 
the girl he likes best. Of course Uncle Tom 
couldn't do the "get back" as well as he 
could twenty-five years before and owing 
to a little weakness in the back he could 
not cut the pigeon wing as lively as he 
could in days agone, but when it came to 
"dancing on the set" he could swing his 
partner and promenade as accurately as any 
"devilish youngster" for twenty miles 
around. Give him an ample supply of 
"good liquor" and he could dance at the head 
of a line of youngsters and call figures any 
night until eleven o'clock and kick Aunt 
Drusillia's bonnet off at eleven ten. 
Now about the time of this big "To-do," 
which was a ring play and dance combined, 
at Uncle Tom's house, you know Brother 
Harris had pitched a big battle against "Si n 
and Satan" down at the Sandy Creek 
church-house; and hearing that Uncle Tom 
was about to "pull off" this big "Intertainment" at his (Uncle Tom's) home, that divine Brother Harris sent a committee to 
Uncle Tom asking him to wait until the 
meeting closed before he do this thing lest 
he divert the minds of the young people 
from the meeting and then a great curse 
fall upon him; but Uncle Tom, using as a 
basis for his argument the words of the 
poet: 
"Religion never was designed 
To make our pleasure less," 
sought to show them that they were in error and refused to concede to their wishes. 
When Aunt Pashie Sutton heard that 
Uncle Tom had refused to listen to the 
sacred committee she hitched an unruly 
mule to an open top buggy and drove six 
miles through the red hot sunshine to Uncle 
Tom's house just to call him an old fool. 
"Never min'," she said as she drove away. 
"Yo u won't come to nothing good. The way 
of the transgressah is hard." But, deaf to 
all that is pure and holy, that old "good 
timer" only laughed the laugh of Satan and 
continued to send out invitations far and 
near, telling the young people to come out 
that following Saturday night and have a 
grand time shaking the dust from their feet 
a little. 
Now, when Saturday came around and 
darkness began to fall, and the pleasant 
wind from the south began to rock the lofty 
trees to sleep, the young people in large 
numbers commenced gathering in Uncle 
Tom Morgan's yard. There were those 
"good looking black boys" of Aunt Pashie 
Sutton's and Nathan Whitaker with his 
thirty dollar suit on. Wooden-leg Peter was 
there, and even some of them "long leg popeyed boys" from away down on Pi g Creek. 
As soon as the moon bounced upon the skies 
and was peeping through the branches of 
the black-jack and elm trees to see who was 
spooning, there came down the road cripple 
Romey and "them Smily boys" playing their 
guitars as they came along, while just be-TH E WA Y OF TH E TRANSGRESSOR 123 
hind them in company with Sealy Green and 
Annie Kato and a host of other "good looking chickens" came Joe Pinkard with his 
fiddle and Frank Talton with his banjo. 
Everybody was in the best of spirits because just as a jolly crowd passed through 
the gate, Nathan Whitaker sneaked up 
among the rest and stole a kiss from Sealy 
Green and Wooden-leg Peter slipped his 
arm around Sallie Black's waist and 
smacked her on the jaw. And that good 
looking "Yalle r gal " you call Pinkie Jackson had already whispered and told Wash 
Smily that John -Clark couldn't shine the 
light for her that night, that he (Smiley) 
would be her light and her joy from that 
time forward. When Smily heard that he 
laughed loud enough to scare Aunt Drusillia's chickens off the roost and took 
taste from her dainty lips while John Clark 
cast a jealous look in their direction. Uncle 
Tom Morgan was in the house arranging 
the barbecue and drinking a plenty of "youknow-what." 
About that time some one yelled out 
"ring play," and everybody was suddenly 
seized with the merry walk-around fever. 
John Clark, although he had ploughed forty 
acres of cotton that week and, worse than 
that, had been suddenly "kicked" by his best 
girl as soon as he had come into the yard, 
rushed out and began to sing a ring play 
song, "Who's gwine to own my dad-in-law?" 
Then some one else offered another popular 
ring song, entitled "Make me up a ring. 
Turn! " But when that handsome Jack Sutton and tender eyed Sealy Green, arm in 
arm, walked up and down the center of the 
yard like two monarchs upon streets paved 
with gold, singing "You can't turn the tea 
like me," they all gathered around that 
couple, joining hands and forming a circle 
and the big ring began to move around. 
Pet Henderson, who looked "good enough to 
eat," wearing a red garment that fit her so 
well that she seemed to have been just taken 
out of the melting pot, came forward and 
everybody desired her to play in the center 
of the ring, because the young men were 
just dying for a chance to be swung around 
on her beautiful arms. 
When the blushing moon was now high 
upon the sky and the ring players had 
swung and sung to their hearts' content, 
each fellow began stealing away to some 
cozy corner with his best girl and the ring 
play was ended. Now came Uncle Tom 
Morgan's opportunity to organize his dance, 
so he got Joe Pinkard with his fiddle, the 
Smily boys and cripple Romey with their 
guitars and Frank Talton with his banjo. 
These he caused to be seated on a bench 
which he had prepared for the musicians, 
then the "set" was organized for the big 
dance, Uncle Tom being chosen to "call 
figures," for you must remember Uncle Tom 
was an expert along this line, having been a 
"caller of figures" for thirty years. Of 
course just before they began to play Uncle 
Tom took all the musicians into a back room 
and "fixed them," after which they were 
seated and commenced to play,—oh, my, 
such music,—and the big foot-shaking began. 
Pet Henderson was the most popular in 
the ring play, but not so in the dance. You 
know there blew in all of a sudden as the 
dance began a flashy bird whom they called 
"Dancing Annie." She hailed from up 
about Penoak Creek some place and I want 
you to know she naturally had on the "rags." 
She was not pretty in the face, though tall 
and graceful in form, but in the ball room 
she was queen. Every man that was present wanted to talk with her at intervals, 
hoping to get to dance the next "set" with 
her. But Wil l Lynch, who had plenty 
money and spent it freely, was there from 
Pig Creek and had "every devil bested" with 
that fish. He danced with her on every set 
and talked with her between times, buying 
her all the cold drinks and sweetmeats she 
wanted, and she seemed not to see any other 
man in the room except Wil l Lynch. Jim 
Frieson tried seven times to get to talk to 
her and seven times she snubbed him, and 
Jim Frieson didn't think Wil l Lynch was 
treating him right either, so he walked out 
into the back yard and put five cartridges 
into the chamber of his British bulldog 
pistol. 
In the meantime the dance was suspended 
for a while. Dancing Annie and Wil l had 
gone out into, the front yard and, seated 
upon a big bench, were sitting so close together you couldn't get a pin between them. 
Jim Frieson came around the corner of the 
house with mischief beaming in his eyes and 
called Will to talk with him, just a minute, 
he said. Now, Wil l Lynch was just a little 
black man, but he was afraid of "no human," you know. So Wil l left Annie just a 
moment to see why Jim Frieson wished to 
disturb him in the midst of so much joy. 
After a few moments of heated discussion, 124 TH E CRISIS 
Will turned away from the angry Jim, whom 
he had refused the privilege of speaking 
just one word to his beautiful butterfly An ­
nie. Jim called him a name that my pen 
would blush to write but joy of Annie 
caught the words away from Will's ears, 
and he returned to the seat and sat down 
beside his fairy and was soon in dreamland 
holding her hands and listening to those 
sweet words like music that flowed from her 
lips. 
Now the young people, standing in large 
numbers on the porch and in the yard, had 
about ceased their courting and were moving about chatting freely with friends, as 
they were now getting ready to go home. 
Jim Frieson stood on the porch, knowing 
that in a few minutes all would be over 
and that he was a defeated "good timer" 
that night in that Wil l Lynch had got between him and the angel of his heart. His 
hand went to his hip pocket just as Wil l 
and Annie arose from their seat and started 
toward the porch. 
"Will, " he yelled like a mad man, "I am 
going to kill you." 
As he spoke his hand shot forward holding a glittering revolver pointed at Will's 
head. Bang! bang! barked the British bulldog. Will's hat flew off and he went reeling 
backward and fell to his knees. Everybody 
was thunderstruck by the sudden occurrence. Annie screamed. So did the other 
girls as each one sought for cover behind 
someone else. Some of the young men who 
were a little hasty in their conclusions, actually jumped the fence and went running 
like jack rabbits down across the stumpy 
field. Uncle Tom came rushing out of the 
door directly behind Jim Frieson just as 
Will, having drawn a small revolver, was 
taking aim at him. Ping! ping! went the 
little piece of artillery. Bang! the British 
bulldog barked again. Uncle Tom caught a 
sharp pain in his left side. Annie, who was 
at that time bending over her Wil l to see 
if he was hurt, was seen to throw up her 
hands suddenly and sink down to the 
ground dead, with a bullet in her brains. 
A t this time the two scrappers were overpowered and their guns taken away from 
them. "Come and take me up from here, 
don't you see I am dead as a door nail?" 
cried Uncle Tom as he lay on the porch 
where he had fallen. "Yo u are not dead, 
Uncle Tom," the young men told him kindly 
as they picked him up. "I guess I ought to 
know*" returned Uncle Tom confidentially. 
"Tom! Tom! is you shot?" screamed Aunt 
Drusillia. "Shot all to pieces, honey," 
groaned Uncle Tom. 
It was the first time he had called her 
honey in twenty-five years. "Yes, baby," 
continued Uncle Tom, crying. "These young 
devils have killed an old man like me." 
Uncle Tom was right, they had killed 
him. Before the physician could reach the 
place the old dancer had passed away in the 
same room where he had been calling figures 
an hour before. 
When the officers arrived on the horrible 
spot, forsaken then by all except Aunt Drusillia, two or three faithful friends and the. 
lifeless bodies of Annie and Uncle Tom, 
they held the inquest over the dead, handcuffed Jim Frieson and Wil l Lynch, and 
drove away toward the county jail, leaving 
the remains of "poor Annie" resting on the 
cooling board by that of Uncle Tom. 
In deep sorrow they could hear the solemn words of Aunt Pashie Sutton ringing 
through the mournful forest: "The way of 
the transgressah is hard!" 
A MOTHER' S NE W YEA R RESOLUTION S 
JOSEPHIN E T . WASHINGTON . 
"REALIZING , as never before, the magnitude of the mother's mission, and 
feeling my weakness under the weight of 
its obligations, herewith, at the dawning of 
the New Year, in humble and prayerful 
spirit, I subscribe myself to the following 
Resolutions: 
I will remember that my children are not 
playthings, nor puppets, nor personal possessions of any sort whatever; but immortal 
beings, loaned by God, to be taught and 
trained and fitted each to fulfill the purpose 
of his existence. 
I will study my vocation, the sacred vocation of motherhood, striving to make myself more proficient, learning from wise men TH E OUTER POCKET 125~ 
and from life how best to deal with the 
little ones entrusted to my care. 
I will live with my children not merely 
for them; since such companionship is 
worth more than divergent ways, marked 
by needless sacrifices on the one side and 
a growing selfishness on the other. 
I will respect the individuality of my children, and not try to change their temperaments, furnish their opinions, nor choose 
their callings—nor their mates, when the 
time comes for such selection. 
I will do whatever lies in my power to 
give my children sound bodies, for physical 
vigor is an asset, the value of which scarcely 
can be overestimated. 
I will provide for my children both work 
and play, believing as I do that they are 
equally essential to a full and harmonious 
development. 
I will lead my children not only to love 
the best in books and art, but, likewise, to 
rejoice in all the beauty of earth and sea 
and sky—in the song of the bird, the glitter 
of the dewdrop upon the grass, the murmur 
of the wind among the trees, the quiet tints 
of the greyest day, as well as the glowing 
colors of the most brilliant sunset. 
I will impart to my children the facts of 
life, that they may look with reverence upon 
their bodies; thinking God's thoughts after 
Him as they learn of human relations, and, 
in the years to come, labor for the enlightenment of those who sit in darkness. 
I will aim to keep ever before me the 
great truth that the mother's responsibility 
begins long before her babe is placed in 
her arms; and, consecrating myself anew 
to the glorious calling of motherhood, I will 
endeavor so to live and grow that should 
other children come to me, they may be 
dowered with a richer heredity. 
Th e Oute r Pocke t 
COWARDS? 
Winnipeg, Canada. 
T
EL L me, what have become of the ME N 
amongst our race? Are we forever to 
be a race of cowards? I am astonished that 
TH E CRISIS, a magazine which I have always read and admired because of its boldness and courage in raising the issue of 
the white man's (particularly the Southerner) injustice toward our people, advocates 
the continued loyalty of the Negro in the 
present crisis that faces the world to-day. 
How can the men who are interested in the 
publication of your magazine plead for a 
nation that shows us so little favor? Only 
to-night I have just read of the further outrages upon my people in East St. Louis. 
If I had been one of that number, rather 
a thousand deaths would I have suffered 
ere I had turned my back on those white 
vultures. God! Give the men of my race 
the courage to fight back, and if they must 
die, let them die as ME N and not as hunted 
animals. 
FREDERIC K HAR T WILLIAMS . 
In relating the East St. Louis incident 
to a colored religious gentleman, to get his 
ideas of the crimes committed, I was told 
by him that had he been there he would 
have just prayed to the Lord to save him. 
Enough said he would have been numbered 
with the slain. Fifteen hundred National 
Guardsmen sent to quell the riot reported 126 TH E CRISIS 
that they were helpless to cope with the 
mob and were disarmed by young girls and 
women—some class for the uniform, wonder what cousin Bil l (The Kaiser) would 
say to see that in print, and the glorious 
American Army coming over to fight him. 
The State of Illinois has colored militia, 
the Federal Government has colored regiments, but it would be a shame to send one 
of these regiments to quell a race riot, the 
girls and women wouldn't be so successful 
and only a third of the number sent to East 
St. Louis would be necessary to quell any 
race riot that starts in America. 
The bravery of the white man is only 
shown where he is in the majority, then he 
is a lion; and to hear him boast would make 
one think when angered he would move 
mountains, but if he sees death staring him 
in the face he is as meek as a lamb. During my many years of service in the Army 
I have had the pleasure of witnessing a 
great deal of the white man's bravery on 
the battlefield. But the answer to where 
can the black man get just treatment is 
right here in the United States, but you 
have got to fight for it like the red man 
and other men that have a right to live. 
This old pleading and praying at the hands 
of a murderous mob don't save you, and the 
talk of getting the right man in office has 
got to be a fish tale, a white man is a white 
man, many good promises are given you 
until he has secured the office then he forgets you exist. 
A FRIEND . 
The Europeans want the black people, 
all right. They are eager for their labor, 
for their fields, even for their women, but 
they do not want them to learn the use 
of firearms and be trained as soldiers. The 
British want the Hindus, their labor, their 
money, their markets, their services, but 
not as fellow citizens. The Americans and 
the Europeans are now after the Chinese, 
though international jealousies and the political position of Japan have made it impossible for them to grab China and treat 
it altogether as their property. 
America has gone to war to crush Germany, to make the world safe for AngloSaxon supremacy. The great humanitarian 
who rules at the White House and gives 
long sermons on the rights of small nationalities, on the blessings of democracy, and 
on abstract notions of right and justice always excludes the African and the Asiatic 
from his calculation. The nations of Eu ­
rope, the peoples of Europe and America, 
the organized nations of the world, are the 
objects of his love and solicitude. The 
blacks, the yellows and the Hindus (who 
are neither the one nor the other) are out 
of consideration. They do not fall in his 
purview. He has no thought for them. He 
wants them to continue as beasts of burden, 
for the benefit of his fellow whites. He has 
not a word of sympathy for the black victims of his white countrymen. He is mum 
about Memphis and East St. Louis. 
But he is mistaken. The European dominance over Asi a and Afric a is not more 
than 200 years old and by the grace of God 
it shall not last for more than a century at 
the most. An d then the day of retribution 
will come. The future is with the colored 
people. They are able-bodied, brave and 
industrious. They do not lack in brains 
and are eager to learn. They are still virgin. Let them keep away from the vices 
of civilization. Let them unite and organA VOICE FROM THE ORIENT. 
Franklin, Pa . 
I wonder why, in your enumeration of 
Negro military leaders, on page 60 of the 
June CRISIS, you do not mention the very 
greatest of them all, Antonio Maceo, the 
Cuban general? I know he is sometimes 
spoken of as "part Negro," but, as a matter 
of fact, I greatly doubt if he had a drop of 
white blood in his veins. I never saw any 
sign of it. 
I had the honor to command in the Cuban 
Army of Liberation a corps known as the 
"Black Rifles." I organized it in the army 
of General Gomez, at first with a few white 
men in it, and later eliminated them, and it 
was entirely composed of Negroes. I commanded that corps under Gomez; for a few 
weeks under Maceo, again under Gomez, 
and finally, until the close of the war, under 
Garcia. In all, we were under fire a hundred and forty-six times in seventeen 
months, and in a hundred and twenty-six 
actual fights. Never once during that time 
did a single soldier of the colored troops 
prove himself anything other than a good 
soldier and a brave man. 
During the few weeks when we served 
under General Maceo I came to respect him 
very highly. Given the opportunity, he 
would have proved himself a very great TH E OUTER POCKET 127 
man, not only as a soldier but as a statesman. I shall never forget a remark he 
made one night when some of his officers 
were raising the question, "What will we get 
out of it?" He was sitting by the tire listening to them and suddenly he lifted himself and said: "I'l l tell you what we shall 
get out of it. We shall get a country where 
little children will laugh as they play around 
the cabin door and sing as they toddle on 
their way to school." 
It was less than a week after that when 
he was killed leading a charge. I have 
never ceased to regret that before that day 
the Black Rifles were separated from him 
and sent back to Gomez, for, had we ridden 
with him (we were mounted) as we did in 
more than one fight, the outcome would have 
been different. 
I expect to take part in the present war 
and I have told the Wa r Department of my 
willingness and desire to command colored 
troops, not because I think colored troops 
should necessarily have white officers, but 
because I know I can make magnificent soldiers out of Negroes. 
GUILLERMO MA C FERGUS . 
HAMPTON . 
New York City. 
HAVIN G been a student at Hampton for 
five years, I thank you for your letter 
to Miss J. E. Davis. 
(From a Student). 
Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania. 
Your letter on the Hampton situation 
makes the matter very clear and convincing 
to me. I find myself puzzling over the possible—or impossible—reasons for so strange 
an attitude on Hampton's part. The white 
people supporting it are most generous with 
their purses, but singularly narrow, it would 
seem, in their intellectual and social vision. 
(From a White Woman.) 
"With the Colors." 
The coming generation is bound to demand a different policy of Hampton Institute. 
Sir, your editorial on Hampton is excellent. . . . 
As I am a graduate of Hampton, I trust 
you will not glean from my words that I 
am disloyal to my Alma Mater. I am not. 
I am ready to fight for Hampton's welfare. 
Nevertheless, I must congratulate you for 
putting into words the thought of thousands 
in regard to Hampton. 
(FRO M A GRADUATE ) 
Woodmere, L. I. 
Your article on Hampton in the November CRISI S is positively the truth. It is the 
best summing up of that institution that 
I have yet seen. 
It would take some time to discuss at 
length the many reasons I have for the 
above statement; however, I might say 
that I have studied—silently—for sometime the methods, the teachers, and general 
aims of Hampton; and have, also, had personal contact with some of her most generous donors of the North. It grieves me to 
say that I have gradually come to realize 
"the truth about Hampton." It is hard 
to have one's confidence so sadly shaken, 
and very bitter to speak the truth against 
one's Alma Mater, but for the sake of 
those coming after me, I cannot sit in untruthful silence to what I feel is an injustice to the ambitious and talented members of our race. My own personal struggle 
in trying to make college entrance in New 
York is proof enough for your statement 
regarding the actual time and money that 
is practically wasted in order to make good. 
(A Hampton Graduate). 
TH E MEMPHI S SUPPLEMENT . 
Memphis, Tennessee. 
SA Y "NIGGER " YO U HAV E SAID 
LOTS MOR E THA N A BRUT E SHOUL D 
SAY . COM E DOWN ; W E WIL L 
SHOW YOU WHERE TH E E L PERSO N 
TRE E IS. NO FIRE THER E NOW -
JUS T PLENT Y ROPE . COM E NIGG
EASY. W E WIL L SE E TO IT. 
(ANONYMOUS. ) 
TH E SILENT-PROTEST-PARADE. 
Atlanta, Georgia. 
HAV E read with inspiration reports of 
the "Silent Protest Parade." I think 
it is wonderful and wish that it might be 
repeated in many northern and border cities, 
then the southern cities. 
We must now very speedily become free, 
or saddle slavery upon ourselves for the 
next one hundred years. The ability of us 
United States Negroes to break the shackles 
now will answer to a large extent what will 
be the rating of Negroes the world over, and 
what will be the fate of the Negro in 
Africa, for he will necessarily become the 
great burden bearer of European exploitation after the war. Shall we make him a 
free burden bearer or a slave? 
JOH N HOPE . Men of the Month 
TH E LAT E R . L . BROW N 
A SEE R O F BEAUT Y 
RICHAR D LONSDAL E BROW N died 
of pneumonia in Muskogee, Okla., last 
month. The loss to the Negro race and to 
the world of art is very great. He was 
scarcely twenty-four years of age. He came 
to New York with his portfolio under his 
arm in 1911, and asked George de Forest 
Brush, the famous artist, "Do you think I 
can ever become an artist?" Brush looked 
at his work. "Yo u are an artist," he said. 
Mr. Brush and The National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People undertook to help the boy. Eventually he had 
an exhibition on Fifth Avenue in the Ovington galleries which netted him a sufficient 
sum to begin his studies. He studied in 
Boston and in New York, helped with the 
pageant, "The Star of Ethiopia," in New 
York, Washington, and Philadelphia, and 
then started on a trip to see what beauty he 
might find in the South. Alone and unattended, he found death in Oklahoma. 
Some of us, perhaps all of us are to blame 
that Richard Brown was not given a better 
chance to develop a gift which some of the 
greatest artists called wonderful. 
A STUDEN T 
LUCIU S LE E JORDAN , Professor of 
History and Economics at Straight 
University, New Orleans, died October 27. 
TH E LAT E L . L . JORDA N 
He was a graduate of Atlanta University 
and of Harvard University, where he took 
his degree cum laude. He was a careful 
student and a man of great force of character and unwavering probity. 
A CHIL D O F TH E UNDERGROUN D 
RAILROA D 
THE escape of William and Ellen Craft 
the Abolition agitation. Their daughter, 
Ellen Craft Crum, widow of the late Dr. 
W. D. Crum of Charleston, S. C , formerly 
United States Minister to Liberia, has recently died at Charleston. 
Mrs. Crum was born in England, educated in Massachusetts, and lived her influential and cheerful life in South Carolina. 
She was stricken with the same African 
fever that killed her husband, and after 
years has succumbed to it. 
A LEADE R O F WOME N 
MRS. FLORENC E RANDOLPH , who has 
been made president of the New Jersey 
State Federation of Colored Women's Clubs, 
is a minister of the A . M . E . Zion Church 
and president of the Home and Foreign 
Mission Society of that church. She was 
born in Charleston, S. C , and educated at 
Avery Institute. She early came to New 
York to live, and was ordained as a deacon 
by Bishop Walters in 1901. She attended 
(Continued on page 133) 
128 MBS . FLORENC E RANDOLP H FRANCI S W WAN D 
DR . C. C, JOHNSO N 
MRS . MET A V . W . FULLE R TH E LAT E MRS . ELLE N C . CRU M 
129 COUR T MARTIA L O F SIXTY-THRE E MEMBER S O F TH E TWENTY-FOURT H INFANTR Y WU S. | 
In Gift Chapel , For t Sa m Houston , Texas. Tria l started Novembe r 1, 1917 . Brig.-Gen . Gen 
Thirtee n of the Defendants wer e hanged, Decembe r 11 , forty-one sentence
130 O N TRIA L FOB . RIOTIN G AN D MURDE R O F SEVENTEE N PEOPL E A T HOUSTON , AUGUS T 23, 1917 Copyright by W. C. Lloyd 
K . Hunton , presiding;; Colone l J . A . Hull , Judg e Advocate ; Majo r Harr y S. Grie r Counse l for defense 
to imprisonmen t fo r life , and four for short terms; five were acquitted. 
131 (ABOVE ) KIN G GEORG E O F ENGLAN D REVIEWIN G TH E CHIEF S O F TH E SOUT H AFRICA N 
LABO R CORP S I N FRANCE . (SE E PAG E 145) 
(BELOW ) BLAC K TROOP S O F KINGSTON , JAMAIC A 
132 'TAINT NO NEED O' WOME N WORRIN' 133 
the Ecumenical Conference in London that 
same year, and has since preached and lectured. 
A MEA T INSPECTOR 
FRANCI S WALTO N WAN D was born 
at Owego, N . Y. , twenty-four years 
ago. He is a recent graduate of Ohio State 
University, and has just been appointed by 
the United States government as meat inspector in the Chicago stock yards at a salary of fourteen hundred dollars a year. 
A PHYSICIA N 
CHARLE S CATLET T JOHNSO N was 
born in Orange, Va., in 1860, but he 
grew up in Washington, D. C. He was 
graduated from Howard University in 1885, 
and received his degree in medicine in 
1888. For twenty years he practised medicine in Columbia, S. C , and since then has 
practised in Aiken and operated a drug 
store. He is well known among the Masons 
and in fraternal orders, and is a leader of 
the colored people in this state. 
A SCULPTO R 
MET A VAU X WARRIC K FULLE R was 
born and trained in Philadelphia. She 
won five free scholarships in succession at 
the School of Industrial Art, and then studied sculpture in Paris for three years, her 
last instructor being the great Rodin. Her 
work has been exhibited at the Paris salon 
and at The Academy of Fine Arts in Philadelphia. 
has just been presented by Loie Fuller to 
the Cleveland Art Museum. Mrs. Fuller, 
who is the wife of Dr. Solomon Fuller, a 
well known alienist, is carrying on her work 
in Framingham, Mass. 
'TAINT NO NEED O' WOMEN WORRIN' 
By WAVERL Y T. CARMICHAE L 
TAIN' T no need o' women worrin' bout 
DOSE sorry men. 
Dey jest like a paper bag w'en it's full o' 
win'. 
Dey will call us sugar pie an' will treat us 
nice 
Til l dey git us horn' wid dem fur to be dere 
wife. 
Things will go 'long very well fur a week 
or two 
Den you'll see 'em settin' 'round frownin' 
atter you; 
'Tain't no need o' women worrin' 'bout dese 
sorry men, 
Dey jest like a paper bag w'en it's full o' 
win'. 
See dem walkin' 'long wid you, holdin' to yo' 
arm— 
Don' you mind 'em, dat's a stunt, dey are 
full o' harm. 
Dey -kin tell de biggis' lies most you ever 
seen, 
An ' kin pet an' honey you like you was a 
queen. 
One caught up wid me las' night, strutin' 
wid a cane, 
Rais'd 'is hat an' gin a bow, "How'd do 
Mis' Lizer Jane?" 
I didn't axe him how he done, which wus a 
hint to him 
Dat I perfer'd a paper bag w'en it's full o' 
win'. 
You better keep yo' eyes on dem, dey'll fool 
you if dey kin', 
Den go eroun' an' make dere brag to all de 
other men; 
Dey'll come eroun' an' talk sweet talk an' 
dey won' let you res' 
But let 'em git you fur a wife, dey'll beat 
you outer bref; 
W'en you see dey ain't no good, jest let 'em 
pas' on by, 
Cause sho' as you fool 'long wid dem,—dem 
fools'll make you cry! 
'Tain't no use o' women worrin' 'bout dese 
sorry men, 
Dey jest like a paper bag w'en it's full o' 
win'. 
If I ever marry one, he sho' is got to work, 
I'll not work myself to death w'ile he set an' 
shirk; 
Many women are today sleepin' in dere 
graves 
'Cause dey work demself's to death like dey 
all was slaves. 
But w'at you think of Jacob Quinn,—he is 
mighty nice, 
An ' you kno' I's promis' him I would be his 
wife; 
Let me stop my crazy talk, I kno' I love de 
men 
If dey are like a paper bag w'en it's full o' 
win'. The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
GILBER T CHESTERTO N writes: ''For 
there is no real hope that has not once 
been a forlorn hope." 
Duffield & Co. announce "The Negro in 
Literature and Art, " by Benjamin Brawley 
of Morehouse College. 
We have received Volume 1 of the very 
interesting "Encyclopaedia of African 
Methodism," by Dr. R. R. Wright. It is a 
folio of 392 pages, containing a large number of photographs and a careful index. It 
might naturally be criticized for its not 
very critical selection of material and poor 
illustrations; but when one knows the extreme difficulty of collecting the material 
and the delicacy of the task for many reasons, Mr. Wright and his helpers are to be 
congratulated. Al l members of the A . M . E . 
Church ought to own this volume, and we 
trust that succeeding volumes will follow 
at an early date. 
"The Law of Human Progress" by Henry 
George is being distributed for fifty cents 
by The Public. 
The life of the late Bishop Turner has 
been written by Dr. M . M . Ponton in a 
small volume of 173 pages. 
"The American Jewish Year Book" for 
1918 is, as usual, full of information. It 
takes up, among other things, the matter 
of Jewish rights at international congresses, a subject of interest to Negroes. 
We have received the following letter 
from a private in Company "L " of the Sixth 
Massachusetts Militia . This colored company has recently been transferred to Camp 
Greene, Charlotte, N . C.: "They are trying 
to keep the Negro soldiers out of the Y . M . 
C. A . building, and have succeeded with the 
help of Captain Pryor! He had them bring 
over some of their things to our mess shack, 
so that we would not have to go over to 
their building. 
"Don't worry about me. Of course, there 
are some men down here that can't relish 
looking at us, but just as sure as they start 
anything with us they will come to grief. 
One of them is in the hospital now because 
he had too much mouth. He was telling 
some men of the Sixth Massachusetts how 
they were going to shoot up the 'niggers,' 
and that the Northerners were no good anyhow. He did not know who he was talking 
to, but he soon found out when they threw 
him into the incinerator. 
" A conductor got fresh with one of our 
men on the car, but two of the Maine 
Heavies on the car saw that no harm was 
done. We have a few here, the Maine 
Heavy Artillery, the Second, Fifth, Sixth 
and Eighth Regiments are all with us. They 
have informed us of the fact. We feel 
different down here, but there is nothing 
to worry about." 
SEGREGATION AND THE SUPREME COURT 
C
OMMEN T on the recent Supreme Court 
decision is not widespread but emphatic, so far as the favoring papers are 
concerned. One, of course, expects this of 
the eastern papers, like the Springfield Republican, which says that the decision is: 
Of importance not only as affecting the 
progress of the Negro race in this country 
but as strengthening a principle of our fundamental law upon which the welfare of all 
of the people depends. Right of access to 
the soil is a fundamental one; exclusion 
from it by law, whether the soil be an infertile farm or a desirable residential district, would be a peculiarly marked limitation of equal rights before the law. The 
unanimity of the Court's decision makes it 
all the more impressive, and the impressiveness is not lessened by the fact that 
the Chief Justice is a citizen of Louisiana 
—and Justice McReynolds of Tennessee. 
The Boston Herald regards the decision 
as : 
One of the most important decisions on 
the race question that the Supreme Court 
has handed down since the Civil War. 
The Christian Register, organ of the 
Unitarians, says that this is: 
The most important event in the history 
of the colored race in this country since 
the Proclamation of Emancipation. It establishes the right of a colored man to be 
a man. It confirms to him one of the fundamental rights of citizenship, the right to 
legal use of property legally acquired. It 
reaffirms what was already thought to be 
settled when slavery was abolished by Constitutional Amendment. But the belief in 
slavery and the wish to re-establish it in 
some form was not abolished. The effort 
to legalize segregation was, in substance, 
an effort to enforce slavery, and the main 
motive underneath that effort was the wish 
of members of one race to subjugate the 
members of another. 
134 TH E LOOKING GLASS 135 
Even the Brooklyn Eagle, which is not 
always square, says: 
We are glad that this decision has been 
reached without any division of the Court. 
It is pleasant to think that judges from 
the South, from the North, from the West, 
Democrats and Republicans, concur in enforcing the reconstruction rights of the 
colored people under the Fourteenth Amendment. Factional or sectional juggling with 
organic law by court interpretation is one 
of the most serious perils of any republic. 
Many of the western papers are also 
sympathetic, like the Chicago News: 
This court decision is a victory for those 
principles of liberty and democracy to 
which this republic is dedicated and for 
which Americans of all races, colors, and 
creeds are preparing to fight and die on 
European battle fields. The problems that 
arise from race antagonisms must be solved 
within the fundamental law, patiently, 
slowly, amicably, and justly. 
The far-going implications of the decision are noted by the New York Evening 
Post which says that: 
As in the case of the "grandfather 
clause" laws to disfranchise colored men, 
the Supreme Court has again shown itself 
a true bulwark of the liberties and rights 
of the colored population of the United 
States. By this last decision it has dealt 
a severe blow to those reactionaries in the 
South who seek ever to force the Negro 
into a position of inferiority and to add 
immeasurably to his difficulties of earning 
a livelihood and living a useful and respectable life. When the Berea College 
case was decided by the Supreme Court in 
favor of the Kentucky law forbidding the 
co-education of the races, it seemed as if 
this great tribunal had definitely placed 
itself on the side of those who would degrade and depress our colored citizenship. 
That decision, Justice Brewer said, made 
possible a law forbidding Jews from going 
to market except during certain hours. 
Monday's decision makes it certain that 
there will be no "reservations" for Jews 
or Negroes or Chinese, or any other of our 
racial groups. For this there are millions 
today giving profound thanks and taking 
new hope as they bear the heavy burdens 
of the disadvantaged. 
The Pittsburgh Gazette Times adds: 
Determination of this case is timely. The 
United States is engaged in a war to settle 
forever the rights of man in the world. 
America stands for liberty and freedom, 
conditions that cannot be modified by any 
considerations of race, creed, or color of 
skin. We can insist upon liberty and freedom throughout the world only if we grant 
them within our own jurisdiction. Lincoln 
said the world could not be half free and 
half bond. Nor can it be secure from equally evil caste domination if unjust restrictions are placed upon a part of the people 
because of race, creed, or color. Discrimination
will have to go, along with the crushing of 
the Prussian system, if we are to reap the 
full fruits of the victory we shall win on 
the battlefield. 
We look, of course, to the cities chiefly 
involved for significant comment. Louisville 
seems dumb; St. Louis had from the beginning a strong division of opinion, and the 
Post Dispatch is complacent: 
The demand for segregation was a property demand. In the case of Louisville, it 
was shown that for fear that some property 
would be depreciated the Negro citizens, 
comprising one-fifth of the city's population, would be crowded into one-eighth of 
the available area. This would have meant 
degradation, disease and a stimulus to 
crime. The segregated district would have 
been a menace to the whole city. 
The tendency is the same in St. Louis 
and other cities. It is a good thing that 
the Supreme Court has put an end to the 
movement. Cities cannot flourish on a basis 
of short-sighted disregard for principle and 
the rights of their citizens. 
Reedy's Mirror while satisfied wants it 
understood that Negroes are to have no 
"social equality": 
There will always be social segregation 
of Negroes and laws cannot prevent it. 
Poverty, black or white, will always be 
segregated. 
The Republic is a bit grouchy and seeks 
to turn public attention elsewhere: 
Assuming that the last word has been 
said on the ordinance, there is still much to 
be done in conserving real estate values. 
More real estate has been reduced in value 
by bad town planning than by movements 
of the Negro population. It was not the 
Negroes who made the "blighted district" 
north of Union Station, and a good deal of 
depreciation that was charged to the Negroes 
that turned a mile of Olive Street into a 
region that is always on the verge of vice 
or really vicious. 
Baltimore is angry and has made several 
silly proposals to bring the Supreme Court 
to its senses. The City Solicitor reasons 
thus: 
In other words, the Supreme Court agrees 
that a colored man may be subjected to 
the humiliation of being ordered out of a 
car, but holds a property right sacred, even 
though no damage would result from its 
enforcement, except to the neighborhood in 
which the colored man insists upon having 
a residence. 
The rock-ribbed South is, as usual under 
such circumstances, wary and watchful. 
The Charleston News and Courier thinks 
that:. 
While the decision of the Supreme Court 
would seem to settle the present impossi-136 TH E CRISIS 
bility of accomplishing race segregation in 
cities by law, the support which the idea 
has found in many cities, of all sizes and 
widely scattered, illustrates a very general 
endorsement of the idea which underlay 
these various ordinances. It would be a 
very unfortunate thing if Negroes in the 
cities whose segregation ordinances have 
been invalidated, should get the impression 
as a result of the Supreme Court's decision 
that they can run counter to this idea and 
can flout the sentiment behind it. The advisability of passing segregation ordinances 
has been doubted by many southern white 
men. There is no disagreement that the 
conditions which gave rise to these ordinances should be guarded against. We believe that this is recognized by the wiser 
Negro leadership and concurred in as well. 
The New Orleans Times Picayune says: 
The decision settles the questions at issue 
and nullifies the ordinances passed. Communities that wish to put in force any 
racial segregation will have to do it as it 
is done in Louisiana, by public sentiment 
and mutual agreement and concessions. 
As is so often the case, the real spokesman of the Bourbon fire eater is found in 
the Southerner who is writing editorials 
for the pro-German Evening Mail, New 
York City. This has the usual southern 
determination to break the law: 
The result will probably be that a way 
will be found to break the law. That is the 
fate of laws that are based upon fictions, 
shams. As the result of the civil war we 
enfranchised the Negro. We gave him 
equal voting rights with the white man. 
The poor ignorant refugees from slavery, 
tools of demagogues and corruptionists, 
bade fair to sink the South into a state of 
anarchy and ruin. The South was saved 
because the states passed voting laws which 
nullified the federal enactment. 
The Chicago Herald echoes this faintly: 
Practically, however, conditions will not 
be greatly changed. Segregation ordinances 
are a recent development. Segregation as 
a municipal custom is, however, of long 
standing. Generations before the separation of the races was crystallized into law 
Negro residence districts were well defined 
in most southern cities. The annulment of 
the ordinances will not affect materially this 
situation. Social influences will continue 
to erect barriers without the sanction of 
lawmakers or courts. 
Two papers make interesting comment,— 
one, the New York World, looks backward 
and expresses some surprise: 
It must have been easy, therefore, for the 
Supreme Court of the United States, in deciding one of these cases, to hold unanimously that as the police power had been 
exercised in this instance in violation of 
property rights guaranteed by the Constitution to whites as well as blacks it was in 
conflict with the Fourteenth Amendment, 
which speaks of life, liberty, and property. 
Yet the same court has decided over and 
over again that states and municipalities 
may separate whites from blacks in railroad 
stations and trains, street cars, schools and 
cemeteries, and the same Fourteenth 
Amendment is just as insistent upon "the 
equal protection of the laws" as it is upon 
any property right whatsoever. 
The other, the Saginaw, Mich., Courier 
Herald, looks forward, and the colored people of the United States should look with it: 
This right has been explicitly denied to 
colored men in the southern states; and 
thus far no issue has ever been framed in 
a manner to reach the Supreme Court upon 
the naked question which is at stake. The 
present decision indicates the trend of the 
Court's mind; and it is the duty of the 
colored man and his friends now to proceed 
to test the greater question. 
MASSACHUSETTS AND WEST 
VIRGINIA 
IN refusing to extradite an accused Negro, 
John Johnson, Governor McCall said to 
Governor Cornwell of West Virginia : 
"The Massachusetts statutes require that 
demands for rendition of fugitives be referred to the Attorney General for an investigation as to the legality and expediency complying therewith. The case was 
carefully heard and some unusual features 
which it possessed, and especially the suggestion that there was danger of lynching 
or of an unfair trial, led to a very painstaking and careful investigation which was 
conducted by the Assistant Attorney General in charge of requisition cases, who is 
a very able lawyer and has, also, had very 
important experience as prosecuting attorney in one of our largest counties. He has 
just made his report to me. He reports 
that the real facts of the case had been 
grossly exaggerated at the hearings before 
him and that primary sources of evidence 
which should have been resorted to before 
indictment had not been probed at all. He 
finds that exaggerated reports of the crime 
have been generally circulated in the community and that on account of the nature 
of these reports and the race of the defendant, there exists a prejudice which would be 
difficult, if not impossible, of control by the 
most upright judge. He finds that there is 
grave danger that the defendant may be 
convicted of a crime of which he is in fact 
not guilty and for which he might suffer a 
long term of imprisonment or even the death 
penalty. In view of all the facts of the 
case and what seems to him danger of a 
serious miscarriage of justice, he recommends that the defendant be not returned. 
"I have no doubt, Sir, that mob law or 
the unjust enforcement of the law would 
be as abhorrent to you as it is to the history 
of "the splendid State of West Virginia , 
which in the nobility of its origin and in 
the enrichment which it has imparted to 
our citizenship ranks among the great 
States of the Union. I have full confidence TH E LOOKING GLASS 137 
that if the case were regarded and facts 
such as have been brought to the attention 
of the Attorney General were brought to 
yours, you would take action similar to that 
which he recommends. In the history of 
some of the greatest States of the Union 
there is far too much of gross injustice and 
the denial of rights of our citizens of African descent. This surely is not the time 
when any discrimination in the administration of justice should be permitted against 
a race which is bearing its full share of the 
burdens of our social fabric and furnishing 
many thousands of men who are training 
themselves to fight for their country. When 
American soldiers are fighting upon the battlefields of Europe for the freedom of the 
world we should exercise special care that 
as far as possible injustice should be banished from our own border. The trained 
officer who has considered this case for the 
Commonwealth having reported against the 
return of the defendant, I feel compelled 
to act accordingly, very greatly as I regret 
not to grant any request made by your 
Excellency." 
The Boston Herald says : 
Since we cannot know the facts as to this 
colored man's guilt or innocence, or what 
would have happened to him had he been 
turned over to West Virginia , we can only 
discuss the question on such general lines as 
these: Does the South deserve this slight 
from Massachusetts? Was it expedient to 
administer it? Can we afford to risk provoking retaliation? To these questions we 
think the affirmative able to present some 
case. Justice has palpably broken down in 
the South, so far as the Negro is concerned. 
There may, then, be a remedial value in 
such a hint as this from the North, just as 
the migration of Negro laborers to our section has doubtless quickened the southern 
conscience to the realities of its position. 
We ought, besides, to indicate to West Virginia that her officers sent here to recover 
the fugitive cannot in our jails impersonate 
so accurately browbeaters and ruffians. 
The Buffalo Enquirer pertinently adds a 
few days later: 
Governor McCall of Massachusetts a few 
days ago refused extradition in the case of 
a Negro fugitive from West Virgini a justice, giving as his reason apprehension that 
the Negro might be lynched on arrival in 
that state. 
The Governor of West Virgini a deemed 
that action an affront to his state and it 
certainly was not giving the "full faith and 
credit" in each state "to the public acts, 
records, and judicial proceedings of every 
other state" commanded by the national 
Constitution. It was a declaration that 
West Virgini a could not be trusted to grant 
justice to the fugitive. 
West Virgini a had a right to feel aggrieved until the shooting to death of an 
unidentified Negro in the Berwind jail by 
a mob Wednesday night. The lynching of 
that Negro, though under arrest and in 
jail, proves that Governor McCall correctly 
understood West Virginia. He is entitled 
to an apology from the Governor of that 
state. 
SOUTHERN LABOR 
SIDE LIGHTS were cast on the southern 
^ labor situation at the recent meeting 
of the American Federation of Labor at 
Buffalo. The special correspondent to the 
New York Evening Post says: 
What is the actual relationship of the 
southern white man to the southern colored man, in the wage-working class? 
This question was threshed out for two 
hours, yesterday, when the delegate from 
the San Francisco Labor Council offered a 
resolution by the International Negro 
League, denouncing the treatment given the 
American Negro, especially in the South, 
and calling for fair play for him. After a 
veritable torrent of protest from delegates 
from the South, who said that the resolution 
was an insult to their section and would 
merely stir U P new antagonisms, the report 
of the committee, shelving the whole matter, was adopted. 
Delegate Murphy, of San Francisco, explained, during the outburst, that the San 
Francisco people knew little about the Negro questio
South knew about the Japanese question. 
But he had been instructed to introduce this 
resolution offered by the International Neg
that body in getting colored men, brought to 
San Francisco to break a strike of culinary 
workers, to join the strikers. 
Through the entire discussion, which was 
heated in tone whenever the South was 
mentioned, there ran an evident anxiety on 
the part of the southern men to avoid any 
further advertising of the old industrial relations between the white and colored races 
in their section. The northward migration 
of Negroes in the past two years seems to 
have effected a change in the comparative 
status of white labor at the South, and the 
southern trade unionist to have been made 
to realize that henceforth there must be cooperation in place of friendly patronage. 
The white trade unionist is not yet ready 
to restore political power to the Negro, but 
he recognizes the Negro's economic and industrial power as a portentous fact. 
The italics are ours; also, we have italicised some words from the Laundry man's 
Guide, Atlanta, Ga., which is rejoicing over 
the presence of sixty thousand soldiers: 
To handle such a deluge of new work 
necessarily involves the best kind of executive management and co-operation on the 
part of the Atlanta power laundries, but we 
believe they are equal to the emergency if 
given anything like a fair show by the 
military powers that be. Since colored help 
is so largely employed in southern laundries 
and wage and hour restrictions are as yet 138 TH E CRISIS 
an innovation, the extra help required no 
doubt will be forthcoming. In this regard 
the South is greatly favored and the southern laundry industry enjoys a rare advantage. 
PICTURES 
AN interesting exhibition of pictures by 
Negro children has been held by the 
Circle of Negro Wa r Relief at the Coady 
Gallery, Fifth Avenue, New York. Twenty-nine pictures were exhibited, done by untrained colored children varying from seven 
to thirteen years of age, and living in one of 
the poorest quarters in Brooklyn. Mr. 
Coady says in a circular: 
This exhibition of pictures by Negro 
children is held for the purpose of calling 
attention to the Negro, to his contributions 
to the culture of the past and present, to 
his service to the nation in all our wars 
and to the needs of Negro families whose 
men are now serving in the United States 
Army and Navy. 
There was a Negroid element in most 
art epochs up to that of Greece and Rome. 
It was as much the Negro influence as any 
other in Spain which E l Greco found helpful in his development from a Venician to 
the father of the Spanish school. The 
whole of modern art has been strongly influenced by the Negro. Cezanne had Negro 
blood in his veins. Picasso and Gris, both 
from Afro-Celtiberian Spain, have based 
their work primarily on the Congo. More 
than any others it was Johnson, McVey, 
and Langford who opened the eyes of 
France, which first saw Poe, to the aesthetic 
possibilities of boxing, and elevated "The 
Manly Art " to the same plane of appreciation as grand opera, over there. 
The Negro has been a vital element in 
our young culture and has already given us 
the Minstrels, the Cake Walk, the Buck and 
Wing, Syncopation—in fact all of our musical developments. What are you going to 
give him? 
E . W. Powell writes in the New York 
Evening Mail: 
That there are vast undeveloped artistic 
reserves in the Negro cannot be doubted. 
He has already given us the only distinctive 
American music, the old plantation melodies, and a notable number of French writers and artists have had the Negro ancestral strain, the Dumas and Gauguin coming 
to mind at once. He certainly has a rich 
emotional quality lacking—and perhaps 
needed—in the northern temperament, and 
amid fostering influences will produce, it is 
predicted by his champions, great regenerative poets, musicians and artists. 
Whatever his future, the presence of the 
Negro is America's great internal fact, a 
sign of which is the anthropological investigation, which has an inevitable sociological bearing, begun this fall at the Museum 
of Natural History. 
MISCEGENATION 
H E " Listener " says in the Boston 
Transcript : 
It is a curious and suggestive fact that 
1917, the year of the Russian revolution, 
is the centenary of the graduation from 
college and beginning of the phenomenal 
productivity of the phenomenal Pushkin, 
the founder of Russian literature—poet, 
dramatist, novelist, historian. Before Pushk
remarkable thing is that with all its splendid evolution in innovating styles, Russian 
literary art has never outgrown or aged 
Pushkin. " He is the first," says Professor 
William Lyon Phelps of Yale, " and still 
the most generally beloved of all Russian 
poets. The wild enthusiasm that greeted 
his verse has never passed away." The 
great five Russians, whose place in the 
world's literature is pronounced absolutely 
secure, are Pushkin, Gogol, Turgenev, Dostoev
that he took Russia out of the artificiality 
of the eighteenth century and showed the 
possiblities of native material in the native 
tongue. There is not one of the great stars 
of the Russian constellation who did not 
fervently insist that Pushkin was his inspiration. Indeed, he had a fostering hand 
in the work of all of them, from Gogol to 
Tolstoi. For the other remarkable thing 
about the Russian literature which has captivated the world is that it is all comprised 
in this hundred years from Pushkin's entrance upon the field. In the same time, 
American literature has had its noble exemplars, but it has not produced a single 
name that the world pronounces with the 
same respect it does any one of Russia's 
" great five." 
Now Pushkin—it is interesting to remember just now. while America is horrified 
and humiliated by the anti-Negro "pogrom" 
in East St. Louis—was what would have 
been called in that part of the State of 
Abraham Lincoln, a " nigger,"—that is to 
say, while he had " white " blood, his father 
having been of an old and noble Russian 
family, figuring much in history, his mother 
was a granddaughter of Peter the Great's 
favorite Negro—obviously much more than 
the necessary quantum of that magic fluid, 
which Booker Washington used to point out 
had such potency that a single drop outweighed, in this country, a whole skinful 
of the other kind. Whatever the blood 
was in Pushkin, he was a prodigy from his 
youth. A t the age of twelve, he had mastered four or five languages and was conversant with the works of Voltaire, Rousse
ing languages is quite universal in Russia 
and this almost uncanny gift is what makes 
cosmopolitanism a striking feature of the 
Russian character. The Horizon 
MUSIC AN D ART . 
MR. ROLAN D W. HAYES , tenor, gave 
a song recital at Symphony Hall, 
Boston, Mass., on November 15, before an 
overflow audience. Mr. Harry T. Burleigh, 
the composer, came from New York to accompany Mr. Hayes in the singing of a 
group of "Negro Spirituals." Mr. William 
Lawrence, the accompanist for the evening, gave much pleasure by his beautiful 
accompaniments, sympathetically played. 
The press gave splendid reviews of the concert in which emphasis was laid upon the 
singer's gift of interpretation. 
The Boston Transcript says: "Although 
Mr. Hayes never forced his voice, it was always equal to the auditorium. It is of great 
lyrical beauty, warm and mellifluous of 
tone, supple of inflection. The softer tone 
quality is finer and more stirring than the 
full and dramatic; the pitch of the highest 
notes is not infallible, but such limitations 
are not grievous. Not only is his voice remarkable, his interpretative power is still 
more important." 
C Mr. Clarence Cameron White, violinist, 
was heard lately in a number of concerts 
that included a visit to Virgini a Seminary 
and College at Lynchburg, Va., on October 
29. A very successful recital was given on 
November 2, at Baltimore, Md., for the 
benefit of Morgan College. Mr. White was 
assisted by Miss Cleota J. Collins, soprano, 
who sang numbers by Gounod, Saint 
Saens, Sanderson, J. Rosamond Johnson, 
H . T. Burleigh, and Coleridge-Taylor. Mr. 
White's offerings included Coleridge-Taylor's Ballade in C Minor, and numbers by 
Saint Saens, Burleigh, Filipucci-Hartmann, 
Lederer, Dvorak-Kreisler, Cui, and a composition of his own " A Negro Dance." 
Mr. Henry Lee Grant was the accompanist. 
C Twenty-five hundred public school children gave a community concert on November 5, at the Athletic Field of Central High 
School, Louisville, Ky . The singing was 
under the direction of Miss Mildred Bryant, 
Assistant Supervisor of Public School 
Music. The program, a diversified one, was 
attractively arranged. 
ft Mr. Kemper Harreld, violinist, of Atlanta, Ga., gave a concert at Morehouse 
College on November 23. He was assisted 
by. Miss Eleanor Stevenson, soprano, Miss 
Margaret Scureman, reader, and the College Orchestr
ft Under auspices of the Urban League of 
Savannah, Ga., a Community Music Festival was held on November 20, at the Savannah Theat
voices sang Negro melodies under the direction of Professor R. W. Gadsden. Mme. 
Anit a Patti Brown, soprano, sang the 
"Jewel Song" from Faust, and the "Mad 
Scene" from Lucia di Lammermoor, as 
well as a group of modern songs. 
C The December number of the Musical 
Observer, a New York magazine, contains 
an article on "Creole Music of America," 
contributed by Maud Cuney Hare. 
ft Mme. E. Azalia Hackley presented the 
Harlem Chorus of two hundred voices in a 
folk song festival at the Washington Irving High School in New York City, November 27. Compositions of colored composers only were rendered. 
ft Emilio de Gogorza, a baritone, sang at 
Aeolian Hall, New York City, recently. His 
program included many of the great composers. The New York World says: "But 
the audience liked best the five songs forming the third and last group, but one, especially, J. Rosamond Johnson's I Told My 
Love to the Roses,' which Mr. de Gogorza 
was obliged to repeat. In this song, which 
like those surrounding it was given in English, the singer excelled in the variety of 
his tone color and in a genuinely expressed 
feeling. The closing phrase, with its beautifully sung pianissimo high note, was beyond reproach." 
TH E WAR. 
MRS. Lottie B. Jones of Tenleytown, D. 
C , has five sons serving in the United 
States Army. Two were formerly on the 
detective force of Washington, D. C , and 
are now Captain and Lieutenant, J. W. and 
Paul W. Jones, respectively; C. A . and T. L. 
Jones are chief petty officers in the Navy; 
W. W. Jones is on an Army transport. Dr. 
William Jones, formerly in the Navy, and 
John Jones, a graduate of Harvard, now a 
railroad engineer in Brazil, are "two more 
who are willing to go anytime they receive 
139 (ABOVE ) PROPOSE D COLORE D Y , M . C . A . BUILDIN G A T ST . LOUIS , MO. , BEIN G ERECTE D 
A T A COS T O F $180,00 0 
(BELOW ) INDUSTRIA L SAVING S BAN K A T ELEVENT H AN D YO U STREETS , WASHINGTON , D . C . 
JOH N W . LEWIS , PRESIDENT : W . A . BOWIE . CASHIE R 
140 TH E HORIZON 141 
a call." Mrs. Jones is making her own 
Service Flag. Her husband, John B. Jones, 
was a lighthouse keeper at Old Point Comfort, Va . He died a few years ago. 
C Campaigns for the Y . M . C. A . Wa r 
Work has resulted in ten thousand dollars 
from forty Negro colleges and secondary 
schools. Hampton and Virgini a Institutes 
gave one thousand dollars each. 
C Major General Doyle and Public Service 
Commissioners Straus and Whitney reviewed the Fifteenth Colored Infantry, 
under Colonel William Haywood, in Central 
Park, New York City. 
C Brigadier General C. C. Ballou of the 
National Army, who was commandant of 
the Training Camp of Colored Officers at 
Fort Des Moines, will command the Ninetysecond Division of the National Army, composed entirely of colored men. This division will probably be mobilized at Camp 
Funston, Kan. The command of the division will carry advancement to the grade of 
Major General. The various units of this 
division will consist of infantry regiments 
from Illinois, Iowa, New York, and Maryland, under Colonels Caldwell, Bush, Moss, 
and Jackson. Three field artillery regiments from New Jersey and Maryland will 
be commanded by Colonels More and Austin. 
One regiment of engineers will come from 
Ohio under Colonel Brown and divisional 
trained troops from Kansas under Colonel 
Jenks. Al l the company officers from Captain down will be filled by colored men. 
C The Twenty-fifth Infantry, stationed in 
Hawaii, led all the other Army units there 
in contributions to the Liberty Loan, contributing $174,600. . 
C The Union League Club, New York City, 
had among its guests Thanksgiving Day 
one hundred and fifty Negro soldiers. 
C Mr. and Mrs. Nathan Straus, at their 
home on Thanksgiving Day, in New York 
City, dined with fifty Negro soldiers from 
Camp Upton. 
C Governor Hugh Dorsey received as his 
guests a party of Georgia's colored officers 
from Fort Des Moines, including one Captain and ten Lieutenants. 
C. Negroes all over the United States helped 
generously in the Liberty Bond Loans. 
Colored soldiers subscribed as follows: 
Twenty-fourth Regiment, $100,000; 1,290 
men at Fort Huachua, $130,350; Eighth 
Illinois, $133,200; 536 men at Bisbee, Ariz., 
$47,400; Camp Pike, Ark., $70,000; Boy 
Scouts in Philadelphia, Pa., Troop 109, sold 
$3,000 worth; through the Maryland Council of De
ers in Kansas City, Mo., $107,800; employees of the Empire, Ala., Coal Company, 
$1,550; thirteen employees of the United 
States Arsenal, St. Louis, Mo., $1,500; the 
Mutual Savings Bank, Portsmouth, Va., 
passed the $25,000 mark; The Reynolds 
Colored School, Philadelphia, Pa., $3,700; 
Anthony Richardson, a farmer in Sumter 
County, S. C , $1,000; Solomon Young, of 
the A . M . E . Zion Church, Rochester, N . Y. , 
$5,000; a colored washerwoman in Philadelphia, Pa., $250; Kansas City, Mo., 
through a special committee headed by Dr. 
W. J. Thompkins, colored citizens purchased 
$120,000 worth; American Woodmen, Den
cers from Fort Des Moines, $75,000. 
C A Rally Concert was given in New York 
City, November 25, for the American Circle 
for Negro Wa r Relief, Mrs. Emilie Hapg
were H . T. Burleigh, Burr Mcintosh, and 
Dean William Pickens; Bryce and King , 
Grace LaRue, and Abbie Mitchell. A 
United Colored Choir of one hundred and 
fifty voices, under the direction of J. Rosamond Johns
Quartet of the Music School Settlement 
gave numbers. The Circle for Negro Wa r 
Relief has headquarters at 489 Fifth Avenue, whe
year. Co-operation with the Red Cross is 
being arranged. Miss Caroline Bond is organizer. 
(L V. W. Tandy has been commissioned as 
Major in the New York National Guard, 
and appointed mustering officer. 
C The school for colored medical officers at 
Fort Des Moines, la., has been closed and 
nearly one hundred physicians and dentists 
have received their commissions. ' Six were 
sent to Camp Upton, six to Camp Dix, 
three to Camp Meade, three to Chillicothe, 
Ohio; four to Camp Grant, three to Camp 
Dodge, and forty-four to Camp Funston. 
(I The following staff has been appointed 
by the Wa r Work Council of the Y . W. 
C. A. : Miss Ev a D. Bowles, Special Representative for all Colored Wa r Work; 
Misses Josephine V . Pinyon, Special Field 
Worker; Mary E . Jackson, Special Indus142 TH E CRISIS 
Worker, South Central Field; Adele F. Ruffin, Special Worker, South Atlantic Field. 
The local workers are Mrs. A . W. Hunton, 
Girls' Work, New York and Brooklyn; Miss 
Alice Shores, Petersburg; Mrs. Hannah C. 
Smith, Camp Upton, and Miss Genevieve 
Lee, Camp Upton. 
ft Mayor James M . Curley of Boston, Mass., 
who is a candidate for re-election, and who 
offended the colored people by allowing "The 
Birth of a Nation" to be shown, has given 
a dinner at the Parker House to fifty colored 
men. 
ft Thirty colored soldiers of the First Separate Company of Maryland have bee
prison for refusing to act as hostlers at 
Camp McClellan, Ala . 
INDUSTRY. 
MANDE L BROTHERS , one of the largest department stores in Chicago, 
Ill., announces the employment of colored 
elevator operators. 
ft Colored men are being employed to run 
electric trucks in the Armour Company's 
, yards in Chicago, Ill. 
ft Custodians, janitors, and engineers of 
colored schools in Washington, D. C , have 
organized and been admitted as a branch 
of the American Federation of Labor. 
ft Miss Jennie Collins, formerly an usher, 
is now telephone operator at the Palace 
Theatre, Chicago, Ill., a position formerly 
held by white labor. 
ft A force of fifty colored carpenters were 
employed on the Government cantonments 
at San Antonio, Tex., at $6.70 a day. 
ft Negro women have replaced male baggage truckmen of the Pennsylvania Railroad 
at Ridley Park Station, Philadelphia, Pa. 
ft The American Federation of Labor at 
its Buffalo meeting recognized certain colored helpers' and laborers' unions in the 
South and authorized for the first time colored organizers. White Southern delegates 
acquiesced in the plan. 
C The Avalon Hosiery Mil l of Elizabeth 
City, N . C , is employing forty-five colored 
girls as knitters and will have one hundred girls by February 1. The girls start 
at $3.50 a week and may eventually earn 
from seven to eleven dollars, a wage far 
below union standards. 
C The Dare Lumber Company of Elizabeth 
City, N . C , is using colored women instead 
of men in its shingle department. 
ft The colored Mechanics Savings Bank of 
Richmond, Va., reports deposits of $277,-
524. Its total resources are $330,560. 
MEETINGS . 
THE State Federation of Colored Wome
Paris with one hundred and fifty delegates. 
ft The fifth conference of the Association 
of Colleges for Negro Youth met in Atlanta, 
Ga. Eleven presidents and deans of colored colleges were in attendance. 
C The fiftieth annual session of the Maryland Stat
vened in Baltimore, with over two thousand 
teachers in attendance. Unless the Legislat
teachers there is fear of many vacancies in 
the school system. A petition will be sent 
to the Governor. 
ft The sixth annual meeting of the National Leag
Negroes was held in New York City. 
ft The Albemarle Conference of the A . 
M . E . Church has sixty churches and raised 
thirty thousand dollars in the past year. 
EDUCATION . 
THE Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing C
Pa., has opened a night school for its hundreds of colored employees. They are 
taught shop arithmetic, English, manufacturing methods and materials, blue-print 
reading, and hygiene. 
ft Because of the increase of fifteen hundred Negro pupils, the Lincoln Graded 
School in St. Louis, Mo., for white children, 
has been changed to a school for Negro 
children. 
ft The Missouri Baptist Association raised 
at its recent convention twelve hundred 
dollars for Macon College, and one thousand dollars to assist needy Negro students 
from Missouri attending the Baptist Theolog
C In Baltimore, Md., the tax levy for 1918 
contains an appropriation for a new 
twenty-four room school building for Negroes 
ft Tuskegee and Hampton Institutes have 
been bequeathed five thousand dollars each 
by the late Mr. Richard Black Sewall of 
Boston, Mass. 
C The late Mr. Robely D. Evans, of Boston, TH E HORIZON 143 
C Plans are under consideration for the 
establishment of schools at all cantonments 
for illiterate Negro drafted men. 
(I Morgan College has been celebrating its 
fiftieth anniversary. Among the honorary 
degrees conferred were Doctor of Science 
upon W. A . Warfield of Freedman Hospital; 
Doctor of Pedagogy upon J. H . Lockerman; 
Doctor of Divinity upon W. H . Brooks, M . 
W. Clair, W. A . C. Hughes, J. U . King, 
and M . J. Naylor. The Governor of the 
State took part in the exercises. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS. 
A TROOP of colored Boy Scouts has been 
registered in Louisville, Ky . Dr. 
Wilson Ballard is Scout Master. 
C Utica Institute, Utica, Miss., has recently lost, through fire, its main boys' 
dormitory. 
C Out of thirty appointments by the United 
States Government as special veterinary 
assistants at the stock yards in Chicago, Ill., 
fifteen are colored. 
C The Catholic Hil l School, an institution 
for the education of colored children in 
Asheville, N . C , has been destroyed by 
fire. Ten children were burned to death and 
others injured. Three hundred children 
were in the three-story building at the 
time. 
C Samuel 0. Ozborn has built an eighteen 
thousand dollar apartment house for Negroes in the recently burned colored district 
in Atlanta, Ga. It contains eight separate 
apartments of four rooms each with bath. 
G A playground for colored children has 
been provided for in Jacksonville, Fla., by 
the city. 
C. Only six out of twelve hundred men at 
the officers' training camp at Fort Des 
Moines had any trace of syphilis. 
C Football scores are reported as follows: 
Hampton 26, Petersburg 6; Tuskegee 19, 
Morehouse 6; Union 3, Hampton 0; West 
Virgini a Institute 7, Howard 6; Union 16, 
Howard 0; Tuskegee 14, Talladega 0; Atlanta 12, Talladega 6; Hampton 7, Lincoln 
0; Lincoln 7, Howard 0; Tuskegee 20, Atlanta 8. 
G Negro citizens of New Orleans, La., have 
raised over twenty-three hundred dollars 
toward a fund for the establishment of The 
Provident Sanitarium and Training School 
for colored nurses. The Times-Picayune has 
received $426 additional. The Colored 
Trades Council, composed of carpenters, 
bricklayers, plasterers and painters, has 
offered to work one or two days free in the 
construction of the hospital. 
( Birth statistics issued by the Bureau of 
United States Census record for 1915, 12,405 bi
ing 600,821 colored people, which is a rate of 
20.6 per thousand, as compared with a rate 
of 25 for the whites. One hundred and 
eighty-one deaths of infants under one year 
of age per one thousand births were recorded for colored people, as compared with 
ninety-nine for whites. The report says: 
"It is possible, however, that the registration of births is not as complete among 
colored as among white persons and that, 
therefore, the rates shown for the former 
class are too low." 
C Mrs. Annie West and Mrs. N . Howe of 
Springfield, Mass., have secured damages 
of twenty-five dollars each against a five 
and ten cent store which refused to serve 
them at the soda fountain because they 
were colored. 
G A playground for colored children has 
been opened in San Antonio, Tex. 
C A survey of the colored people of Newark 
has been made by Mr. W. M . Ashby. Ten 
families were found with an average income of $21.90 a week out of which an 
average rental of $11.05 a month had to 
be paid. The housing conditions have been 
brought to the attention of the authorities 
and a movement for improvement is on 
foot. 
C The Louisiana Railroad Commission, 
after granting a hearing to the colored people, has issued an order directing the railroads of the State by May 1, 1918, to provide better service for Negroes who travel. 
The New Orleans Times-Picayune says that 
the "Jim-Crow" cars have been "utterly 
unfit in many cases and growing steadily 
Worse." 
C Over forty thousand cans of fruit and 
vegetables have been put up by twenty-one 
community clubs of seventeen hundred people, organized under the M . E . Church of 
Brookhaven District, Mississippi. 
G A central figure at the historical pageant 
given at Fort Smith, Ark., was Judge Robert Fortune w
prisoners. Fortune was one of many 
powerful black deputy marshals in early 
Oklahoma days. 
G Harry S. Keelan, a chemist in the re-144 TH E CRISIS 
search laboratories of the Hooker Electro-Chemical Company, Niagara Palls, N . Y. , 
would like the names of colored chemists 
and chemical engineers who would be interested in forming a national association. 
d The Circuit Court of Baltimore has ordered that the Donovan Trust Fund of 
sixty thousand dollars, yielding about sixtyfive hundred dollars a year, shall not be 
turned over to the State or to the Colonization Society. The fund was created for 
transporting Negroes to Liberia and for 
providing schools. The case will probably 
go to the Court of Appeals. 
d A community center, embracing about 
one-fourth of the District of Columbia, has 
been formed by colored people, meeting at 
the Dunbar High School. 
d The Richmond Branch of the N . A . 
A . C. P. is moving for better schooling facilities in the city. 
d A colored restauranteur at Fostoria, 0., 
has been fined one hundred dollars and 
costs and ordered to take down a sign which 
read, "Colored Trade Not Wanted." 
d It is reported that Negroes are still 
leaving Alabama for the North, especially 
around Dothan. 
d The seventy-fifth anniversary of Shiloh 
Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pa., has been 
celebrated by the installing of a new pipe 
organ which cost ten thousand dollars. The 
Reverend Mr. A. R. Robinson is pastor. 
PERSONAL. 
CAPTAI N OLLI E DAVI S of the Ninth 
United States Horse Troops, now 
stationed in the Philippine Islands, has 
been promoted to the rank of Major in the 
Second Squadron of his regiment. 
(I Miss Willie M . Hatcher, R. N. , of Decatur, Ala., and a graduate of Hale Infirmary, 
of the Emergency Hospital at Camp Sheridan. 
C Miss Ev a Burleigh, a sister of Harry 
Burleigh, the composer, and herself a 
prominant social worker, died suddenly in 
New York City. 
d Colored men were recently elected to 
office as follows: Richard A . Cooper, reelected a member of the City Council, Philadelphia, Pa.; in Englewood, N . J., Dr. 
Bergen County, on the Republican ticket; 
Thomas W. Fleming was re-elected to the 
City Council, Eleventh Ward, Cleveland, O., 
for the third time, against four white opponents; Dr. Sumner A . Furniss was elected 
to the City Council of Indianapolis, Ind. 
d Essex DeLoath, a colored man in Newport N
table, for use in hotels, restaurants and 
boarding houses. It is being exhibited at 
the Richmond Manufacturing Exhibit. 
d Talladega College, at its semi-centennial 
in November, inaugurated the Reverend Mr. 
Frederick A . Sumner as president and conferred honorary degrees as follows: Doctor of Di
William Harvard Holloway; Doctor of Letters 
Stanley Braithwaite; Master of Arts on 
Colonel Charles Young and Jefferson G. Ish. 
C Miss Ev a Mulford, a colored woman, has 
been appointed a visiting nurse for the 
Newark, N . J., Board of Health. 
d Walter F . Gerrick, a junior in the 
medical school of the University of Pennsylvania, 
admitted to membership in the Zelosophic 
Literary Society of the school, which has 
been established for eighty-eight years. 
d David LeRoy Ferguson, rector of the 
Church of the Merciful Saviour, Louisville, 
Ky., has obtained leave of absence for a 
year to do Y . M . C. A . work in France. 
d The Reverend Mr. T. J. Searty, pastor 
of the Metropolitan Baptist Church, Memp
tended by thousands. 
d Robeson, the giant colored football player 
at Rutgers College, was the hero of the 
game between Rutgers and the Newport 
Naval Reserves, and has already been 
named by certain writers for the "All-Amer
d Julius C. Johnson, Deputy Grand Master 
of the Odd Fellows, is dead at Baltimore. 
d A testimonial reception has been given 
to Dr. J. E . Moorland at Washington, D. C , 
who has finished twenty-five years as international secretary of the Y . M . C. A . 
d The remains of the late James L. Curtis, Mini
United States and funeral services were 
held in New York and Chicago. 
d Alexander C. V . Cartier, for thirty-three 
years a priest of the Episcopal Church, is 
dead at Philadelphia. 
d Dr. A . Clayton Powell of New York 
City has celebrated the twenty-fifth anni-TH E HORIZON 145 
versary of his ordination to the Baptist 
ministry. 
C A pageant was given in honor of Mr. N . 
B. Dodson, who for twenty-five years has 
been superintendent of the Concord Baptist 
Sunday School, Brooklyn, N . Y . The school 
is graded, with six hundred pupils and 
fifty-two officers and teachers. During his 
service Mr. Dodson has raised $14,335. 
FOREIG N 
THE young daughter of Samuel Coleridge-Taylor lately made her debut 
in concert in London as soprano soloist. 
One of her own song compositions appeared 
upon the program. 
C Eugene Bullard of Columbus, Ga., 
twenty-two years of age, volunteered in the 
French Foreign Legion in 1914. He was 
twice wounded at Verdun and has the 
Croix de Guerre, a much coveted decoration 
for bravery. After six months in the hospital he has enlisted in the Aviation Corps. 
C A committee, of which the Reverend Mr. 
Charles A . Tindley is chairman, and Doctor 
W. F . Graham and the Reverend Mr. W. G. 
Parks are members, is appealing for funds 
for relief of the colored people of the Island 
of Grand Cayman, B. W. I. The island was 
visited by a violent hurricane, September 
24. The property loss reached $300,000. 
Nearly all the houses and crops were destroyed. 
C News from Haiti says that the operating 
room of the new hospital in Port-au-Prince 
has been completed. Contracts have been 
made for electric light and power companies in the capital and at Cape Haitien. 
Haiti has sent to Havre, France, during 
1916: 125,124 sacks of coffee, 21,309 pounds 
of hides, 308,192 pounds of honey, 104,582 
pounds of cotton, 852,604 pounds of cocoa, 
11,827,118 pounds of campeche, and 483,958 
pounds of cotton seed. 
(I The Reverend Dr. Majola Agbebi has 
died in Sierra Leone at the age of fiftyseven. He was a native African of the 
Ijesla Tribe, was educated in Mission 
schools, and was head of the native Baptist 
Church. 
C During the recent visit of the Kin g and 
Queen of England to France they reviewed 
the African Labor Contingents. There were 
Kaffirs from various tribes, splendid looking men. Kin g George said: "I have much 
pleasure in seeing you who have traveled 
so far over the sea to help in this great war. 
I take this opportunity of thanking you 
and your comrades for the work done in 
France by the South African Labor Corps. 
Reports have been given me of the valuable 
services rendered by the natives of South 
Afric a to my armies in German Southwest 
Africa and German East Africa. The loyalty of my native subjects in South Afric a 
is fully shown by the helpful part you are 
taking in this world-wide war." 
C A reception was tendered Senor Don 
Julio Arjona of Panama in November by 
more than two thousand colored laborers. 
Among other things, they protested against 
rents which they are compelled to pay. 
Senor Arjona promised to look into the 
matter. 
(I One of the chief planters of the Island 
of Barbadoes, Alexander Ashby, has left an 
estate worth $250,000 for public purposes. 
This is the only public bequest since Codrin
CRIME . 
GOVERNO R HUG H M . DORSE Y of 
Georgia has offered a reward for the 
conviction of "night riders" who have been 
terrorizing Negro autoists. 
C A colored woman in Augusta, Ga., shot 
and killed Earl Harmon, a white private, 
for robbery. 
d In Etowan County, Ala. , Andy Mason, 
a white man, has been sentenced to ten 
years' imprisonment for the murder of a 
colored man, Walter Wafford. 
C Leroy Griggs, a white man, in Baltimore, M
Allen McLane to two years' imprisonment 
for assaulting a colored woman. 
C Wil l Henderson, a colored man, accused 
of attacking a white woman at Bradentown, Fla., w
a mob while in the hands of a deputy 
sheriff. 
C The following lynchings have taken 
place since our last record: 
Quitman, Ga., November 10, Jesse 
Staten, shot to death. A n "insolent" letter 
to a white woman was the alleged cause. 
Another Negro is missing. 
Welch, W. Va., November 22, unidentified Negro shot to death, charged with attacking a white woman. 
Dyersburg, Tenn., December 2, Ligon 
Scott, burned to death. He was accused of 
attacking a white woman. 146 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Alabam a 
443 
Alaska. 
36 
Arizon a 
201 
Arkansa s 
1207 
Californi a 
1681 
Cana l Zone 
1112 
Colorado 
471 
Connecticut 
722 
Delawar e 
229 
Distric t of Columbi a 
1333 
Florid a 
1105 
Georgi a 
1924 
Hawaiia n Ter . 
556 
Idaho 
31 
Illinois 
2843 
Indiana 
894 
Iowa 
335 
Kansa s 
1159 
Kentuck y 
760 
Louisian a 
1308 
Main e 
34 
Marylan d 
997 
Massachusetts 
1990 
Michiga n 
962 
Minnesot a 
407 
Mississipp i 
522 
Missour i 
1625 
Montan a 
160 
S4,ooo Copies of TH E CRISIS, including a second edition of 6,ooo, for December have gone to states, territories and 
foreign countries, as shown in the margins of this page. 
CIRCULATION 
FIGURES ARE 
GROWIN G 
The World Wa r is the opportunity of 
the Darker Races and The CRISIS 
should be read by millions. 
HOW YOU CAN HELP 
1 . Show your CRISIS to friends and ask 
them to give you One Dollar for a 
year's subscription. 
2. Write to us for agent's terms. 
3. Recommend to us live, wide-awake 
agents, who will devote a portion or 
all of their time canvassing for subscriptions or selling single copies. 
They can earn from $2 to $5 per day. 
4. Organize a CRISIS club of five or 
more new yearly subscribers and get 
your own subscription free. 
5. Ask your Church, Society or Club to 
help us put The CRISIS in the hands 
of the Negro soldiers. We will explain details if you write us. 
The CRISIS, a monthly magazine, is the 
organ of the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People. As 
such it fights for our rights without compromise. Constructive as well as critical, 
beautiful in picture and make-up, written 
in the King's English, it is a succinct and 
accurate Record of the Darker Races. 
Address: Th e CRISIS 
70 Fifth Avenue New York City 
Nebrask a 
234 
Nevad a 
17 
Ne w Hampshir e 
10 
Ne w Jerse y 
2223 
Ne w Mexic o 
253 
Ne w Yor k 
3751 
Nort h Carolin a 
1912 
Nort h Dakot a 
17 
Ohio 
2826 
Oklahom a 
800 
Oregon 
131 
Pennsylvani a 
5750 
Rhode Island 
209 
South Carolin a 
1664 
South Dakot a 
7 
Tennesse e 
965 
Texa s 
2277 
Uta h 
74 
Vermon t 
7 
Virgini a 
3567 
Washingto n 
342 
West Virgini a 
955 
Wisconsi n 
76 
Wyomin g 
46 
Philippin e Is. 
49 
Port o Rico 
22 
Virgi n Islands 
212 
Foreig n 
748 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E 147 CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Completes Your Life -Line 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Is the only regular old line legal reserve life insurance company 
Began operation in 1913. 
Ha s a paid in capital of $125,000.00 
Ha s additional protection to policyholders of over $130,-
000.00 legal reserve. 
Ha s insurance in force of over $5,000,000.00. 
Issues policies from $250 to $5,000 on all modern plans. 
Ha s paid policyholders since organization over $60,-
000,00. 
Ha s paid to Colored Physicians nearly $40,000.00. 
Ha s paid to agents and employees, all members of the race 
nearly $90,000.00. 
Ha s outstanding loans to Colored people secured by real 
estate amounting to $80,000.00. 
Operates in 9 States and employs 200 agents, and 36 clerks 
and stenographers in its offices. 
Is helping to bring about the economic emancipation of the 
race and deserves by its clean business methods the patronage 
and co-operation of all thinking people. 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY 
Home Office ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Mention TH E CRISI S 148 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, Inc. 
Sells Insurance That Protects 
Insurance that covers the whole field of life's emergencies in one policy: 
Sickness, Accident and Death, and perpetual in payments for disabilities. 
Of all investments that of insurance is the safest, because it pays at the 
crucial moment—it is not subject to the money market or the rise and fall 
of stocks and bonds: but pays promptly upon the death of each policyholder. 
Then why not select the best that is to be had—a policy that pays every 
week with Southern Ai d Society of Va., Inc.? Also owning and operating 
the Va . Beneficial & Insurance Co.. Inc., at Norfolk, Va . 
Read a few testimonials from the thousands that are on file at home 
office in Richmond, Va. 
DREW $217.50 SICK BENEFITS and $500.00 DEATH CLAIM 
Richmond, Va., July 2, 1917. 
To Whom It May Concern: 
This is to certify that my wife, Mrs. Lelia V. James, 1104 Chaffin Street, 
was a member of Southern Ai d Society of Va., Inc., for six and one-half 
years. During this time, she was sick on several occasions and whenever 
she reported her illness to the Society, she received her sick dues promptly. 
Her last illness extended from the latter part of November, 1916, to Tune, 
1917. The Society sent her money to her bedside each week, from December 6, 1916, to June 6, 1917, and at her death paid over to me the Death 
Claim of $500.00. 
I take pleasure in recommending the Southern Ai d Society of Va., Inc., 
to anyone who wants a sure policy of protection all through life. 
Respectfully yours, 
GEORG E JAMES . Husband. 
CLARENC E JAMES , Witness. 
$500.00 DR . THOS . A . STEVENS ' DEAT H CLAI M 
1007 Sixth St., Lynchburg, Va. 
Southern Aid Society of Va.. Inc.. February 10, 1917. 
Richmond, Va. 
Gentlemen: 
Kindly accept my sincere thanks for your check of $500.00 in full payment of death claim of my husband, Dr. Thomas A. Stevens, who died February 6, 1917. The above named check was delivered to me Thursday, February 8, 191", by your superintendent, Mr. R. D. Burton. 
I shall always speak in the highest terms of your company, and pray 
God's blessings upon the work. 
Respectfully, 
MRS . THOMA S A. STEVENS . 
Southern Aid Society of Virginia, Inc. 
HOM E OFFICE: 527 N. 2nd St., Richmond, Va . 
District offices and agencies in all the principal cities of the State. 
INSURES AGAINST SICKNESS, ACCIDEN T AN D DEATH . 
A. D. PRICE, President. THOS . M. CRUMP, Secretary. 
B. L. JORDAN , Asst. Secretary. 
Mention TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 149 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
19 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y : : ATLANTA , GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Pric e 25 cents. Send order to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street New York, N. Y. 
$25.00 PER WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"Histor y of Negro Soldiers in Spanish- American 
War " combined with "Histor y of the Negro Race." 
•00 pages, 50 illustrations. Pric e $1.25 net. 
Address: E . A . JOHNSO N 
154 Nassan Street NEW YORK 
The 
Disgrace of Democracy 
An 
Open Letter to President Wilson 
By 
KELLY MILLER 
Professor Kelly Miller has written 
a remarkable open letter to President 
Wilson .—N . Y . Evening Post. 
A constructive proposal for suppression of lynching and race riots.— 
The Springfield Republican. 
A very fair, temperate and strong 
letter on a most important matter.— 
Senator John Wesley Jones. 
Agents Wanted Everywhere 
Ioc. the Copy 
Terms to Agents: 
SC. per copy on orders over io. 
Address: Kelly Miller, 
Howard University, Washington, D. C. 
Th e twentieth session of the Georgi a 
State Farmers' Conferenc e wil l be held at 
the Georgi a Stat e College on Februar y 21, 
22, 23, 1018, Farmin g and food questions 
wil l be discussed by able experts, 
Fo r furthe r information appl y to 
R. R. WRIGHT, President 
Georgia State College, Savannah, Ga. 
Th e Poem s o f Philli s Wheatle y 
the early negro poetess collected by 
RICHAR D R. WRIGHT. JR.. and 
CHARLOTT E CROGMA N WRIGH T 
an d arrange d i n a n attractiv e volum e suitabl e for a 
birthda y gift. 
Price, One Dollar 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fift h Avenu e :: :: :: New Yor k 
GRAND 
COMBINATION 
THE A. M. E. 
CHURCH REVIEW 
Published Quarterly 
Reverdy C. Ransom, D.D., Editor 
Price $1.00 per year 
THE CRISIS 
Published Monthly 
W. E. Burghardt DuBois, Ph.D., Editor 
Price $1.oo per year 
These two publications are pleased to 
announce to the discriminating reading 
public a special combination by which a 
year's subscription to each will be sent 
to any address in the United Slates for 
$1.50. 
Address: 
TH E CRISIS 
70 Fifth Avenue New York City 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
PROF . KELL Y MILLER . 
Dean Howar d University . 
$200 per month being made, working full time. $10 per day 
being made with spare time, selling Kelly Miller's new "Progress of the Colored People." Teachers, ministers, students, 
widows, wives with spare time, anyone can make $1.00 per 
hour. IT IS TH E BIGGEST SELLE R YO U EVE R SAW. 
Everybody buys. Kelly Miller's books are in great demand. 
You should not miss haying this book yourself. We mail it 
for $1.95, postage at our expense. SATISFACTIO N GUAR ­
ANTEED , or money promptly refunded. It is easy to sell. 
Write quick for agents' proposition, a big circular and other 
people's opinions FREE . Act to-day; state whether you 
wish agents' terms. 
AUSTI N JENKIN S CO . 
A GREA T LEADER . 523 Nint h Street 
Books of Distinction 
B Y NEGR O AUTHOR S 
TH E BOOK S listed below have 
met with instant recognition at the 
hands of the foremost literary critics of the day. 
TH E MECHANICA L MAKE ­
U P follows the same high standards 
of perfection that have associated 
69 Cornhill with the best traditions 
of American book making. 
THE Y AR E DECIDEDL Y worth 
while books which you may well be 
proud to own. 
Fifty Years and Other Poems, 
by James Weldon Johnson. 
Price $1.25 
From the Heart of a Folk, by 
Waverley Turner Carmichael. 
Price 1.00 
The Message of the Trees, by 
Maud Cuney Hare (a beautiful gift book"). Price 2.00 
The Heart of a Woman, by 
Georgia Douglas Johnson . 
Price 1.25 
Postage Extra. 
The Cornhill Company, Publishers 
69 CORNHILL , BOSTO N 
Or through The CRISIS . 
Just from the Press 
"SOLVIN G TH E PROBLEM " 
Lectures of the Famous Negro Orator , the 
late Rev. Dr . M . C . B . Mason , author of 
the "Gospel Message," etc. 
Th e eight lectures in this volume include 
"Afric a in Americ a and Afric a Beyond the 
Seas," with its wonderful peroration or 
apostrophe to Afric a which is almost without an equal in the English language. 
"NAPOLEO N A T WATERLOO " 
"HEREDIT Y OR SOUR GRAPES " 
"TH E SECON D EMANCIPATION " 
Mr . Alfre d Flude , manager of the Chautauqua Association, Chicago, in the introduction writes; "Th e volume needs no comment; 
it speaks for itself." 
$1.25 postpaid 
BU Y YOU R COP Y NO W 
THE PLATFORM PUBLISHING CO. 
205 E . 50th Stree t 
THE NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY 
Contains 296 Pages, 35 Chapters, Historical 
and Biographical, 17 Ful l Page Illustrations 
Printed on Fine Antique Book, Boun d in Ful l 
Green Extr a Cloth, Gol d Titl e on Fron t Cover 
and Shelf Back. Price , net $1.25. Postage 
Prepaid $1.40. Orde r through any bookseller 
or direct from the author. Address 
JOH N W. CROMWEL L 
1439 Swann St. Washington, D. C 
Agent s Wante d To Sell Great Epic Poem To 
Hon . Frederic k Douglas s 
Historical and Epigramatic . Absorbing in interest; 
Inspiring] in effect; Epi c in subject and replete with 
incident. 
One Hundre d and Eight Verses—Illustrated. 
De Lux e Editio n $1.00. "Write for terms. 
Enclos e a 3c stamp. 
B y Dr . Iff. A . Majors, 4714 State St,, Chicago , 111. 
Mentio TH E CRISI S n TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 151 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
1227 S. 17th Street, PHILADELPHIA , PA . 
Bein g abl e to take a message rapidl y in shorthand and transcribin g it quickl y on a typewrite r wil l fit you to be of more service to Uncl e Sam than the trench-men, Me n and women 
can help win the Wa r by just knowing how to operate a typewriter . 
10,000 STENOGRAPHER S AN D TYPEWRITE R OPERATOR S AR E WANTE D A T 
WASHINGTON . D . C . A T A SALAR Y O F .FROM . $1.000»TO • $1,2001PER' YEA R 
Mr . Richar d Hill , Jr. , one of our students, was appointed last Septembe r at $1200 to 
start. Othe r students are on the eligibl e list. Tak e our Wa r Emergenc y 36-day Cours e in 
Typewriting—reduce d to $6: 9 lessons in Fingering ; 0 lessons in Letter-writing ; 9 lessons 
i n Tabulatin g and 9 lessons in Lega l Work . Ap t students operate the typewrite r blindfolded 
at the end of the course. O n Januar y 2, 1918, new classes wil l tie organized i n Stenography, 
Typewriting , Business Forms, Bookkeeping , and a Special Cours e in Junio r Bookkeeping for 
school children in the 6th, 7th or 8th Grade . W e do not teach by mail . 
W e have given 1300 colored people, fro m the South and other places, work as domestics, 
fre e of charge . If you desire work in Philadelphi a in a clerica l or domestic capacity , writ e 
us, enclosing reference s and stamp for repl y and our service wil l be rendered you gratuitously . 
EDWAR D T. DUNCAN , President. 
WANTED— A position as bookkeeper, 
double or single entry or as stenographer. Address M. M. B., in care of 
TH E CRISIS , 70 Fifth Avenue, New 
York City. 
JOH N A . DYE R 
Accountant 
Insurance , Mercantile , Systems; Audits a 
specialty. Reference—Th e Internationa l 
Accountants' Society, Chicago , 111. 
910 FAYETTEVILL E ST. , DURHAM , N . C . 
A qualified bookkeeper and stenographer, 
secretarial experience and former Civi l Service employee, excellent references, wishes position with firm in need of the services of a 
capable man. 
Address Mr . Emerson , 302 Old Telegrap h 
Building , Detroit, Mich . 
A t Last W e Hav e It! 
The housewife's friend is the Arizona 
Cook Book, by James H . Robinson. 
Th e most helpful cook book and a beautiful 
souvenir picture of the Phoenix Indian School 
will be mailed on receipt of $1.0 0 to any 
place in the Unite d States. 
Address JAME S H . ROBINSON , Indian 
School, Phoenix , Ariz . 
SUNSHIN E COTTAG E 
A Rest Home for Women 
Convalescents and Invalids Cared For 
(Mrs) Corinna M. Phillips, R. N. 
171 King Street Springfield, Mass. 
Are you wishing your friend " A Happy New Year"? Then send him a 
year's subscription to the CRISIS. 
Hand Made Natural Human Hair Wigs 
Transformations, Switches, Puffs, Plaits, 
Bangs, Coronet Braids, that can be combed the 
same as your own hair. Huma n hair for sale 
by ounce or pound. Hair NETS . 
We Carry the Largest Stock in Electric Combs. 
Mai l Order s sent to any par t of the U . S. or B . W , I. Send 2c for catalog. 
MME . BAUM'S HAIR EMPORIUM, Inc. 486 Eighth Avenue, New York City 
Betwee n 34th and 35th Streets 
TH E BO N TO N WAITER—Al l the newest ideas which the best European and 
American Head Waiters know about Serving and Waiting. Price $2.00. 
TH E BO N TO N TAILOR—Al l the newest ideas which the best Tailors know 
about Tailoring, Dyeing, Cleaning and Pressing. Price $2.00. 
436 Leno x Avenu e 
By DALLA S GURLE Y 
Twenty years catered to "New York's Four Hundred" 
New Yor k Cit y 
Mentio n T H E CRISIS 152 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Mme. BRIDGES' SCHOOL French Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring and 
Millinery- Special Courses in Designing1 
Copying, Draping, Making, Trimming , Fin ­
ishing, Cutting and Fitting. 
A PRIVATE BOARDING SCHOOL FOR SPECIAL TRAINING. Individual Instruction. 
Write for Catalog. 4221 OAKENWAL D AVENUE, CHICAGO , ILLINOIS 
// It Is For Your Lodge 
WE HAVE IT! 
W e manufacture Lodge Regalia for every 
Fraternal Society. Cash or Installment 
Plan. Cheapest Badge House i n the Country. Catalogue for your Society FREE . 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
The Negro Regalia House. JOS. L.JONES, Pres. 
N. E. Cor. 8th & Plum 
Cincinnati. Ohio 
BUST S O F 
Booke r T. Washington , Fre d Douglass, Pau l Lawrenc e Dunbar , Bisho p Eichar d Allen , 
$1.50 each. Th e 4 busts for $5.00. Agents wanted. Send at once. 
The pric e of these busts cannot remai n at $1.50 muc h longer . Orde r now. 
TH E ISAAC HATHAWA Y AR T COMPANY 
718 S. HICKOR Y ST. , PIN E BLUFF , ARE . 
LADIE S WANTE D 
Smart, ambitious, hustling women to enter business. Clear $15.00 to 
$25.00 per week. Easy—pleasant. I will show you how. 
Dr. BELL, 4709 State St., Chicago, 111. 
THE system you 
will always use 
after the first trial. 
Learn to grow and 
beautify the hair the 
Dermo way. 
19 East 43rd St. 
Chicago Illinois 
Dermo College Co. 
Makes you 
An Expert in Hair 
And Beauty Culture 
Chicago 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S TH E 153 CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
BEAUTY AND WOMEN AR E ONE 
Obtain beauty or keep it by use of our 
New Beauty (Night) Cream. Others use 
mineral oils. Our Night Cream contains 
vegetable and animal oils, more beneficial, 
more readily absorbed by the skin. Marvelous .results follow its use. Cleanses, 
soothes, and heals. Delightfully perfumed. 
75 cents per jar. 
FLORESSENC E MFG . CO. , INC. , 1919 BROADWAY , 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
WANTE D 
Every reader of T H E C RISI S to send 
for a free trial sample of 
PHYLLIS HAIR DRESSING 
AND GROWER 
and literature on the care and treatment of the hair and scalp. 
We wish to prove to your, own satisfaction that you can really make your 
hair grow long, glossy and luxurious— 
and free from dandruff. See how easy 
it is to make your hair look lustrous 
and live—and to keep your scalp clean 
and healthy. 
M . J . MILLER 
6th and John Sts. Cincinnati, O. 
W e are looking for a reliable, energetic and 
intelligent agent in each locality. Exclusive 
territory. Please say if you are interested 
in our agency when writing for sample. 
Tn e SLAUGHTE R SYSTE M Introducing 
LLYRA' S HAI R BEAUTIFIE R 
A Guaranteed Food Preparation for 
the Hair. Price 50 cents per box. 
Agents Wanted. System taught by Mai l or at College 
Mrs. E. Slaughter Gamble 
3001 LAWTO N AVENU E ST . LOUIS . MO . 
STOP! LOOK! LISTEN! 
If you would like to have a beautiful head 
of hair, try a jar of M .i u I Well' s Geranium 
Hai r Grower . A scientific scalp food and 
guaranteed preparation free promoting the 
growth of the hair. Pric e ..Oc per jar . Fo r 
sale at leading druggists 
912 Westminste r St., N . VV., Wasl ir.;ton,D.C . 
HOTE L WASHINGTO N 
First- Class Service for First- Class People 
3427 Sout h Par k Avenue , Chicago , III. 
TEACHERS A Live Agency. furnishes the 
connecting medium in a busin
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida , 
Georgia. Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Mary ­
land, Mississippi, Missouri, New York , North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island. 
South Carolina , Tennessee, Texas, Virgini a and Wear 
Virginia . 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1408 New Yor k Avenue Washington, D . C . 
100 CALLING CARDS 50 CENTS 
Calling and Business cards are good sellers at all 
seasons of the year. Libera l commissions. Write 
for samples and agent's terms. 
Th e Hous e of Chowning , Indianapolis, Ind. 
Beautiful IdlewiId 
Th e most wonderfull y idea l spot where young an d 
old cast aside for the time all the cares an d worries 
of thei r strenuous, nerve ranking routine lives an d 
romp an d play once mor e as childre n an d enjoy to the 
ful l natur e in al l he r wondrous glory. Th e waters of 
the lake an d surroundin g trout Streams axe fairl y 
teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
D o yo u enjoy bathing , boating , fishing, hunting ? 
D o you enjoy roamin g through the woods pickin g 
wil d flowers an d wil d berries ? 
D o you want a plac e to go whor e you can buil d up 
you r health, vitality, energy an d business efficiency? 
D o you enjoy minglin g with the active, thinking , 
progressive) people of the day—peopl e wh o do things? , 
D o yo u believe i n progress an d d o yo u want to J 
have a par t i n one of the most progressive move - * 
merits of the time ? Surely ! * 
Tne n yo u will be interested In. an d want to 
own a lot of your own i n Beautifu l Idlewlld , 
Michigan . If yo u act at once yo u ca n se-
 4 
cur e a beautiful lot for only $24.50 eac'.i; / 
$0.00 cash ; $1.00 per week. Whe n you r * 
payments are completed tho lot will be / 
transferred to you by a n absolute * 
warrant y deed with abstrac t showing / 
clear title. 
Good live energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company A 
1110 Hartford Bldg. 
8 So. Dearbo . i St., 
Chicago; 11. 
Mentio n The CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 154 
$1.95 Made to 
You r Order 
Special Offer jr -
to prove our fine quality: " 
The Be fine Pants for Dress or 
Business, choiceof many handsome styles, guaranteed for 18 
monthssolidwear and satisfac­ tion or MONE Y BACK , absolute $5.00 value—while they i 
last, one pairto a customer, B 
Express prepaid $[,95/, 
No Extra Charges 
No charge for Big Extreme Pee TopB or 
Cuff Bottoms, nothing extra for f ancyKelt 
Loops or Pocket Flaps, no charge for Open 
Welt Seams or Large Sizes—all novelty 
features FREE. This GOLD FINISHED 
PI N FRE E to you 
JJClaBsy. lapel pin with *^SenaWo« 
flyour first order, only a Mottea 
?few hundred on hand, get yours quick. 
A-«UD »Ali*e to y° nfortakin S
mcas ; 
V9S n rmill9ure s of relatives and 
neighbors. YoungGeorge Gekovich made 
616 in one day. Write for free samples today. 
Chicag o Tailor s Associatio n 
Dept. E 12 . S1 5 Sout h Frankli n Street . Chicag o 
The 1918 
CRISIS 
CALENDA R 
"Types of American Negroes" 
Contains an Art Cover in three 
colors and twelve additional pictures of Negro types with 
appropriate verse. 
Order now. But few are left. 
Price 25c . 
We GIVE it to YO U 
Take this fine Made to 
Measure Suit and don 
pay us one cent for 
We want you to get one of our r 
class suits, absolutely Free, Bo y 
can show it to your friends. It wi 
be a biff advertisement for us 
If you have a little spare time, 
you can easily make from 
$
35t° $50 E v
E M E K 
and besides that be th e be 
dressed man in your town. It's 
opportunity you cannot afford 
overlook. Don't delay a minut 
Write for this Big Offer at Once 
Drop us a line or send us your name 
o n a postal card and we wil l send 
you absolutely Free, our wonderful 
Btyle book , containing dozens of samples and fashion plates to chooB e from. 
Write Now. Everything sent Free 
and postage prepaid. 
TH E PROGRES S TAILORING CO . 
Dept. 981, CHICAGO 
T .Ui,„ m . /Centra l 104-W Telephones: [ mi n fi, 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
1607 Williamson Buildin g Cleveland, Ohi o 
GEORG E A . DOUGLA S 
Counselor- at- Law 
800 Broad Street, Globe Building, Rooms 603 and 604 
Office'Phone, 3297 Mulberr y KHMIJADV M I 
Residence 'Phone, 5277-M Marke t NEWARK , N. J . 
Genera l Practic e Notar y Publi c 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLO R -A T -LA W 
818 Metropolitan Lif e Buildio f 
Minneapolis Minn . 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
Offices: Suit e 802 Syke s Block 
Nea r Thir d and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn . 
Tel . 54 J7 For t HM1 Cabl e Address, Epbe n 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNE Y AM P COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
14 School Street Boston, Mass 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbi e Hawkin s George W . P . McMeche n 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
ATTORNEYS.AT-LA W 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore , Md . 
Patents secured on easy terms 
Writ e for particulars. 
JOS. H . STEWART , Attorney-at-Law, 
494 Louisian a Ave. , N.W. , Washington , D . C . 
DR . KAPLAN , Inc. 
OPTICIANS 
531 Lenox Ave., New York 
Telephone Greeley 4214 Established 1911 
BRANIC' S 
New York and Brooklyn Express 
Daily Trips to Harlem 
212 WEST 35th STREET 
ANDRE W J. BRANI C New York City 
DOLL S BEAUTIFUL COLORED JOINTED DOLL S 
18 inch doll undressed wit h dark hai r $2.00 
12 inch doll dressed, withou t hair , $1.00 
Sent prepaid to any address i n the Unite d 
States. Send 10c in stamps to help cover 
postage. Term s strictl y cash wit h al l orders. 
Otis H . Gadsden, 30 Churc h St.. Roo m 439, 
Ne w Yor k City . 
LEAR N TH E S. T. TAYLO R SYSTE M 
of Garment Cutting, Fitting, Designing, Draping, Embroidery, Hand Decoration of Garments, Dressmaking and Ladies' Tailoring. 
Terms reasonable. Write for Catalog 
S. T. TAYLOR SCHOOL AND PATTERN PARLORS 
Mrs . Maybe l B . Evans, Prin. 
34 N. Garfield Avenue Columbus, O. 
Mention TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS Book mart 
You can orde r through the CRISIS an y book printed at 
the regular publisher's price. 
"The true University of these days is a collection of books."—Carlyle. 
A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL . (Mary White Ovington) $1.0 0 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPH Y OP A N EX-COLORE D MAN . . (Anonymous). 1.20 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
TH E LIF E AN D TIME S O F BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (B . F . Riley) 1.50 
A NARRATIV E O F TH E NEGRO . (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOUL S O F BLAC K FOLK . (W . E . B . D U Bois) 1.25 
TH E WHIT E MAN' S BURDEN . (T . Shirby Hodge) 1.00 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTOR Y O F TH E NEGRO . (B . G. Brawley) 1.25 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMAT H O F SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIF E AN D WORK . (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 
JOH N BROWN . (W . E . B . D U Bois) 1.25 
NEGR O I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W . Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W . Crawford). . 1.00 
TH E HAITIA N REVOLUTION . (T . G. Steward) 1.25 
NEGR O CULTUR E I N WES T AFRICA . (George W . Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO . (W . E . B . D U Bois) 6 0 
TH E EDUCATIO N O F TH E NEGR O PRIO R TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACT S O F RECONSTRUCTION . (John R . Lynch) 1.50 
LIF E AN D LETTER S O F COLERIDGE-TAYLOR . (W . C . BerwickSayers) 2.2 5 
POEM S O F PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T O F TH E HOUS E O F BONDAGE . (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
BOOKE R T . WASHINGTON . (Emmett J . Scott and Lyman Beecher 
Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address, TH E CRISIS , : : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York Advertising 
There are twelve million Negroes in the United States. 
They spend a thousand million dollars every year. 
TH E CRISIS reaches more Negroes with intelligence 
and money than any periodical in the world. 
If you have anything to sell which these people want 
advertise it in TH E CRISIS. 
Remember that if our rates seem high it is because our 
service is exceptional. If you want testimonials 
to this, Write us. 
Circulation — 55,000 
Beaut y fo r Wome n 
CLEAR , SMOOT H SKI N 
-PERFEC T HAI R 
FRE E FRE E 
Famous Deluxe Beauty Book, illustrated 
and complete. Sent to you postpaid free 
of charge. Tells all about the Kashmir 
Way and describes the wonderful methods 
which hundreds of women are using to get 
A Kashmir Girl pretty skin and hair. You can do the same. 
5 or 1 0 minutes a day caring for your skin and hair the Kashmir 
Way will bring wonderful results. You Won't Know Yourself in a 
few days. 
WRITE TODAY DON'T SEND ANY MONEY 
KASHMIR CHEMICAL CO., Dept. K 
4709 State Street Chicago, III. 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 