The Easter CRISIS 
April, 1913 
10 ten cents a copy No . 4 Specia l Bugg y only $65.0 0 
HIGHES T GRAD E 
A Value Unequaled. Sold on $1.00 Profit Margin . 
FRO M FACTOR Y T O USE R 
Writ e for prices and othe r styles. Send for Catalogue . 
C. R. PATTERSO N & SONS, 
GREENFIELD , OHIO . 
MILE S M . WEB B 
Chicago's Expert Photographe r 
I specialize in every phase of artisti c pictur e making . 
Send me your photos for enlargement. Price s reasonable. 
Satisfaction guaranteed. 
WEB B STUDI O 
3519 State Street Chicago, Ill. 
Swell, Nifty Suit 
FREE ! 
Get in Quick! 
Most marvelous tailoring offering ever made . B e ou r salesmanage r in you r town—$25 0 a 
month . Enoug h coin to fill your 
pockets. Nift y suits for you to 
wear—AL L FREE . Mak e $60 to 
$75 a week selling our nifty 
suits. It's easy! Order s turne d 
over to you. N o experience, no 
money necessary. 
W E PA Y EXPRES S 
ON EVERYTHIN G 
Yo u pay nothing — absolutely 
nothing. EVERYTHIN G guaran ­
teed, too. 
Write—Hurry! 
Send a postal card right away for this great 
free offer. Neve r anythin g like it. 
Ge t our book of beautiful samples 
an d ful l particulars —al l free . 
Yo u assume no obligations whatever, so write at once. 
America n Woole n Mills Co . 
Dept. 451 Chicago , Ill. 
Made $30 First Day 
B. Basha. of Bell Island, Newfoundland, did this with our 
CHAMPIO N 
Minute Photo Machine 
Tha t beginners make such profit 
at the start, shows that no experienc e is needed i n this wonderful money-making business. 
Robt. Bock, Willow Hill . Pa . took 
in $35 in one day. Vernard Baker, 
Holbrook, Neb.. $29.90. Jas. F.Wende. Ashton. Idaho, 
$26. C.V . Lovett, Ft. Meade, Fla. , made $50 in one day. These 
testimonials are just a few of many hundreds we have on file. 
Pictures in Post Cards and on Buttons all the rage 
at Fairs. Carnivals. Picnics, Resorts, Schools. Depots, Factories, on Streets—anywhere—everywhere. 
Our Champion Camera takes pictures size 2 1/2 x 3 1/2, 
1 3/4 x 2 1/2 and buttons. Finishes complete photo in 30 
seconds: 200 an hour. No dark room. Easiest, quickest, 
biggest money-maker known. Small investment. About 85c 
profit on each dollar you take in. Be your own boss. Write at 
once for Free Book. Testimonials and Liberal Offer. 
AMERICA N MINUT E PHOT O CO . 
2214 Ogde n Ave. , Dept . E39 6 Chicago , Illinoi s 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
Price 
$7.50 
Up TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D 
PEOPLE . A T 26 VESE Y STREET . NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Edited by W . E . BURGHARD T D u BOIS , with the co-operation of Oswald Garrison Villard , 
W . S . Braithwaite, M . W . Ovington, Charle s Edwar d Russell and others. 
Contents for April, 1913 
DEPARTMEN T HEADINGS . Drawn by Lorenzo Harris. 
CENTE R PAG E DECORATION . Drawn by Louise R. Latimer. 
ARTICLES 
Page 
EASTER—EMANCIPATION . A Poem 285 
TH E MA N WH O WON . A Story. By Harry H . Pace 293 
TH E BLAC K HALF . By Jacob Riis 298 
DEPARTMENT S 
ALON G TH E COLO R LINE . 267 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 274 
OPINIO N 276 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 296 
TH E BURDE N 300 
LETTER S 301 
TE N CENTS A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Whe n a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your 
subscription is desired. Th e date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the 
wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 264 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
State summer school for colored 
teachers. Fourteent h annual 
session begins June 23, 1913, and 
continues five weeks. Board, 
lodging and fees for the session, 
$14.00. Limited accommodations. 
Send $1.00 in advance and reserve room. Fo r catalo g o r 
further information address : 
STAT E SUMME R SCHOO L 
Agricultura l and 
Mechanical College 
GREENSBORO , N . C . 
Southern Business College 
BIRMINGHAM , ALA . 
Da y and night school, teaching Shorthand, Type ­
writing , Business English , Business Arithmetic , 
Bookkeeping and preparin g for Civi l Service . A 
high-grade commercial school with competent instructor s and healthy surroundings. Th e only Negro 
school of its kin d in the world . Fo r catalogue and 
furthe r information address 
Southern Business College 
4th Avenue and 15th Street 
W . J . ECHOLS , Principa l 
J . P. BOND , Secretary-Manage r 
Send your buy South—the land of Opportunity . 
Th e Prairi e Vie w State Norma l and Industria l 
College of Texas. E . L . Blackshear , Principal . W . 
C , Rollins, Treasurer . Largest State institution for 
colored youth in the Unite d States. Excellent 
literary, scientific and industria l advantages. Ex ­
penses low—idea l climate—new buildings. 
Fo r particular s address: 
H . J . MASON , Secretary 
Prairi e Vie w Walle r County , Texa s 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
A n Episcopa l boardin g and day school 
for girls, under the direction of the Sisters 
of St. Mary . Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
609 N. 43d St. W . Philadelphia, Pa. 
Fisk University 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 H . H . Wright, Dean 
Thoroug h Literary , Scientific, Educationa l and Socia l Scienc e Courses. Pioneer 
in Negr o music . Specia l study in Negro 
history. 
Idea l and sanitary building s and grounds. 
Well-equippe d Scienc e building . 
Christia n home life. 
Hig h standards of independent manhoo d 
and womanhood . 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School, Nor ­
ma l School and College, with manua l trainin g 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduate s of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth , Smit h 
and Wellesley. Forty-two years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universall y successful. 
Fo r furthe r information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, Hig h School, Gramma r School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage . Expense s very reasonable. 
Opportunit y for Self-help. 
Fall Term Begins September, 1913. 
Fo r information address 
President R. W . McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum . 
A Theologica l Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological seminaries. 
A n Academy , with manual training , giving a 
preparation for life or for college. 
Th e positive mora l and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of class 
work, its fine new buildings and well-equipped 
laboratories and librar y prepar e a faithful student 
for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY , President 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 265 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
16 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A . G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
A NARRATIV E of 
TH E NEGR O 
By Mrs. Leila Amos Pendleton 
A comprehensive history of the 
Negr o race from the earliest period 
to the present time ; told in pleasin g narrative style ; may be read 
and understood by children. Boun d 
in cloth and illustrated. 
Address: Price $1.50 
MRS . L . A. PENDLETO N 
1824 11th Street, N. W. , 
Washington, D. C. 
HEAVE N AN D HELL 
Swedenborg's great wor k on the life after 
death, 40 0 pages, onl y 1 5 cents postpaid. 
Pastor Landenberger, Windsor Place, St, Louis, Mo. 
A Race Between Two Straits 
A Ne w Boo k on Labo r Union s and Ba d 
Politician s by Rev . W . B . Reed, 
Newport, R. I. 
Th e book shows that labor unions are the 
greatest menace to-day to America n manhood and freedom. Read the book and 
kno w the truth. Pric e 25c. Sol d by Th e 
Crisis. Agents wanted everywhere. Writ e 
REV . W . B . REE D 
Newport - - - - R. I. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
B y James F . Morton , Jr., A . M . 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon 
champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity 
for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. 
Belongs in the librar y of every friend of social 
justice. Pric e 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAME S F . MORTON , JR . 
244 West 143d Street New York , N . Y . 
$
5 
Brings Oliver 
Typewriter 
Send $5 for The Olive r Typewriter—the 
machine will come a-flying. The newest 
Model—No. 5—the regular $100 machine— 
with no extra charge for Printype. 
Fo r the price of a good fountain pen you 
secure the World's Greatest Typewriter. Yo u 
can pay the balance at the rate of 17 cents a 
day. 
This irresistible "$5 offer" is sweeping everything before it. The era of universal typewriting is coming. The triumph of the typewriter over primitive pen-and-ink has been 
brought about by the same machine that 
introduced visible writing. 
The 
OLIVE R 
Typewrite r 
The Standard Visible Writer 
This is the typewriter whose high efficiency has 
made it the choice of the greatest firms and corporations. It is the simplest of all standard typewriters, yet the swiftest and by far the most 
versatile. Th e moving parts work freely in a solid 
metal framework, making the machine so strong 
that the hardest usage has no effect upon it. 
No Extra Charge for 
"Printype' 
Most people prefer to have the machine equipped 
to write in Printype . This beautiful type is obtainable only on Th e Olive r Typewriter. 
It is the greatest style improvement ever evolved 
for typewriters—the most easily read type in existence—the type which conforms to that in universal 
use on the world's printing presses! 
Win Success with the Oliver! 
Th e Olive r Typewrite r aids success-seekers in a 
multitude of ways. Th e real-life stories of achievement that center around it would fill volumes. 
N o matter what your work may be—in office, 
store, shop or home—The Oliver Typewriter will 
prove itself a great convenience and an actual 
money-maker. 
It stands for order and system and success. It is 
the visible evidence of the progressiveness of its 
owner. Youn g people with brains, ambition and 
Olive r Typewriters are succeeding everywhere. Can 
you afford to let $5 stand between you and success? 
Sen d fo r Specia l Circula r an d Ar t Catalo g 
Ful l details regarding the 
Olive r Easy-Purchase-Plan, 
beautiful catalog and a 
specimen letter written in 
Printype will be sent you 
on request. 
Le t this $5 offer awaken 
you to your need of Th e 
Olive r Typewrite r and the 
ease with which you may 
own it. 
Remember—$5 only and on 
comes The Oliver Typewriter ! Sales Department 
(206) 
Th e Olive r Typewrite r Compan y 
310 Broadwa y NE W YORK , N . Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
F 
0 
R 
B 
1 
R 
t 
H 
d 
A 
y 
S 
F 
o 
R 
E 
Y 
E 
R 
Y 
D 
A 
Y 266 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
COLORED MEN 
MAK E BI G MONE Y A S 
Train Porters or 
Sleeping-car Porters 
Let us prepare you for and assist you in 
getting one of these good paying positions. 
Experience unnecessary. Enclose stamp 
for application blank and book; state position preferred. 
I. RAILWA Y G. I. 
Dept. K. Indianapolis. Ind. 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements Jul y and August. 
Bo x 25, Wilberforc e Universit y 
Wilberforce , O. 
Reddick's World's Greatest 
Polishing Mitt 
(Wit h a Protected Tip ) 
FO R POLISHIN G AL L METALS , SIGNS , PIANOS , 
FURNITURE , GUNS , HARNESS , AUTOMO ­
BIL E BODIE S LAMPS , HARDWOO D 
FLOORS , ETC . 
Full y Protects the Han d Saves Tim e and Labo r 
A n incomparabl e duster for the household. A 
combination shoe polisher second to none. 
Ca n be used 
with or without 
oil or polish. 
Mad e of special 
tanne d lamb's 
wool on the hide, 
thoroughly cleaned and combed of 
all grit. Wil l not scratch the finest surface. A 
household wonder that simplifies housekeeping. Fits 
either hand and will last a long time of hard usage. 
Adopted by the Pullma n Company for porters' 
use on the best trains and used in the best hotels, 
office buildings, theatres, garages, furnitur e houses; 
on dining cars, ocean liners, yachts and thousands 
of households because it's the best practical polishing device on earth. 
B y mail postpaid 25c. each (stamps or currency). 
Special prices to large users. 
A splendid proposition for agents. Writ e to-day 
for particulars. 
J . E. REDDICK 
1028 South 17th Street Philadelphia, Pa. 
OF INTERES T TO 
VOCA L STUDENTS 
Tone Placing and 
Voice Development 
Practica l method of singing for 
daily practice , based upon artistic 
principles, together with a carefully prepared numbe r of exercises. 
Fro m "Musica l Courier, " N . Y. : 
A ver y practica l little book is 
"Ton e Placin g and Voic e Development, " b y Pedr o T . Tinsley . It 
contains some very excellent material and vocal 
exercises, and should be in the hands of all vocal 
students. 
WORD S O F APPRECIATIO N 
I offer yo u the heartiest possible endorsement 
of your work, which I believe to be the most complete course of the kin d that has ever come 
unde r my notice.— Glen n Dillar d Gunn , Chicago 
"Tribune. " 
Fro m "Musi c News, " Chicago, Ill.: Accordingl y 
his "Practica l Metho d of Singing " is a most concise and practica l little manual, containing many 
valuable vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be 
helpful to all ambitious vocal students. 
CANNO T FAI L O F GOO D RESULT S 
Th e work is especially commendabl e because it 
treats in a clear and systematic manne r all the vital 
points so essential to the student, makin g it easy 
for hi m to advance to the highest point of 
development.— Geo. I. Holt, De s Moines, Iowa. 
PRIC E $1.00 
Address the publisher : 
PEDRO T. TINSLEY 
6448 Drexe l Avenu e CHICAGO , ILL. 
This Handsome Suit 
FREE to Our Agents 
Writ e to-day . B e the one i n your town 
to get this astounding tailoring offer. A n 
offer to give yo u the swellest suit you 
ever saw FREE ! Bu t you must hurry . 
W e want a representative i n you r tow n 
right away. W e wil l star t yo u i n a bi g 
mone y - makin g business o f you r own — 
FREE ! Plent y of mone y an d plenty of 
nifty clothes—for YOU — i f you write A T 
ONCE ! N o mone y nor experience 
necessary. 
We Pay All Express Charges 
Yes, we pay everything. Yo u take no 
risk. Just take orders for our fine clothesmade of the most beautiful fabric s an d 
i n the latest, classiest styles. Kee p your 
present position an d make 
$50.00 to $100.00 A WEE K 
on the side, or go into the business 
righ t an d make $3,000 to $5,000 a 
year. PARAGO N clothes sell like wild ­
fire. Agents swamped with orders on 
NE W plan . Nothin g like it anywhere, 
our swell samples an d complete outfit for 
going right out to take orders. Ge t our WONDERFU L NE W 
OFFE R right now. W E PA Y AL L CHARGES . Send a postcard NOW—whil e this great offer is stil l open. Don't delay— 
WRIT E TO-DAY . 
PARAGO N TAILORIN G CO . 
Dept. 451 Chicago, Ill. 
Th e Pau l Laurenc e Dunba r Calenda r 
Fo r 1913 
It is a seven-pag e calendar , wit h a n autographe d 
portrai t o f th e autho r on th e cover . Th e insid e 
page s contai n six illustrations , aroun d whic h ar e 
appropriat e verses . 
£§ T Thes e calendar s ar e sold fo r th e benefi t of th e 
Wilmingto n (Delaware ) Settlemen t House , 
Addres s Pric e 35 cents, postpaid 
TH E DUNBA R COMPAN Y 
26 Vesey Street New York City 
to-da y for 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISI S 
Vol. 5. No. 6 APRIL, 1913 Whole No. 30 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 
POLITICS . 
THE woman's suffrage party had a hard 
time settling the status of Negroes i n 
the Washingto n parade. A t first Negro 
callers were received coolly at headquarters. 
Then they were told to register, but found 
that the registry clerks were usually out. 
Finall y an order went out to segregate them 
in the parade, but telegrams and protests 
poured i n and eventually the colored women 
marched according to their State and occupation without let or hindrance. 
<J N o direct reference to the Negro was made 
in President Wilson's inaugura l address, but 
Negroes wil l read the followin g passages with 
interest: 
"This is the high enterprise of the new 
day : To lift everything that concerns our life 
as a nation to the light that shines from 
the hearth fire of every man's conscience and 
vision of the right. It is inconceivable we 
should do this as partisans; it is inconceivable we should do it i n ignorance of the 
facts as they are or in blind haste. W e shall 
restore, not destroy. W e shall deal wit h our 
economic system as it is and as it may be 
modified, not as it might be i f we had a 
clean sheet of pape r to write upon, and step 
by step we shall make it what it should be i n 
the spirit of those who question their own 
wisdom and seek counsel and knowledge, not 
shallow self-satisfaction or the excitement of 
excursions whithe r they cannot tell. Justice, 
and only justice, shall always be our motto. 
"This is not a clay of triumph ; it is a day 
of dedication. Her e muster not the forces 
of party, but the forces of humanity. Men's 
hearts wait upon us; men's lives hang i n 
the balance; men's hopes call upon us to say 
what we wil l do. Wh o shall live up to the 
great trust? Wh o dares fail to try ? I summon all honest men, all patriotic, all forward-looking men, to my side. Go d helping 
me, I wil l not fai l them i f they wil l but 
counsel and sustain me." 
<J A t the recent Democratic primar y in 
Moberly , Ala. , the Southern system was 
partially put into use. Al l white men, whether 
Republicans or Democrats, were allowed to 
vote, but Negroes were barred unless they 
were vouched for as regular Democrats. 
<I The effort within the Republican party 
to eliminate the Southern representation i n 
party conventions is still being discussed. 
Southern Democratic Congressmen are very 
enthusiastic for it. 
*] Plans for the complete organization of 
Negro Progressives were discussed recently 
in Washington and Philadelphia . 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
T
H E Frederick Douglass Memoria l Hospital of Philadelphi a is raising $8,000 
for a nurses' home. 
•J A bulletin on age and marriage conditions 
has been issued by the Unite d States census. 
The age statistics of the colored population 
are as follows: 
1910 
Al l ages 9,827,763 
Under 5 years 1,263,288 
5 to 14 years 2,401,819 
15 to 24 years 2,091,211 
25 to 44 years 2,638,178 
45 to 64 years 1,108,103 
65 years and over 294,124 268 TH E CRISIS 
The percentage of Negroes i n the older 
age groups is smaller than among the whites, 
due partl y to a higher death rate, but also 
probably to a higher birth rate among the 
colored people. The high infant mortality 
among colored people is shown by a smaller 
proportio n under five. 
The percentage as to marriage for 
Negroes 15 years of age and over is as 
follows: 
Single—Male , 35.4; female, 26.6. Mar ­
ried—Male , 57.2; female, 57.2. Married , 
widowed or divorced—Male , 64.0; female, 
73.1. Widowe d or divorced—Male , 6.9; 
female, 15.9. 
Colored people marry at a somewhat earlier 
age than the whites, but have also usually 
a larger percentage of the widowed. 
The 12,000 colored Masons i n Georgi a 
have been licensed by the State to do a fra ­
ternal insurance business. They support the 
orphan home and industria l school and have 
i n their insurance fund $68,346. 
<J Houston , Tex., has a $15,000 colored 
librar y nearly ready for tenancy. There are 
rooms fo r children, reference, lectures and 
trustee meetings. The architect was W . S. 
Pittman , of Washington , D . C. It has 
20,000 volumes. 
*I The second colored branch librar y of 
Louisville , Ky. , wil l have a buildin g to cost 
$17,000, a gift of Mr . Carnegie. The $5,000 
already raised is for the site. 
^ The Nationa l League on Urba n Conditions has undertaken to handle "the bigbrother movement" i n the case of colored 
boys i n Ne w Yor k City . It has already had 
fifty-one cases. 
*3 The baseball team of Wilberforc e Uni ­
versity wil l make a Southern tri p this spring, 
playin g white colleges i n Ohio and colored 
schools in Kentucky , Alabama and Georgia. 
<J A n athletic carniva l was held among the 
colored students of Washingto n at Convention Hall . Amon g the schools represented 
were Howard , Lincol n and Hampton , besides 
many Northern high schools. 
ECONOMICS . 
T H E Mutua l Housin g Company , of 
Springfield, Mass., has been organized 
to suppl y good tenements fo r colored people 
and to encourage investments i n real estate. 
They own property to the value of $12,200, 
and have recently declared a dividend of 5 
per cent. 
*2 The Colored Stenographers' Association 
has been organized i n Ne w Yor k Cit y for 
securing employment and mutua l benefit. 
*J The Nort h Carolin a Mutua l and Provident 
Association, a colored industria l insurance 
company, had a gross income of $313,576 for 
1912, an increase of $50,000 over the previous year. 
*I The Knoxvill e Bankin g and Trust Company, a white institution, recently went into 
the hands of a. receiver and hundreds of 
colored people lost their money. Negroes are 
thinkin g of opening a bank of their own. 
Al l the officials have been arrested and held 
i n heavy bond. Lawso n Irvin , a Negr o contractor, swore out the mai n warrant. 
«I The Seullin-Gallaghe r Steel Foundry , of 
St. Louis, Mo. , one of the largest steel plants 
in the world , employs several thousand 
colored men i n its shops. Negroes are to 
be found workin g i n all but three of its departments. The wages pai d Negroes run 
from $1.75 to $6 pe r day. No t a few 
Negroes have learned the trade i n this 
foundry and are now foremen of their 
departments. 
*J The method of land tenancy i n South 
Carolin a is thus described by the Columbi a 
State: 
" A lawye r i n Greenville or Columbi a buys 
150 acres twenty miles from his office at $6 
an acre, or $900. H e leases it to a Negro 
for 1,500 pounds of lint cotton a year, worth, 
at 10 cents a pound, $150. The Negro buys 
a mule, mortgaging it to the seller, and 
mortgages his crop to a merchant. The 
merchant takes long chances and demands big 
profits fo r advances. Sometimes both land 
owner and merchant lose everything, but 
in 'good years' their returns are excellent. 
The land owner has a fine investment i f he 
collects his rent once i n two years, $63, after 
the payment of taxes, being 7 pe r cent, 
on his investment." 
«I I n Toronto, Canada , G . W . Carter, a 
colored man has had the shoe-shining concession i n the Unio n Depot for seventeen 
years, and manufactures shoe blacking which 
is widely sold. J . F . Gregor y has a store and 
imports and sells ladies' and children's hats 
and dresses. Mrs. Decoursey, a colored 
woman, has been employed i n the Woolworth store for four years as timekeeper. 
^ Balaytown , Ark. , is settled by Negroes. It 
has three stores, a canning factory and a saw-ALON G TH E 
mill , and expects a brickyar d soon. Good 
farmin g lan d around about can be bought 
fo r $15 an acre. The Unio n Industria l 
School is to be located there. 
«J The Frederic k Douglass Center, of 
Chicago, has been tryin g to widen industria l 
opportunit y fo r colored people by appealin g to business men. Man y business men 
have responded. 
Juliu s Rosenwald, who led the movement 
fo r the establishment of colored Y . M . C. A . 
organizations, wrote : 
" I keenly feel the injustice against the 
colored man, and have fo r some time past 
been makin g efforts to convince some of the 
head men of Sears, Roebuck & Co. of our 
duty i n that direction. " 
Irwi n S. Rosenfels, advertising manager 
fo r Sears, Roebuck & Co., wrote : 
"It wil l interest yo u to know that I 
recently have secured a favorable expression regarding the admission of colored apprentices from shop chairmen of three 
different labor unions employed i n our printin g plant. " 
«! Farmers' Bulleti n No . 516 of the Unite d 
States Department of Agricultur e tells of 
the remarkable intensive farmin g of Samuel 
McCall , a colored man of Alabama : 
"Determinin g upon concentrating his 
efforts upon a small area of land, he selected 
two acres near his cabin and has been devoting time and energy to that small tract 
for the past twenty-one years. His first 
effort was to improve the organic content of 
the soil. Practicall y everything produced by 
the soil, except the lint cotton and a portion 
of the seed, was returned to it. Al l the 
manure produced by his horse and two cows 
was used, but no commercial fertilize r except 
a little cottonseed meal under oats. Gradu ­
all y the soil was made deeper by plowin g 
until i n a few years it was open and porous 
to a depth of ten or twelve inches. 
"B y 1898 the lan d was producing seven 
bales of cotton to the two acres which had 
first made about two-thirds of a bale each. 
This ex-slave took up seed selection early 
and produced a high yieldin g strain, known 
locally by his name, as Sam McCal l cotton. 
H e has practised crop rotation durin g the 
past few years to advantage. H e plants 
one crop whil e another is maturing, thus 
keeping the land always occupied, getting 
a crop each of oats, corn and cotton from the 
same ground i n one year. The goal of his 
COLO R LIN E 269 
ambition is to raise nine 500-pound bales of 
cotton on one acre; he has already succeeded i n raising a 506-pound bale on a 
measured eighth of an acre. In one year 
he has produced, from one acre, three bales 
of cotton, fifty bushels of oats and fifty 
bushels of corn, according to this account." 
I n Empire , Wyo. , there are eight colored 
families. They have a public school and 
a Presbyterian Church. Fou r of these 
families have deeds to near 900 acres of 
land ; all families, save one, have homesteads of 320 acres each. 
<J I n the town of Gering, Western Nebraska, 
a prospective white juror, hailin g from 
Southern Texas, was objected to because he 
acknowledged that i n a case of colored men 
against white men he could not give an 
unbiased judgment. The case was that of 
Speese Brothers (colored) versus Nicholls 
(white), claiming $6,000 damages for cattle 
alleged to have been unlawfull y taken by 
Nicholls. Judgment was rendered fo r the 
plaintiff. 
*! I n St. Louis, Mo. , white stablemen have 
struck because of colored competitors, and 
i n Dallas, Tex., white chauffeurs tried to 
drive out the colored men until the owners 
armed their employees. 
EDUCATION . 
GOVERNO R BLEASE , of South Caro -
lina , has vetoed a compulsory schoolattendance bill . 
1 The Phelps-Stokes trustees have appropriated $10,000 for an endowment of a 
visitation fund at the white Peabody School 
in Tennessee. The purpose of the fund is to 
keep the officers, teachers and students of 
the school i n close touch with the actual work 
of Negro educational institutions. 
*3 The New Orleans courts have decided that 
the bill to remove the Southern University, 
a colored institution, from the city is 
unconstitutional. 
*J The Virgini a Negro State Teachers' Association has been meeting in Norfolk . There 
were 400 delegates i n attendance. 
*? The General Educationa l Boar d is offering 
to provide a salary of $3,000 a year for 
a State supervisor of Negro rura l schools i n 
certain Southern States. There have been 
several Negro applicants, but white men 
have been appointed i n Florid a and i n 
Arkansas. 270 TH E CRISIS 
*J Anothe r colored Greek-letter school fra ­
ternity, known as the Kapp a Alph a Nu , has 
been organized at the Universitie s of Indian a 
and Illinois. 
<I The Florid a Agricultura l and Mechanica l 
College, at Tallahassee, has opened a new 
hospital and nurses' trainin g school. 
1 Robert Biggs, an uninfluential school commissioner i n Baltimore , has made an 
abortive attempt to reduce the curriculum 
of the colored high school. Anothe r demagogue is proposin g "Ji m Crow " street cars. 
MEETINGS . 
THE new Andre w Memoria l Hospita l has 
been dedicated at Tuskegee Institute. 
The hospital cost $50,000 and on the occasion 
of its dedication visitors from the Nort h and 
East were present. Fro m Chicago Juliu s 
Rosenwald took a number of distinguished 
persons. Ell a Flag g Young , superintendent 
of the Chicago publi c schools, said while i n 
Tuskegee that she was interested i n men and 
not in separate races. 
Dr. Aaro n Aaronson , director of the 
Jewish Agricultura l Experimen t Station i n 
Palestine, said : 
"Wha t is the use of the intensification of 
race differences and race qualities? I do not 
believe there are superior or inferior races, 
but different races. There are superior or 
inferior individuals, but the claim of inherent 
race superiority is a conceit. I feel sure that 
the worl d is the richer and the man is the 
better when we tr y to brin g out in every race 
and every individua l the qualities and the 
energies they are best fitted to develop." 
*3 A State commission is investigating the 
affairs of the Negro Expositio n Compan y i n 
Philadelphia . It is said that the New Jersey 
people have decided to hold their celebration 
within the State. 
* A mass meeting of 2,000 persons i n the 
Metropolita n Church , Washington , D . C , 
passed resolutions opposing "Ji m Crow " 
legislation. They pointed to the fact that 
they pai d taxes on $40,000,000 of real estate 
and that the proposed legislation was designed to degrade, in the eyes of the civilized 
world , one-fourth of the inhabitants of the 
national capital. They said, among other 
things: 
"Whereas, W e colored people of the 
Distric t of Columbi a i n mass meeting 
assembled, believe that after two and a half 
centuries of slavery an d a half century of 
mob violence and insult that we have suffered 
enough. 
"1 . Resolved, Tha t we protest most 
emphatically against the attempt to promote 
the growt h of a local sentiment fo r the 
segregation of the races i n the street cars of 
the nationa l capital. 'Ji m Crow ' cars are a 
cheat. They do not afford equal accommodation. I n all cases wherever local circumstances force a readjustment of the space 
prescribed fo r the races the colored people 
suffer. 'Ji m Crow ' cars are plainl y i n viola ­
tion of the fundamental principle s of the 
law of the common carrier, a principl e which 
even the Supreme Court cannot square with 
the leading cases of the common law of Eng ­
lan d and of this country. 
"W e further protest against the enactment of a 'Ji m Crow ' car law because only 
a reactionary group seeks to introduce here 
customs of commonwealths i n which the 
Fourteenth and Fifteent h Amendments are a 
dead letter, and where the spirit of liberty is 
suppressed. 
"2. Resolved, That we protest against 
the railroadin g through the Hous e of Rep ­
resentatives of a miscegenation law as an 
invasion of the most sacred of individua l 
rights. Besides drawin g a color line based 
on racia l prejudice, it is clearly unconstitutional i n that it prohibits people of sound 
mind, prope r age and good mora l character 
from exercising their common-law rights to 
eider into the marriage status. 
"Whil e the avowed purpose of the bil l is 
to preserve the purit y of the white race, it 
ignores indiscriminat e sexual relations between the races, leaves woma n unprotected 
against the bruta l advances of vicious men 
and promotes domestic tragedies that are a 
blight upo n our so-called Christian 
civilization. 
"3 . Resolved, That we beg leave to call 
the attention of those who are advocating 
this proposed discriminatory legislation to the 
fact that the colored people were induced i n 
large measure to drop part y lines i n the 
recent presidential canvass and give their 
support to the first candidate since the Civi l 
Wa r from the South, whose triump h seemed 
a concrete illustration of the fact that sectiona l lines were obliterated; a candidate 
who himself expressed surprise that there 
could be the slightest distrust on the part of 
any citizen as to his security i n the exercise ALON G TH E 
of politica l rights so fa r as he himself was 
concerned. Hi s incoming ought not to be 
embarrassed by reactionary measures and 
their advocates, especially at the seat of the 
nationa l government." 
*I Farmers' conferences of colored people 
have been held at Lan e College, Jackson, 
Tenn., and at Demopolis, Ala . 
<I A t the Nationa l Federation of Religious 
Liberals recently held at Rochester, N . Y. , 
the cause of the Negro was discussed by the 
Hon . Joh n E . Milhollan d and Mrs. A . W . 
Hunton . 
PERSONA L 
THE centenary of the birth of Davi d 
•"• Livingstone was celebrated by Lincol n 
Universit y on Marc h 7. The address for the 
occasion was delivered by Mrs. Pau l 
Laurence Dunbar. 
• Grace Morris Hutten , of Omaha, Neb., 
has completed the three-year advanced 
teacher's course i n Bellevue College i n one 
year and a half, and has received a State life 
certificate. She is the only colored woman 
who ever attended this college. 
Q Mrs. Mar y Churc h Terrell, of Washington , 
D . C , has delivered a second course of lectures on the Negr o race i n the Unite d States 
at the Brookly n Institute. 
<I A memoria l troph y committee, of which 
Dr . Louis E . Baxte r is secretary, is collectin g money fo r a troph y i n honor of the 
late Joh n B . Taylor, Jr. The priz e wil l be 
competed fo r each yea r until won three 
times by one club or college. 
f$ Dr . J . W . Hawkins, a colored physician of 
Dawson , Ga. , was the first to report meningitis i n that city. The white city physician 
an d a colleague declared that the cases were 
not meningitis and finally sent to Atlant a for 
experts who confirmed Dr . Hawkins' diagnosis. Dr . Hawkin s owns a drug store, an 
automobile and considerable real estate. 
«3 Davi d J . Gilmere , a colored captain i n 
the Spanish-America n War , returned to his 
home i n Greensboro, N . C , and went into 
business. First he started a grocery store, 
then a dru g store, barber shop and a 
restaurant. H e also owns a 100-acre farm. 
<! Fre d R . Moore , publisher of the New 
Yor k Age, has been confirmed by the Unite d 
States Senate as ministe r to Liberia . H e 
was nominated by ex-President Taft and wil l 
COLO R LIN E 271 
hold office until his successor is appointed 
by President Wilson . Moor e was formerly 
messenger for a downtown bank. 
*j James Hammond , an Oyster Ba y (N . Y. ) 
Negro, has died leaving an estate worth 
$30,000. H e was 70 years old and could 
not read or write. 
*J Dr . S. S. H . Washington , a practising 
physician of Montgomery, Ala. , well known 
throughout the State, died recently. 
<I Dr . C. H . Turner, the colored biologist of 
the Sumne r Hig h School of St. Louis, Mo. , 
recently delivered three lectures before the 
Academy of Science i n that city on bees, 
ants and wasps. 
<J The Righ t Reverend Henr y M . Turner, 
senior bishop of the Africa n Methodist 
Church, has retired from active church work 
at the age of 80. 
* A modern Catholi c church and school for 
colored people has been erected at Atlanta , 
Ga. ; it is a three-story buildin g of brick and 
stone, valued at $16,000. 
I n Richmond , Va. , a Catholi c college for 
the higher education of Negroes has been 
established. It has industria l departments. 
< The new Bethel Methodist Episcopa l 
Churc h i n West 132d Street, New Yor k City , 
has been begun. It wil l cost $75,000. 
MUSI C AN D ART . 
THE sum of $2,250 is needed by Jul y 
•*• 1 to keep the residence of the late 
Samuel Coleridge-Taylor from being sold. 
It is proposed that the colored America n 
admirers of Mr . Taylo r and his work should 
raise this money. TH E CRISIS would be very 
glad to give further details to persons in ­
terested i n this project. 
<J Mrs. Mau d Cuney Har e and Mr . Willia m 
H . Richardson, of Boston, Mass., are givin g 
concerts i n Texas. 
<I The choral society of the Washingto n 
Conservatory of Musi c (Harr y A . Williams, 
director) gave a choral concert, assisted by 
Feli x Weir, violinist, on Februar y 2, at the 
Howar d Theatre, Washington, D . C. The 
soloists were Misses Jeanne Kelly , Al| a B . 
Scott and A . Lillia n Evans, soprani; Miss 
Enol a McDaniels, alto; Mr . Adolp h Hodge , 
bass. 
I n keeping wit h the Sunday concerts of 
serious purpose inaugurated this winte r i n 
New Yor k and Boston, the Washingto n Con -272 TH E 
servatory of Musi c is makin g the Sundayevening concerts a new feature of this 
season's work. 
The second publi c concert was given on 
Marc h 1. The choral society presented Miss 
Dais y Tapley, of Ne w York , i n the comic 
opera "Mikado. " The dances were under 
the direction of Miss Theresa Lee. 
* A Victrol a has been purchased by the 
Teachers' Chora l Society of Louisville , Ky . 
The instrument wil l be used i n all of the 
schools of the city as a medium of acquaintin g the pupils with the best music. 
*J Dr . W . E . B . D u Bois gave a lecture on 
America n Negro folk songs, assisted by Mr . 
Harr y T. Burleigh , baritone, on Sunday 
afternoon, Februar y 23, at the Ethica l 
Cultur e meeting house. The lecture was 
given under the auspices of the Musi c School 
Settlement fo r Colored People. 
* Miss Claric e Jones, pianist, of Washington , 
D . C , and Mr . Rolan d W . Hayes, tenor, 
of Boston, Mass., presented a program at 
Andre w Ranki n Memoria l Chapel, of How ­
ar d University , Washington , D . C , which is 
deserving of mention. Mr . R . Wilfre d Tibbs, 
the excellent pianist, was the accompanist. 
Miss Jones is a graduate of the Ithaca Con ­
servatory of Music , of New York . 
*J Since there are no librar y facilities for 
the colored people at Paris, Tex., the 
Gibbons colored high school of that city, 
through concerts and lectures, has provided 
for the school a well-chosen librar y of 1,400 
volumes, a piano and eighteen instruments 
for the use of the boys' brass band. 
1 "Majors and Minors, " one of the earliest 
of Pau l Laurenc e Dunbar's books, is quite 
rare and is being quoted by dealers at $7.50. 
*5 The musical and historical pageant, celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of emancipation, was given at Carnegie Hall , New York . 
It was entitled "Histori c Scenes at 
Hampton. " 
FOREIGN . 
DR. LEO . FROBENIUS , of the German 
Centra l Africa n exploration expedition, 
has obtained some remarkable terracotta 
wor k from West Afric a and has found some 
unknown ruined cities. 
•3 Prof. Carl Pearson, lecturing i n London , 
declares that all white races are evolved from 
colored races. 
CRISIS 
*I The financial report of the island o f St. 
Lucia , B . W . I., shows a prosperous condition. The revenue amounts to $360,000, 
which was $15,000 more than the expenditure. 
TH E GHETTO . 
CLEVELAN D G . ALLE N has been 
^ unearthing discrimination i n the navy 
against colored sailors. H e reports that 
colored men who enlist i n the navy are 
barred from all social lif e aboard the ships; 
as, fo r instance, smokers, entertainments and 
the privilege of the librarie s and reading 
rooms. Colored men are only received fo r 
enlistment i n the messmen branch and get 
no chance fo r promotion except to stewardship—an d the steward does not rank as a 
petty officer. The Negr o is deprived of the 
regula r system of shore leave and i n other 
ways so treated that the few that enlist 
desert whenever opportunit y offers. There 
are a very few colored petty officers and seamen who enlisted durin g the time of the 
Spanish-America n War . They are fo r the 
most part isolated i n out-of-the-way places. 
*J None of the new set of intermarriage bills 
have yet been passed i n the North , but all 
sorts of desperate expedients are being used. 
Forge d petitions from alleged colored organizations have been distributed i n Ohio ; defeated measures have been reintroduced in 
Kansa s and Iowa , and a bil l was sneaked 
through the nationa l Hous e of Representatives durin g the absence of two-thirds of the 
members. I n the State of Washingto n a bill 
prohibitin g intermarriage between white and 
colored races, except where both are citizens 
of the Unite d States, has been passed. It is 
aimed at Asiatics. 
* The colored fire company o f Durham, 
N . C , was disbanded as soon as the new 
fire-engine house was finished. 
* "Ji m Crow " street cars have been proposed 
i n Illinois and Delaware . 
< A segregation ordinance is proposed i n 
Atlanta , Ga . 
COURTS . 
THE case of Dr . W . J . Thompkins, of 
Kansa s City , Mo. , against the railroad 
company fo r ejection from a Pullma n car is 
to be carried to the Unite d States Circuit 
Court. 
*3 I n Atlanta , when six Negroes were called 
to trial, it was found that the warrants upon 
which they were arrested were forged. They ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 273 
ha d all pai d bogus bonds. Ten men have 
been arrested i n connection with the scandal. 
*J The publi c service commission of Mary ­
land has ordered that the B. , C. and A . 
Compan y provide, on its trains operated 
from Claiborne to Ocean Cit y and on its 
trains operated elsewhere in the State, accommodations for colored passengers which 
shall make no difference or discrimination i n 
quality or convenience of accommodations i n 
the cars or compartments set aside fo r white 
anil colored passengers. 
That whenever a car is set aside for colored 
passengers the same may be divided by a 
substantial partition so as to furnish a smokin g compartment for colored men, provided 
that the number of colored passengers is not 
sufficiently large to give them a just claim 
to an entire smoking car instead of such a 
smoking compartment. 
<3 I n Alabama it is solemnly declared that a 
white officer with a Negro prisoner can ride 
either i n the white car or the colored car. 
<2 I n Massachusetts it has been decided that 
an owner has a right to advertise his 
property as for sale to colored people. 
CRIME . 
THE followin g lynchings have taken 
place since our last record : 
A t Elysia n Fields, Tex., two colored men, 
for horse stealing. 
A t Andalusia , Ala . (where several Negroes 
have been lynched i n the past and postcards wit h the scenes published), a colored 
man was lynched fo r shooting a white 
woman. 
A t Cornelia , Ga. , two colored men were 
lynched fo r killin g a policeman. 
A t Manning , S. C , a Negro boy was shot 
to death fo r assault and battery on a white 
man. 
A t Drew, Miss. , a Negro was lynched (by 
a mob said to be colored people) for murder. 
A t Lyrtis, La. , a colored preacher was 
lynched. H e owed a white merchant $10. 
The merchant demanded his pay, but the 
colored man di d not have it. The merchant's 
friends attempted to whi p him. The man 
resisted and was killed . 
«J A t Cla y City , Ky. , one of four Negroes 
charged wit h murde r is believed to have 
been lynched. 
«J One of the lynchers of the mob that 
lynched the wron g man at Houston , Miss. , 
has committed suicide. 
<J A bill to legalize lynchin g has been in ­
troduced into the South Carolin a legislature. 
*I On account of the race riots at Collierville , Tenn., one white man and two colored 
men are dead. 
A white man in Memphis, Tenn., has been 
found guilty of wantonly murdering a Negro. 
H e was sentenced to twelve years in the 
penitentiary. 
I n Augusta , Ga. , a prominent white man 
remonstrated with another white man who 
was whippin g a Negro. The prominent white 
man was killed. 
The reign of terror in Nort h Georgi a continues. The homes of three Negroes were 
recently dynamited. 
<J Frederic k L . Hoffman, who distinguished 
himself some years ago by predicting dir e 
calamities to the colored race, has declared in 
a letter to the New Yor k Times that lynching 
is decreasing. H e bases his conclusions upon 
these figures: 
Lynchings per 
Numbe r of 1,000,000 
Lynching s Population 
1885-1889 762 2.58 
1890-1894 944 2.88 
1895-1899 702 1.95 
1900-1904 537 1.36 
1905-1909 385 0.88 
1910 74 0.80 
1911 71 0.76 
1912 64 0.67 
1885-1912 3,539 1.69 
H e adds the followin g table: 
LYNCHING S B Y STATES . 
1908-1912 
Rate per 
Numbe r of 1,000,000 
States Lynching s Population 
Florida 40 10.63 
Georgia 74 5.67 
Mississippi . . . 46 5.12 
Louisiana 33 3.98 
Alabam a 30 2.81 
Arkansas oo 2.81 
Texas 45 2.31 
Tennessee 23 2.11 
South Carolina. .. . 15 1.98 
Kentuck y 22 1.92 
Oklahoma 14 1.69 
West Virginia . . 3 0.49 
Virgini a 4 0.39 
Missour i 6 0.36 
North Carolina. .. . 3 0.27 
Illinois 4 0.14 
Ohio 2 0.08 
Ten other States have each had a single 
lynching i n this period. A JUROR . 
BEATRIC E REAM S BALL , of Seattle, 
Wash. , is the second colored woman to 
serve as a juro r i n the State of Washington . 
Mrs. Bal l was educated i n the publi c schools 
of Denver, Col. , and at the Elms, Spring ­
field, Mass. She returned to Denve r and was 
there appointed to a clerkship in the 
MRS . B. R. BALL . 
recorder's office, a position which she held 
for three years with credit. She moved to 
Seattle, Wash. , i n 1904. 
I n 1910 the constitution of the State of 
Washingto n was amended so as to give 
women the right of suffrage, and since that 
time women have been serving on juries i n 
all the courts of the State. No t until this 
month di d the most populous county, King , 
select fo r jur y service a colored woman, and 
that woman is Mrs. Ball . She is now sitting 
as juro r i n the court of Seattle. 
TH E PASSIN G O F 
JAME S EDGA R FRENCH . 
JAME S EDGA R FRENC H di d not distinguish himself to any great degree as 
a man of letters. Death claimed him just 
as he was about to enter upo n his lif e work 
as poet and writer. Bu t manuscripts and 
writings which he left show that he possessed 
talent. 
Mr . Frenc h was born at Paris, Ky. , in 
1876, and died at Chicago, Ill., Jul y 31, 1912. 
Afte r finishing high school at Paris, he 
taught school in the rura l districts of Ken ­
tucky, and i n 1901 was a member of the 
faculty of the State norma l school at Frank ­
fort. A t his death he was i n the government 
service in Chicago. 
Fro m his youth he was a close and devoted student of the best literature, particularl y poetry. Amon g his unpublished 
manuscripts there are essays, poems and a 
novel upo n which he spent several years, 
and which he was rewritin g at the time of 
his death. 
A n article of some length on the fourth 
annua l meeting of the Nationa l Association 
for the Advancement of Colore d People, setting forth "what it is, what it aims to do, 
its method, wit h a few of the things it has 
accomplished in the three years of its existence," was probabl y his last single literary 
effort; for he died just three months after 
that meeting was held i n Chicago last April . 
W e close wit h a line from "The Winge d 
Ideal" : 
" I woul d have yo u observe also that a 
man's success i n lif e ma y be measured not 
MEN OF THE MONTH ME N O F TH E MONT H 275 
TH E LAT E J . E . FRENCH . 
by the place he holds i n the eyes of men, 
but by the approva l he wins from his own 
conscience. An d this approva l wil l be i n 
proportion to the honor and reverence which 
a man is able to pay to his life's ideal. " 
A HUMA N DOCUMENT . 
I WA S born October 5, 1880, in a one-room 
cabin floored by the bare ground. I 
lived the first twelve years of my life i n a 
narrow valley at the foot of a big hill which 
guards the waters of the Coosa. I was 
licensed to preach at the age of 12 and 
soon became known as a "boy preacher." I 
rhymed, whined or "whanged" to such an 
extent that the good old folks soon thought 
that I was a fit subject for ordination. 
Wherefor e at the age of 16 I began the 
pastorate of two big country churches, each 
havin g more than 300 members. 
Durin g these four years of pastoral work 
I recited and wrote many crude things (I 
don't know where nor how I learned anything—I was never taught). A t the age of 
20 I went to a Methodist theological 
seminary and remained there fo r nearly three 
years. I was not graduated because the 
Baptist pastors persuaded me to "leave the 
Methodist school without a diploma. " I 
spent three years in Chicago and St. Louis 
preaching, writing , working . Whe n I left 
the West I went to a colored university i n 
the South, where I spent seven years i n 
academic theological and college departments. 
Durin g all these years 1 accumulated bales 
of manuscripts, from which trash I expect to 
untangle some time a worthy book of stories 
and poems. Whil e in college I was editorin-chief of a paper for three years. M y 
poems and stories appeared in its columns 
each week. The paper had a large circulation 
in the city, hence it was not long before I 
was called "Dunba r the Second. " Man y 
papers have published some of my writings. 
M y success in the pastorate here has been 
good. The opinion of the best people added 
to what I have previously achieved has made 
me believe that I could stand wider public 
notice. So you see that I resist the temptation no longer when 1 send yo u my "cut " 
and some selections from my "rhymes, " 
expecting them to appear in TH E CRISIS. I 
hope that you wil l find space for a few lines 
of commendation. It wil l prove stimulating 
and encouraging to me and wil l probably 
help me to become what I never could become 
without your help. 
" A HUMA N DOCUMENT. " OPINION 
TH E ARM Y Army and Navy Journal 
publishes a translation of an 
article in the Frenc h Revue Militaire 
Generale, which says, among other things: 
"Takin g everything into consideration, we 
cannot place the number of privates of the 
line, worthy of that name, above ten or 
twelve per company, according to the testimony of the experts. W e must, however, 
make an exception i n the case of the Negro 
regiments, which number i n the ranks many 
re-enlisted men, and therefore have a large 
proportion of well-disciplined and welltrained soldiers. They have indeed given 
proof of this, and particularly i n the 
Spanish-America n War . Mor e than once i n 
Cub a the honor of the day has, i n justice, 
been due to them. I have personally seen 
the Negro infantr y i n Colorado and a regiment of black cavalry i n Vermont ; all these 
'colored soldiers,' as they are called, were 
well built and well set up. They had a 
militar y bearing very unusua l in the 
America n army, and they woul d have taken 
an honorable place i n the ranks of Europea n 
troops. " 
This testimony is further strengthened 
by a letter from the Secretary of Wa r from 
the mayor of an Arizon a town, who says: 
" I wish to give honor to whom honor is 
due; therefore I wish to state officially, as 
the mayor of this town, that Troops I, K 
and L , of the 9th U . S. Cavalry , have been 
stationed at this place for several months, 
and their actions have been perfectly 
exemplary i n this town, and there has never 
been the slightest cause for any trouble for 
our peace officers." 
Smal l wonder that the Unite d States is 
not anxious to get ri d of its black troops. 
NEGRO 
music . 
The Lo s Angeles Times says i n the 
editorial columns: 
"It may be news to some, but the 
wave of ragtime at present sweeping 
Americ a (also, by the way, washing out considerable starch from the Britis h composition) is really a triump h fo r the colored 
race. Eighteen years ago ragtime was started 
i n Americ a and fo r good or il l it has now 
become an institution. It was really introduced by a Negro named Wil l Cook, a 
splendid musician, as so man y Negroes are. 
Cook started it wit h a libretto by Pau l Dun ­
bar, whose face was as black as his lines 
were brilliant. The piece was played under 
the direction of Edwar d E . Ric e on the roof 
of the New Yor k Casino. Onl y eighteen 
years ago; and this Africa n renaissance has 
captured the human race ! 
"Th e prevalence of the mino r key is 
another sign of its primitiv e origin ; all untutored races naturall y express themselves 
in minors. The rollickin g exuberance of the 
rhythm is the America n note dominating the 
origina l stock. Presently some expert will 
take the commonness out of ragtime and it 
wil l take its place among legitimate musical 
compositions. 
"Alread y it is influencing classical music. 
Dvorak's symphonies and humoresques are 
only sublimated ragtime. Ye t they could 
be played not inappropriatel y on a church 
organ. The extollers of Wagne r are i n reality 
praisin g ragtime raised to a dramati c height. 
I n fact people generally are beginning to 
think and talk and act i n ragtime. Every ­
thing is being syncopated, even conversation and politica l speeches. W e talk either 
i n shorthand or ragtime. It is a sign of the 
lyri c age brought about by America n bustle 
and America n optimism. It fits i n naturally 
wit h the motor ear, the wireless and the 
aeroplane. 
"Old-fashioned conservatives naturally 
fight this innovation, but the younger generation is sweeping all before it. I n exclusive 
restaurants ragtime has been discarded as 
an aid to digestion—the process of mastication at least needs slowin g down, not speed-OPINIO N 277 
ing up. Bu t it is crowding out the graceful 
walt z and the glidin g two-step from the dance 
floor; it is monopolizin g light opera and 
pushin g its wa y into the realms of the 
classical. The Salvation Arm y has long employed it to start religious revivals among 
the uncultured. A n excellent work. Prob ­
ably the name of Wil l Cook wil l be known 
to posterity. Ragtime has come to stay." 
The Richmon d Times-Dispatch, commentin g on an article i n the New Yor k Age, says: 
''This is as encouraging as is the statement 
that the Negroes still reverence the old folk 
songs and that a society called 'The Frogs' 
is industriously at work collecting them. W e 
add to these hopeful signs the fact that Joh n 
Powell, of Richmond , pianist and composer 
of note, has used Negro themes i n one movement of his violi n concerto, played recently 
i n New Yor k fo r the first time by Efre m 
Zimbalist. The South is keenly aware of the 
musical value of such origina l motifs. It 
seems not unlikely that the native genius of 
the Negro fo r melody wil l be reflected by 
composers of both races i n their endeavors 
to reflect the manifol d spirit of America . 
Negro and India n survivals are all we have 
of what may be called origina l music. The 
Times-Dispatch does love the old songs, but 
it also believes they may be molded into 
richer and more strikin g esthetic forms that 
wil l answer to the hopes expressed by the 
Age i n this paragraph. 
"Negr o music is not dead—far from it— 
and it is yet to enjoy the patronage of the 
public. The intentions of the Times-Dispatch 
are of the best, but it, wit h other Southern 
papers, has the fault of idealizing the Negro 
of slavery days, as well as all things relative 
thereto. W e who believe i n race progress, 
while thinkin g kindly , and some of us affectionately, of what has been, find greater in ­
spiration, interest and hope i n the things of 
to-day and to-morrow—things more material 
and which have a more conspicuous bearing. " 
m 
It is not often that a Negro paper 
MURDER . _ . x , • , 
in the South speaks out plainly , 
and particularl y the Southwestern Christian 
Advocate, which is apt to be overconservative i n its comments; but lynchings i n these 
last days have aroused the editor: 
"A s a matter of fact, every Negro walks 
upon 'sinkin g sand' and can scarcely count 
a day his own. Eve n the most conservative 
and peaceable and the most humble, i f they 
were to recognize insults and infractions, 
would be the chief cause fo r headlines i n 
the daily press. It is against this stifling, 
threatening atmosphere which we breathe, 
that we utter a protest. W e impart a secret 
of the Negro's heart life when we say that, 
i n spite of the Negro's accumulation of prop ­
erty, which aggregates now more than seven 
hundred million of dollars, no little of this 
has been accumulated with misgivings. Often 
i n famil y council the debate is whether it is 
worth while or not to purchase property, 
and i f property is purchased may it not 
have to be sold at a sacrifice on an order to 
move out, and under the most distressing 
circumstances. It is the atmosphere of lynching and the absolutely reckless disregard of 
the Negro's life and the powerlessness of the 
government to protect the Negro that concern us. 
"Le t our readers listen while we make 
good our contention: 
"W e know of a Methodist preacher who 
desired a change of appointment because 
he preached against illicit relations between 
white men and colored women. A daredevil of a white man placed his hand upon 
the shoulder of this man of Go d and threatened him wit h death i f he dared open his 
mouth on that subject again. An d this was 
not the first Negro to be intimidated at this 
particula r place. 
" A good friend of ours was bullied and his 
lif e threatened the other day by an underlin g i n a ticket office, simpl y because this 
friend of ours, when questioned concerning 
a mileage book, answered 'yes,' instead of 
'yes, sir.' This friend was not at all impolit e 
or ill-mannered i n his speech, for he is a 
polished, Christia n gentleman. Bu t the 
underling wanted it understood that a 
'Nigger' must say 'yes, sir,' or pay the cost. 
An d this is not an isolated instance of the 
kind . 
"W e have, on our desk, a note signed by 
one of our ministers, which tells of the shooting of two Negroes; one was seriously 
wounded and the other killed outright because, it was claimed by a young white man, 
the Negroes had driven a buggy wheel over 
the foot of his dog. They plead 'not guilty,' 
but that was of no avail. They saw trouble 
coming and fled and both were shot i n the 
back. W e reserve the name of the pastor 
and the place, for the protection of the 
pastor. (Thin k of it! W e dare not let it 278 TH E CRISIS 
be known that he reported the case. H e 
might not be secure.) " 
Eve n white papers like the Arkansa s 
Gazette sometimes tell the truth : 
"Th e For t Smit h Times-Record points to 
the lesson i n the death of a promisin g son 
of a prominent For t Smit h famil y at the 
hands of a fear-crazed Negro i n Fort Smit h 
a few days ago. The lesson as outlined by 
the Times-Record teaches again the dangers 
of allowin g irresponsible fellows to go armed 
and to make arrests, and incidentally teaches 
that murder and violent deaths wil l continue to be common i n Arkansa s until the 
courts and the peace officers abolish the 
pistol-carrying habit. 
"The youn g man who was kille d i n Fort 
Smith , hearing shots, ran to the scene to do 
his duty as a citizen and was kille d by a 
Negro who had been beaten by the two men 
sent to arrest him. The general opinion is 
that the Negro, who has a good reputation 
for industry and peacefulness, di d not intend 
to kil l the youn g man, but thought he was 
shooting at the other officer who had 
assisted i n beating him. 
"I f the statements concerning this affair 
are true the men who arrested the Negro 
are largely responsible for the terrible 
tragedy. It is said that they came to where 
the Negro was workin g to arrest him for 
some minor offense. They beat him until the 
blood ran from his head and face and he 
begged them not to strike him again, sayin g he was going wit h them as fast as he 
could. It is said further they continued to 
beat him and after they got him out of the 
buildin g where he was employed they 
repeatedly jabbed a pistol into his stomach. 
The Negro, crazed with fright and wit h his 
hands over his head, begged them to desist, 
and then, thinkin g he was going to be 
murdered, wrenched the pistol from the hands 
of one of the men and shot him. The other 
officer gallantly dived to safety. It was at 
this juncture that the youn g citizen, hearing 
the shots and rushing to the scene to do his 
duty as a good citizen, came before the 
blood-smeared eyes of the Negro and the 
Negro kille d him. 
"It requires more than a commission and 
a pistol to make a good officer. It requires 
bravery, honesty and judgment. W e hope the 
authorities of Fort Smit h and Sebastian 
Count y and of every city, town and county 
i n Arkansas, wil l benefit by the terrible lesson 
now before them." 
A professor at the Uni -
INTERMARRIAGE . 
versity of Virgini a has 
decided that the mulatto is not necessarily 
a degenerate, whic h leads the St. Luke's 
Herald (colored) to remark sarcastically: 
•"This pronouncement comin g from Charlottesville is of peculia r significance. 
Charlottesville is what the Universit y of 
Virgini a has made it, especially along the 
lines of her mulatto population, made so by 
the very best of the South's distinguished 
scions." 
The Crown, that excellent church pape r 
of Newark , N . J. , discusses frankl y the proposed intermarriage bil l and says i n part: 
"Assembl y bill 183, whic h proposes to 
make it a misdemeanor to issue licenses 
for the marriage of a white person to a 
Negro or mulatto, or fo r ministers or others 
to perform such marriages, touches upon 
such fundamental principle s of good morals, 
as well as of civi l and religious rights, that 
a discussion of the subject should be of much 
interest and value. It was drafted by State 
Registra r Davi d S. South and introduced by 
Mr . Marshall . Bills on somewhat simila r 
lines have recently been introduced i n four 
or five other States and also i n Congress for 
the Distric t of Columbia . 
"The bill , i f it ever became law, would 
inevitably create i n Ne w Jersey a tendency 
to the immoralit y and bastardy that was a 
curse to blacks and whites i n slavery days, 
and which is so to-day i n Southern States 
where the prohibitio n of marriage and other 
relics of the slave-time regime prevail. A t 
the time of the Civi l Wa r the extent of the 
mulatto, quadroon and octoroon class showed 
how fa r the evil had gone. 
The impossibility of marriage woul d give 
greater immunit y and security to licentiousness, as it does i n the South. It woul d offer 
greater temptations and inducements to evil, 
inasmuch as such illicit relations would be 
considered safe. It would make colored 
women a more easy prey and woul d increase 
their temptations. 
"Th e prohibition of marriage and the widespread and publicl y condoned concubinage 
of the South makes colored women practically helpless. I n Turke y there are oncebeautiful girls wit h ear or nose or face 
mutilated or disfigured to save them from the 
lust of Turkis h officials. That is under 
anti-Christian rule. Fro m the professedly 
Christia n South many families wit h grow-OPINIO N 279 
in g girls come Nort h to find safety. Is New 
Jersey to help to spread these evil 
conditions? " 
W e cannot too often revert to 
the fact that the Southern 
Negro is not receiving a decent chance for 
education. The Scroll, a student pape r at 
Atlant a University , Atlanta , Ga. , says: 
"Abou t fou r years ago a movement was 
started i n Atlant a to float bonds i n order to 
obtain money, a large part of which was to 
go fo r the purpose of improvin g the schools 
of Atlanta . Al l the qualified voters i n the 
city were urged to vote for these bonds. The 
colored voters were told that i f they would 
co-operate wit h the white people i n this 
matter they woul d be assured of ample and 
improved school facilities. Accordingl y 
when the contest was held at the polls the 
qualified voters of both races carried the 
election i n favor of bonds. 
"No w after a lapse of about four years 
let us see what conditions we find i n our 
city. Last fall , when the publi c schools 
opened, the superintendent decided not to 
have an eighth grade at the West Mitchell 
Street school on account of the crowded condition of the schools i n this ward . This made 
it necessary for children who live i n the first 
war d to wal k from two to four miles through 
the downtown district to school. The colored 
citizens of this war d called a meeting to protest against this arrangement, and i n this 
meeting, which I might say right here was 
successful i n restoring the eighth grade i n 
this ward, much was learned of the conditions of the publi c schools of Atlanta . 
"First , it was found that there is hardly a 
white residence i n the city which is not 
withi n six blocks of a publi c school. Wit h 
the aid of the bond-issue money, all of the 
old buildings have been replaced by modern 
structures which add much to the beauty of 
our city. W e find that the white schools 
have only one session dail y and that there 
is sufficient room for all white children to 
attend schools which are very close to their 
homes. I n fact, i n one of the schools which 
is situated near here on Ashb y Street, there 
were enrolled last year ninety-five pupils i n 
a school which woul d easily accommodate 
600 pupils, and I am told that there are 
only about 125 pupils i n the school this 
year. 
"I n contrast to the superabundance o f 
white schools we have but very few colored 
schools. It is often necessary for colored 
children to walk all the away across town 
because there is no school near them or because the one which is near them is overcrowded. I n addition to this appallin g fact, 
it is necessary for the colored publi c schools 
to have double sessions, which is unfair both 
to the teacher and to the pupils, especially 
those who come to the teacher after she has 
had to worr y all mornin g with a class. Fro m 
the proceeds from the bond issue the colored 
people have received one school, which is 
unsatisfactory i n many ways. Fo r instance, 
it is built wit h only a few entrances and 
exits and is miserably low on the ground. It 
was found that the buildin g occupied by 
the Summe r Hil l School is i n such bad condition that durin g a rai n it is necessary for 
the teachers to put the children i n one 
corner of the room i n order that they may not 
get wet. I n the Roac h Street school, whenever it gets cloudy, lamps must be lighted 
i n two of the rooms which are situated i n a 
basement. Onl y the Gra y Street school approaches i n any degree the requirements 
which are necessary for comfort and good 
work i n a school." 
The Atlant a Independent, a colored paper, 
goes on to say i n reply to the Atlant a 
Constitution: 
"The Constitution talks about our educational and mora l uplift, and always picks 
up some 'hat-in-hand, yessir, boss,' Negro, 
whom the race has long ago repudiated and 
holds him out as a Moses. The Atlant a 
Norma l and Industria l School is held out 
to us as a panacea for all our mora l and 
educational diseases. No w wh y is our contemporary so much more interested i n this 
excuse of a school that has its greatest 
existence on pape r than it is i n reputable 
well-established schools like the Atlant a 
Baptist College, Clar k University , Atlant a 
University, Morris Brow n College and Spelman Seminary ? The explanation is not fa r 
fetched; it is evidently at hand and plain . 
"I f the Constitution wants us educated 
wh y does it not throw its great influence 
behind the real Negro colleges withi n the 
shadow of its dome? Wh y does it not tell 
the publi c of the high character and usefulness of Drs. Joh n Hope , W . A . Fountain , 
E . A . Ware , J . W . E . Bowe n and the 
faculties of these great schools? Wh y harp 
and bleat about a little school i n the ditch 
EDUCATION . 280 TH E CRISIS 
that the Constitution itself does not know 
whether or not it really exists i n fact ? I f 
the Constitution is our friend, it woul d cooperate wit h the agencies struggling for our 
uplift. Wh o has heard the Constitution 
speak of the character and usefulness of 
the teachers of our colleges, or commend 
their work ? I f it wants us educated, wh y 
not get behind Morris-Brow n College, 
Atlant a Baptist College, Atlant a University , 
Clar k University , and Spelman Seminary ? 
Al l the Negroes cannot be washerwomen, 
cooks, butlers, bootblacks and hat-in-hands 
any more than all white men can be 
preachers, lawyers and doctors." 
The Columbi a State, a Southern white 
paper, points out that industria l and agricultura l education may be just as 
"dangerous " to "white supremacy" as compulsory common school training : 
"The State submits to the Hon . B . R . 
Tillman , who was one of the first men of 
prominence to exploit this reason for opposing compulsory education, that the 
'danger' he saw to 'white supremacy' i n a 
compulsory attendance law is fa r more 
menacing i n this voluntary improve d farming . Ho w do he and others of his school 
of statesmanship propose to meet it ? I f it 
be wron g or dangerous to force all whites to 
learn to read and write because a few 
Negroes not already attending school may 
be inadvertently squeezed into Negro schools 
at the same time, how much worse, how much 
more dangerous, to encourage the Negro who 
has already learned to read to learn to grow 
it bale of cotton on the lan d that the unlettered white man cannot make produce more 
than a quarter of a bale? An d i f the way 
to help the white boy who does not wish to 
go to school is to let him stay out along with 
the Negro who wishes to stay out, the way 
to help the white farme r who is illiterate 
and i n ignorance of farmin g must be, 
according to that logic, to keep the Negro 
farme r i n the same state of ignorance and 
unprogressiveness! 
"There is no escape from the logic of that 
situation for those unwillin g to cut from the 
neck of our white people the millstone of 
illiteracy because they might simultaneously 
free some Negro who does not feel his bondage a tenth as much as the white man. 
"Shal l we help the white farme r of another 
generation by furnishin g him the foundation for an intelligence with which he can 
make lan d produce fifty bushels of corn to 
the acre ; or shall we help him by leaving 
him i n that mental state where he cannot 
make fifteen bushels and providin g that his 
Negr o neighbor shall do no better? 
"Tha t is the question. " 
The white teachers of Ne w Orleans, too, 
are discovering that Negr o education may 
not be the worst thin g i n the world . One 
of them recently read a pape r before her 
fellows i n which she said : 
"Th e prejudice of the Southern people 
against Negr o colleges is so universa l that 
it needs no quotation. It is a feeling that 
has come down to us from reconstruction 
days, and one whic h we have generally 
accepted without question. Bu t the new 
South is beginning to appreciate the gravity 
of its race problem and to realize its responsibilit y fo r the mora l and social development 
of the race whose services it cannot spare. 
"The tremendous importanc e of education 
as a factor i n improvin g social conditions is 
everywhere acknowledged, and hence the first 
question that the new South, wit h its 
quickened social consciousness, is beginning 
to ask is: 'Wha t are we doing to educate 
our Negroes? ' It was from a desire to 
satisfy this questioning that the Southern 
Association of College Wome n appointed a 
committee to report on the wor k of the 
Negro schools and colleges of Ne w Orleans. 
"I n spite of the prosperous and encouragin g condition of Negr o education here we are 
constantly meeting people who are bitterly 
opposed to the education of the colored 
population. Investigation shows that their 
chief reason for this opposition is the fear 
that it wil l lead to race amalgamation when 
the social condition of the Negr o is raised. 
Surely no blow could be more fata l to the 
South than race amalgamation, and the fear 
is one that deserves consideration. I personally do not believe that education wil l 
have any such results. I thin k that as the 
Negroes are educated they wil l gain more 
self-respect and look less enviously upon 
their white neighbors. They wil l have leaders 
and advisers among themselves, and while 
amalgamation of the insidious character that 
now exists wil l no doubt continue to some 
extent, I believe that education of both the 
whites and the blacks wil l be the greatest 
factor i n preventing it. 
"It is remarkable how many intelligent 
Negro men are coming to the front, and how OPINIO N 281 
rapidl y the rest of their race are turnin g to 
them instead of to white people. New 
Orleans now has six colored lawyers, twentyone physicians, seven dentists, six editors, 
ninety ministers and 150 teachers, all graduates of good schools. The Southwestern 
Christian Advocate is edited and published 
entirely by Negroes, and it is a rather good 
paper, too. I have talked to the editor and 
his wife , and found them both intelligent and 
well-informed people." 
m 
Mr . Henr y W . Wilbur, a Phila ­
delphi a Quaker, has made a 
recent tri p to the South and says: 
"The causes which lead the Southern 
Negro to leave the soil, and which must 
be removed, may be summarized as follows: 
The exaction of usurious rates of interest 
on money, whether the money is borrowed to 
help produce a cotton crop or to buy land. 
A virulent local prejudice which annoys, 
threatens and visits bruta l treatment upon 
the Negro, especially the Negro who succeeds. On the affirmative side the improve ­
ment of the rura l colored publi c schools is 
imperative. These are all matters only 
remotely to be reached by Norther n philanthropy. They largely involve lines of 
conduct whic h must be applied by the 
Southern whites. 
"The Southern Negro is really indigenous 
to the soil. Tha t he ought to stay on the 
soil is nearly an axiomatic statement. His 
presence i n considerable numbers i n cities 
anywhere is bad for both races. A n 
organized effort to secure for him, and to 
eventually be pai d for by him, large blocks 
of the cheap agricultura l lands of the South 
is a line of effort which may well interest 
philanthropists and capitalists Nort h and 
South, who are large enough to see that the 
best business and the ideal philanthropy 
must be employed i n helping people to help 
themselves. 
"Th e buildin g up of a feeling of comity 
between the two races i n the South involves 
such conditions on the soil as wil l make the 
Negr o economically successful as a farmer 
and self-respecting as a citizen. This means 
an increased disposition on the part of 
Southern white men to treat the Negro as a 
man, i f not as a brother. This problem wil l 
not be solved, however, by performing 
miracles, but by creating an atmosphere of 
common justice and sympathy i n which it 
can be sanely considered. I n any event, the 
Negro wil l not remain on the soil i n Dixi e 
because white men want him to, but i n the 
last analysis because it is made worth his 
while. " 
m 
A reporter from the St. Louis 
Globe-Democrat has been having 
some interesting adventures i n 
Boley, Okla . H e writes: 
"Bole y is what is known i n Oklahoma as 
a 'Nigge r town.' It has not a single white 
resident in it. It is interesting. Whe n I got 
off the train I looked around to see i f any 
other white man came to Boley wit h me. I 
was alone. Then I looked around me. The 
platform was crowded with people. There 
was a white man, and I approached him and 
timidl y asked him i f he lived here. H e 
looked pityingl y at me and replied i n the 
negative, stating that white people were not 
permitted here. 
"'Ho w about the station agent?' I asked. 
" 'He's black,' replied the man. 
"'An d the postmaster?' 
" 'He's black, too.' 
"M y bump of curiosity asserted itself and 
overmastered my loneliness. The more questions I asked the more interested I became. 
Her e at last I was to find the Negro question 
solved. I n a few minutes I found myself 
engaged i n delving into the workings of one 
of the most important colonization problems 
ever undertaken i n this country, and I am 
glad to say I was pleased wit h my 
investigation. 
"Her e is a town made u p entirely of 
colored people—and the experiment is a 
splendid success. These black men and their 
families are happy, prosperous and contented, and they have a well-ordered and 
well-governed little city. 
"Abou t eight years ago the Fort Smit h and 
Western Railroa d was built across the State, 
passing here. Contractor Bole y was a friend 
of the Negro ; he believed he had better impulses i n him than the white man brings out; 
that i f put upon his own responsibility he 
would rise to higher levels and better things. 
Bole y came to the conclusion that i f the 
colored people separated from the whites and 
had their own towns they would make greater 
progress and be happier. 
"Finall y Boley laid the matter before the 
officials of his road and prevailed upon them 
to lay out a colored man's town. Then he 
A BLAC K 
TOWN . 
THE LAND . 282 TH E CRISIS 
elected the co-operation of T. M . Haynes. a 
bright, intelligent and industrious colored 
man, i n the wor k of gathering a community 
of Negroes fo r the proposed new town. 
"It was not difficult to get a company of 
colored men together to start the enterprise, 
and i n honor of the originator of the idea 
they named the town Boley. That was a little 
over seven years ago. 
"To-da y Bole y has a population of 2,000 
people; it is thoroughly organized and as 
well governed as any town of its size in 
Oklahoma . It has its own municipa l water 
works, fire department, electric-light plant, 
telephone exchange—in fact, everything that 
any other town of 2,000 would be expected 
to have. There are three miles of concrete 
sidewalks—ten feet wide in the main street, 
on which there is not a foot of boardwalk. 
There are five aldermen and they have high 
ideals of civic righteousness. It is a dr y 
town ; it is a model town ; it is a clean town. 
"T o give an idea of the morality of the 
people, I need but relate an incident of a 
few days ago. A traveling salesman accosted 
an attractive young colored woman ; she 
accepted his advances so promptl y his suspicions were not aroused until he found she 
had led him into the police headquarters. 
That experience cost him $42. 
"The people of Boley are high grade, i f 
they are colored. The white man who comes 
here cannot but be so impressed. Me n and 
women are well dressed and all seem kindl y 
disposed toward each other and exceptionally courteous. 
" I went up to the Farmers' and Merchants' 
Bank . The assistant cashier, a man named 
Jones, came here from Wheeling . W . Va. , 
where he was a schoolteacher. H e is enthusiastic over Boley. 
" 'Yo u should be here on a Saturday,' he 
said. 'The town is black; yes,' he laughed, 
'literally black with people. They come by 
hundreds from the farmin g districts, and a 
more orderly lot of people yo u never saw. 
The streets rin g with their laughter and jokes. 
They are happy. An d I tell yo u it is fortunate the colored people are of this disposition. 
If they were not they woul d be most miserable and lost. I have never seen a serious 
quarrel here, and there has never been a 
killin g in the town. W e have a police force, 
but very little need of one. Just now we are 
having a little difficulty to keep bootleggers 
out.' " 
TH E NEGR O IN The New Yor k World pubNE W YOR K AN D LISHES A PAGE ON WHAT IT 
London. means to be a Negro in 
Ne w York : 
" 'The Negr o i n New Yor k is under a ban. 
I n this great city, where the gates of opportunit y stand open wide to all men of all 
other races, nearly every field of honest 
employment is closed to any one—man, 
woman or child—who has Negro blood. Not 
only that. It is very difficult, i f not impossible, fo r us to get man y of the ordinary 
conveniences—I had almost said necessaries— 
of life . W e are not treated as human. That 
is the cold, hard fact!' 
"Th e Rev. Charles Martin , a Protestant 
clergyman of pure Africa n descent, had been 
telling me how heavily a black skin handicaps 
a man right here i n New Yor k Cit y fifty 
years after the abolition of slavery in the 
Unite d States. I had asked him for facts— 
fo r specific instances of the disabilities to 
which he had referred. H e said : 
" 'Just to take one case. When a Negro is 
downtown and wants something to eat there 
is no place he can get food. Very few men 
realize how unrelenting this rule is enforced. 
On one occasion when "Joseph's Brethren" 
was being played at the New Theatre a 
Jewis h rabbi who was anxious that I should 
see the pla y had invited me to go with him. 
H e had had nothing to eat, and so we stopped 
at a lunchroom in the neighborhood of 
Columbus Circle . W e sat down at a table, 
but no one came to serve us. N o more attention was pai d to our presence than i f we had 
suddenly become invisible, and after waiting 
some time i n vai n there was nothing left for 
us to do but to walk out. 
" 'Outside of domestic employment there is 
very little opportunit y fo r either the men or 
women of my race except withi n the limited 
circle of their own people. A woman can get 
employment to do washing and a man can 
get a job as elevator boy or store porter, 
but that is about all. Onl y the other day a 
large department store which had employed 
quite a few Negro girls ever since it opened 
dismissed all of them at once for no other 
reason than their color. No fault was found 
with their work, but they were Negroes, and 
probably some customers had objected, and 
so they were thrown out of employment. 
" 'The attitude of the community toward 
the Negro is this: So long as he is down and 
willin g to remain down and does not try to OPINIO N 283 
enter into any o f the higher activities he is 
all right, but the moment he aspires to better 
himself he is not all right. So long as the 
Negr o is of useful service—useful to the 
white man—he is tolerated; the moment he 
seeks to enter the field of lucrative 
endeavor—lucrative to himself—the whole 
weight o f the community is exerted to keep 
him down. It is almost impossible for a 
Negro to obtain commercial or professional 
employment in any firm of good standing in 
New York. Le t me give yo u a couple "o f 
instances: 
" 'There was a youn g fellow who had just 
been graduated from Cornell. I f I am not 
mistaken, he had won the Frenc h medal there. 
H e was an excellent linguist, and some white 
people who were interested i n him recommended him strongly to the Standar d Oi l 
people. They wanted a youn g man to travel 
for them—some one speaking Frenc h and 
Spanish. This youn g fellow had all the 
necessary qualifications and had an interview 
wit h the head of the foreign department, but 
was told plainl y that he could not be employed because he had Negro blood i n him. 
" 'Anothe r case which was even harder— 
the youn g fellow knelt down and prayed 
with me i n church over it ; he was a graduate 
pharmacist. H e had his Londo n diplomas 
and had passed the State examination here. 
I tried to get him employment at a colored 
institution—that is, an institution for 
colored patients, but ru n by white folks—an d 
when he put i n an appearance they told him 
point blank that they could not take him i n 
their prescription department as a druggist, 
but they wanted some one to wash the bottles and they would be willing to give him 
that. 
" 'I could give you countless such cases 
N o matter how good a printe r a Negro is, no 
matter how good a carpenter, or painter, or 
electrician, he can get no employment i n New 
Yor k i n the open market. The great injustice 
is that there is nothing against these men 
except that they are Negroes. N o white firm 
wil l give them a place any more than it 
woul d think of employin g a Negro bookkeeper or Negr o shippin g clerk. Unless he 
is willin g to give u p his trade and become 
an elevator boy or a store porter, he must 
confine his activities solely to the restricted 
area where Negroes live and where the field 
is so poo r that man y skilled workmen i n it 
can barely make a living. ' " 
This revelation causes the Southern papers 
great satisfaction and glee, while the foolish 
report of the capture of Londo n by black 
folk arouses them; but the Louisvill e CourierJournal says: 
" A colonial woman i n Londo n is agitating 
against the admission of 'men of color' to 
social equality in London . 
"The term 'men of color' i n Londo n means 
Mongolians, America n and Africa n Negroes. 
West Indians, Turks, Egyptians, brownskinned Aryan s from India , Berbers from the 
Atla s Mountains, Arab s from beyond the 
Red Sea, straight-haired blacks of the South 
Sea islands, Malays, Australians, New Zealanders, Kanakas, Somalis, Singhalese, 
Afghans, Abyssinians, Filipino s and men of 
other divisions of the human race, all of 
whom are held by the protesting idealist to 
be brothers under their skin. " 
The Boston Transcript adds: 
"Th e explanation of the alleged invasion 
is creditable to the British . It is that Negroes 
are so well treated that Great Britai n is a 
most attractive country to them, and Londo n 
i n particula r is the colored man's paradise. 
Herei n we find a little trace of Britis h selfsatisfaction, but it is only a trace after all, 
for unquestionably Negrophobi a is compelled 
to lur k i n secret corners i n Great Britai n and 
would not dare to manifest itself i n lynching . The Britis h have learned tolerance o f 
foreign races by the long experience of their 
nation as a great colonial power. There are 
under the Britis h rule millions of Negroes; 
there are other millions of Britis h subjects 
who, i f not black, are certainly not white. 
I n Londo n every colony, black, brown and 
white or yellow, is represented. A t times 
and i n particula r localities the streets seem 
a moving picture of the ethnology of the 
empire. The Hindoo , the Negro and Mala y 
and the Hongkon g native may be seen passin g along the thoroughfares of what is to 
them the metropolis of a great protecting 
empire. 
"Possibl y i f the Unite d States were not 
one of the newest apprentices to the art of 
rulin g alien peoples it might exhibit the same 
toleration to those whose skins and ways are 
different from ours. It is not alone this 
toleration, however, that makes the Negro 
feel particularly comfortable while under the 
Britis h flag. A most powerful contribution 
to his comfort and safety is found i n the 
general determination of the Britis h people 284 TH E CRISIS 
that law shall be enforced, and that constitutiona l guarantees shall be maintained. Her e 
and there i n some extremely out-of-the-way 
place mob violence directed against Negroes 
might find a victim, but it is unthinkable that 
there should be a succession of lynchings i n 
England , Scotland or Ireland. " 
DINGAAN'S DAY. In South Africa they 
have been celebrating the 
victory of the Dutc h over the Kaffir, and 
the A. P. O., a colored pape r remarks: 
"Bu t a change has come over South 
Africa . The two white races, so we are told, 
are one. They now claim equal shares i n 
layin g the foundation of a united white 
people. On Monda y the language question, 
the immigratio n question, the naval contribution wil l all be forgotton. There wil l be 
perfect harmony. Dutchmen wil l magnify 
all the petty deeds of valor of their forefathers, and wil l generously grant to English ­
men some share of the honor of having defeated Dingaan ; and Englishme n wil l slobber 
over Dutchmen, and strain their language to 
belaud their exploits, dishonorable and discreditable though they may have been i n 
Dingaan's country seventy-four years ago. 
N o mention wil l be made of the hundreds of 
colored and natives who fought on the side 
of both Englis h and Dutch , nor of the 
hundreds who shed their blood i n the same 
cause. 
"Now , it is very difficult, i f not impossible, 
from the available historical records, to 
arrive at any other conclusion but that Din ­
gaan was a monster, and that the Dutc h 
emigrants were heaven-sent saviours, whose 
every action was prompted by Christia n 
benovolence toward the native. Bu t it must 
be borne i n min d that the history of South 
Afric a is a record written by white persons 
from information supplied by white persons 
who had every reason to picture the blacks 
as a cruel, barbarous, traitorous people, and 
their own actions as that of tolerant 
Christians. Nevertheless, by reading between 
the lines, it is quite clear that the farmers 
who migrated from the colony into Dingaan's 
country were as cruel, traitorous, vindictive 
and revengeful as any set of men that ever 
came i n contact wit h colored races." 
A s the representation of 
REPUBLICA N the South in the Republ- REPRESENTATION , lica 
being agitated anew we ma y recall the last 
words o f the lamented Frederic k L . McGhe e 
i n the St. Pau l (Minn.) Press: 
"Th e Negro's presence i n the nationa l Re ­
publica n convention used not to be a thing 
disdained and wanted to be gotten ri d of. 
There was a time when the Republica n 
nationa l convention honored a Negr o by 
makin g one a temporary chairman of the 
convention. It was the convention that nominated James G . Blaine , the plume d knight 
of the Republica n party , an d it should not 
be forgotten that the convention that wrote 
the gold plan k i n the Republica n part y platform wrote it only because it had the solid 
support of the Negr o delegates, and that 
convention witnessed the end o f right recognitio n to Negro delegates. It was i n that 
convention that the late Mar k Hann a was 
presidin g over the deliberations concerning 
the credentials from the State of Texas; the 
lil y whites, who were first springin g into 
existence, contested the delegation headed by 
Wrigh t Cuney, 'Noblest Roman ' o f all the 
Southern host, Negr o though he was. Then 
it was first urged to willin g ears that i f the 
Negro was 'cut out,' i f white men were put 
on the nationa l committee i n their places, 
they woul d organize i n the South a white 
man's party , the solid Sout h woul d be 
broken ; white men woul d divide on economic 
questions and the Republica n part y woul d not 
be compelled to look to the Norther n tier of 
States fo r its elections. Mr . Hann a listened, 
was charmed, was fooled, believed the lie, 
and by reason of his influence the Cuney 
delegation was seated wit h a half vote; the 
lil y whites got the other half. Cuney then 
reminded Mr . Hann a that the Negro i n the 
wa r had shot a ful l bullet; that since the 
wa r he had voted the ful l Republica n ticket; 
never scratched it (the shame is that he still 
does it), and that as fo r himself and the 
Negroes from Texas they woul d refuse a half 
seat and left the meeting o f the committee; 
refused to participat e i n the convention; 
went home; died o f a broken heart and thus 
ended the old order of things and thus began 
the new, that has been a shame, an injustice 
and disgrace to both my race and the 
Republica n party. " I A M dead; 
•*• Yet somehow, somewhere, 
In Time's weird contradiction, I 
May tell of that dread deed, wherewith 
I brought to Children of the Moon 
Freedom and vast salvation. 
I was a woman born 
And trod that streaming street 
That ebbs and flows from Harlem's hills 
Thro' caves and canons limned in light 
Down to the twisting sea. 
That night of nights 
I stood alone and at the End 
Until the sudden highway to the Moon, 
Golden in splendor, 
Became too real to doubt. 
Dimly I set foot upon the air; 
I fled, I flew, thro' thrills of light, 
With all about, above, below the whirring 
Of almighty wings. 
I found a twilight land 
Where, hardly hid, the sun 
Sent softly saddened rays of 
Red and brown to burn the iron earth 
An d bathe the snow-white peaks 
In mighty splendor. 
Black were the men, 
Hard haired and silent slow, 
Moving as shadows 
Bending with face of fear to earthward; 
An d women there were none. 
"Woman, woman, woman! " 
I cried in mounting terror. 
"Woman and Child!" 
And the cry sang back 
Thro' Heaven with the 
Whirring of almighty wings. 
Wings, wings, endless wings, 
Heaven and earth are wings; 
Wings that flutter, furl and fold, 
Always folding and unfolding, 
Ever folding yet again; 
Wings, veiling some vast 
And veiled face, 
In blazing blackness, 
Behind the folding and unfolding, 
The rolling and unrolling of 
Almighty wings! 
I saw the black men huddle 
Fumed in fear, falling face downward; 
Vainly I clutched and clawed, 
Dumbly they cringed and cowered, 
Moaning in mournful monotone: 
0 Freedom, 0 Freedom, 
0 Freedom over me; 
Before I'll be a slave 
I'll be buried in my grave 
And go home to my God 
And be free. 
It was as angel music 
From the dead, 
And ever, as they sang, 
The winged Thing of wings, filling all 
Heaven, 
Folding and unfolding, and folding yet 
again, 
Tore out their blood and entrails 
'Til I screamed in utter terror 
And a silence came: 
A silence and the wailing of a babe. 
EASTER-EMANCIPATION Then at last I saw and shamed; 
I knew how these dumb dark and dusky 
things 
Had given blood and life 
To fend the caves of underground 
The great black caves of utter night 
Where earth lay full of mothers 
And their babes. 
Little children sobbing in darkness. 
Little children crying in silent pain. 
Little mothers rocking and groping and 
struggling, 
Digging and delving and groveling 
Amid the dying-dead and dead-in-life. 
And drip and dripping of warm, wet blood 
Far, far beneath the wings. 
The folding and unfolding of almighty 
wings. 
I bent with tears and pitying hands 
Above these dusky star-eyed children. 
Crinkly haired, with sweet-sad baby voices 
Pleading low for light and love and living— 
And I crooned: Little children weeping there, 
God shall find thy faces fair; 
Guerdon for thy deep distress. 
He shall send His tenderness; 
For the tripping of thy feet 
Make a mystic music sweet 
In the darkness of thy hair; 
Light and laughter in the air— 
Little children weeping there. 
God shall find thy faces fair! 
I strode above the stricken bleeding men. 
The rampart 'ranged against the skies. 
And shouted: 
"Up I say, build and slay; 
Fight face foremost, force a way, 
Unloose, unfetter and unbind; 
Be men and free." 
Dumbly they shrank 
Muttering they pointed toward that peak 
Than vastness vaster, 
Whereon a darkness brooded, 
"Wh o shall look and live," they sighed; 
And I sensed 
The folding and unfolding of almighty wings 288 TH E CRISIS 
Yet did we build of iron, bricks and blood; 
W e built a day, a year, a thousand years. 
Blood was the mortar, blood and tears 
And, ah, the Thing, the Thing of wings, 
The winged folding wing of Things, 
Did furnish much mad mortar 
Fo r that tower. 
Slow and ever slower rose the towering task 
And with it rose the sun. 
Until at last on one wild day, 
Wind-whirled, cloud-swept and terrible. 
I stood beneath the burning shadow 
Of the peak. 
Beneath the whirring of almighty wings 
While downward from my feet 
Streamed the long line of dusky faces 
And the wail of little children sobbing under 
Earth. 
"Freedom! " I cried. 
"Freedom! " cried Heaven, Earth and Stars, 
And a Voice near-far 
Amid the folding and unfolding of Almighty 
wings 
Answered "I am Freedom— 
Wh o sees my face is free— 
He and his." 
I dared not look; 
Downward I glanced on deep bowed heads 
and closed eyes, 
Outward I gazed on flecked and flaming 
blue— 
But ever onward, upward flew 
The sobbing of small voices; 
Down, down, far down into the night. 
Slowly I lifted livid limbs aloft; 
Upward I strove: The Face, the Face ; 
Onward I reeled: The Face, the Face ! 
To Beauty wonderful as sudden death 
Or horror horrible as endless life— 
Up ! Up ! the blood-built way 
(Shadow grow vaster! 
Terror come faster!) 
Up ! Up to the blazing blackness 
Of one veiled face 
And endless folding and unfolding, 
Rolling and unrolling of Almighty wings: 
The last step stood! 
The last dim cry of pain 
Fluttered across the stars— 
And then— 
Wings, wings, triumphant wings, 
Lifting and lowering, waxing and waning, 
Swinging and swaying, twirling and 
whirling, 
Whispering and screaming, streaming and 
gleaming, 
Spreading and sweeping and shading and 
flaming— 
Wings, wings, eternal wings, 
'Til the hot red blood 
Flood fleeing flood, 
Thundered thro' Heaven and mine ears 
While all across a purple sky 
The last vast pinion 
Trembled to unfold. 
I rose upon the Mountain of the Moon ; 
I felt the blazing glory of the Sun. 
I heard the Song of Children crying "Free! " 
I saw the Face of Freedom— 
And I died. EASTER. 
LIFT up your heads, 0 ye 
gates and be ye lifted up, 
ye everlasting doors; and 
the King of glory shall 
come in. 
Wh o is the King of 
glory ? The Friend strong and faithful; 
the Friend faithful in little. 
The Friend that seeks neither place 
nor pay; the Friend that does not boast 
nor blame, but sits beside us patiently; 
the Friend who in our weakness knows, 
and in our travail understands; the 
Friend to whom we need not say our 
suffering, for he has suffered even as we 
and with his stripes we are healed. 
The Friend who looks into our tired 
eyes and laughs cheeringly, who grasps 
our hand warmly and is silent; who 
says: ' ' Well done, old man,' ' and ' ' Good 
work, little sister!'' 
The Friend who is no impossible god or simpering angel, but human like us, 
hungry as we are and disappointed; who 
smokes and drinks with us and walks 
beneath the stars. 
The Friend that hath clean hands and 
a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his 
soul unto vanity nor sworn deceitfully. 
Yes, and the Friend who, looking back 
through jeweled tears, has gone down 
the Wa y of Shadows to the place that 
is silent and dark. 
Lift up your heads, 0 ye gates; even 
lift them up, ye everlasting doors; and 
the King of glory shall come in. 
Wh o is this King of glory? The 
Faithful Friend—he is the King of 
glory. Selah! 
HAIL COLUMBIA! 
HAIL Columbia, Happ y 
Land! Again the glorious 
traditions of Anglo -
Saxo n manhood have 
been upheld! Again the 
chivalry of American 
white men has been magnificently vindicated. Down on your knees, black men, 
and hear the tale with awestruck faces; 
Learn from the Superior Race. We do 
not trust our own faltering pen and 
purblind sight to describe the reception 
of the suffragists at the capital of the 
land. We quote from the Southern reporters of the Northern press: 
"Fiv e thousand women, marching in 
the woman-suffrage pageant yesterday, 
practically fought their way foot by 
foot up Pennsylvania Avenue, through a 
surging mass of humanity that completely defied the Washington police, 
swamped the marchers, and broke their 
procession into little companies. The 
women, trudging stoutly along under 
great difficulties, were able to complete 
their march only when troops of cavalry 
from Fort Myer were rushed into Washington to take charge of Pennsylvania 
Avenue. No inauguration has ever produced such scenes, which in many instances amounted to little less than 
riots." 
"Mor e than 10 0 persons, young and 
old, of both sexes, were crushed and 
trampled in the uncontrollable crowd in 
Pennsylvania Avenue yesterday, while 
two ambulances of the Emergency Hospital came and went constantly for six 
hours, always impeded and at times 
EDITORIAL 290 TH E CRISI S 
actually opposed, so that doctor and 
driver literally had to fight their way 
to give succor to the injured." 
Hoodlums, many of them in uniform, 
leaned forward till their cigarettes almost 
touched the women's faces while blowing 
smoke in their eyes, and the police said 
not a word, not even when every kind of 
insult was hurled. 
"T o the white-haired women the men 
shouted continuously : ' Granny ! granny ! 
We came to see chickens, not hens! Go 
home and sit in the corner!' To the 
younger women they yelled: ' Say, what 
you going to do to-night? Can't we 
make a date?' and the police only smiled. 
The rowdies jumped on the running 
boards of the automobiles and snatched 
the flags from the elderly women, and 
they attempted to pull the girls from 
the floats." 
Wasn't it glorious? Does it not make 
you burn with shame to be a mere black 
man when such mighty deeds are done 
by the Leaders of Civilization? Does it 
not make you ' ' ashamed of your race ?' ' 
Does is not make you "want to be 
white? " 
An d do you know (we are almost 
ashamed to say it) the Negro again lost 
a brilliant opportunity to rise in his 
"imitative" way. Ida Husted Harper 
says: 
"W e made the closest observation 
along the entire line and not in one instance did we hear a colored man make 
a remark, although there were thousands 
of them." 
Another white woman writes: 
' ' I wish to speak a word in favor of 
the colored people during the suffrage 
parade. Not one of them was boisterous 
or rude as with great difficulty we 
passed along the unprotected avenue. 
The difference between them and those 
insolent, bold white men was remarkable. They were quiet and respectable 
and earnest, and seemed sorry for the 
indignities whic h wer e incessantly 
heaped upon us. There were few policemen to protect us as we made our first 
parade in Washington, and the dignified 
silence of the colored people and the 
sympathy in their faces was a great contrast to those who should have known 
better. I thank them in the name of all 
the women for their kindness." 
Now look at that! Good Lord! has the 
Negro no sense ? Can he grasp no 
opportunity ? 
But let him not think to gain by any 
such tactics. The South sees his game 
and is busy promoting bills to prevent 
his marrying any wild-eyed suffragette 
who may be attracted by his pusillanimous decency. Already the Ohio legislature has been flooded by forged petitions 
from a "Negro advancement society of 
New York " to push the intermarriage 
bill! 
No, sir! White men are on the firing 
line, and if they don't want white women 
for wives they will at least keep them 
for prostitutes. Beat them back, keep 
them down; flatter them, call them 
"visions of loveliness" and tell them that 
the place for woman is in the home, even 
if she hasn't got a home. If she is 
homely or poor or made the mistake of 
being born with brains, and begins to 
protest at the doll's house or the bawdy 
house, kick her and beat her and insult 
her until in terror she slinks back to her 
kennel or walks the midnight streets. 
Don't give in; don't give her power; 
don't give her a vote whatever you do. 
Keep the price of women down; make 
them weak and cheap. 
Shall the time ever dawn in this Land 
of the Brave when a free white American 
citizen may not buy as many women as 
his purse permits? Perish the thought 
and Hail Columbia, Happy Land! 
THE HURT HOUND. 
THE editor has received this 
news note from a colored 
friend: 
"January 22—Revs. 
G. H. Burks and P. A. 
Nichols, returning from 
Louisville to Paducah, Ky., over the-EDITORIA L 291 
I- C. Railroad , o n being detained from 
5 p . m. to 2 a. in., b y reason o f a freight 
wreck , wer e ushered into the dinin g ca r 
an d give n suppe r withou t one single 
wor d o f commen t o r protest from the 
whites, wh o wer e eating at the same 
time.' ' 
Th e editor read this an d read it ye t 
again. A t first he though t it wa s a banque t give n to blac k me n b y white ; then 
he though t it charit y to the hungr y poor ; 
then—then it dawne d o n his darkened 
soul : Tw o decentl y dressed, educate d 
colore d me n ha d been allowe d to pa y fo r 
their unobstrusive meal in a Pullma n 
dinin g ca r "WITHOU T ON E SINGL E 
WOR D O F COMMEN T O R PRO ­
TES T ! " N o one had curse d them; non e 
had thrown plates at them; the y wer e 
not lynched ! An d in humbl e ecstacy at 
being treated fo r onc e like ordinar y 
huma n beings they rushed from the ca r 
an d sent a letter a thousand miles to say 
to the world : "M y God ! Look ! See! " 
Wha t mor e eloquent commen t coul d 
be mad e o n the whit e South ? Wha t 
mor e stinging indictmen t coul d be 
voiced ? Wha t must be the dail y an d 
hourl y treatment o f black me n in 
Paducah , Ky. , to brin g this burst o f 
applaus e at the sheerest an d most negative decency ? 
Ye t ever y blac k ma n in Americ a has 
know n that same elation—Nort h and 
Sout h an d West . W e have all o f us felt 
the sudde n relief—the half-mad delight 
whe n contrar y to fixed expectatio n we 
wer e treated as me n an d no t dogs; and 
then, in the nex t breath, we hated ourselves fo r elation ove r that whic h wa s 
bu t du e an y huma n being. 
This is the real traged y o f the Negr o 
in America : the inne r degradation, the 
hurt houn d feeling ; the sort o f upturnin g o f all value s whic h leads some 
blac k me n to "rejoice " becaus e "only " 
sixty-fou r Negroe s wer e lynche d in the 
yea r o f ou r Lor d 1912. 
Conceive , O poet, a ghastlier traged y 
than such a state o f mind ! 
THE "JIM CROW" ARGUMENT. 
THE chairma n o f the committee in the Missouri 
f^'VKlVyj?/ legislature whic h is engineering th e "Ji m 
((|l>S$<<_§ y Crow " ca r bill has 
evolve d this unanswerable syllogism: 
1. Negroe s should not objec t to 
being separated o n the trains b y "just 
a small railing.' ' 
2. If they d o objec t it shows that 
they are averse to associating with 
themselves. 
3. If they insist o n associating with 
whites, it shows that they wan t "socia l 
equality!' ' 
Th e argumen t o f ou r learned and 
astute solon no t onl y prove s his case, 
but it prove s so muc h in addition as to 
destroy his argument. 
If poo r peopl e objec t to being separated from rich people , doe s it prov e a 
wil d desire fo r the society o f Mrs. 
Ponsonb y de Thompkyn s or simpl y 
righteous indignatio n at havin g manhoo d 
measured b y wealth ? 
If Jews objec t to the Ghetto and the 
pale, does it prov e them ashamed o f 
themselves or afraid o f those oppressors 
wh o find oppression easier whe n the vic ­
tims are segregated an d helpless ? 
The moder n fight fo r huma n freedom 
is the fight o f the individua l ma n to be 
judge d o n his ow n merits and no t 
saddled with the sins o f a class fo r which 
he is not responsible. Th e favorit e devic e 
o f the devil, ancient an d modern , is to 
forc e a huma n being into a mor e o r less 
artificial class, accuse the class o f unname d and unnamabl e sin, and then 
damn an y individua l in the alleged class, 
howeve r innocen t he ma y be. 
This is the medieva l tryann y which 
the Sout h has revived in "Ji m Crow " 
legislation and whic h Missouri is striving 
for. Th e Sout h fulminate s against dirt, 
crime and ba d manners an d then herds 
in the "Ji m Crow " ca r the clean an d unclean an d the innocen t and guilt y and 292 TH E CRISI S 
the decent and indecent. Separation is 
impossible in a democracy. It means 
segregation, subordination and tyranny. 
Social equality? Of course we want 
social equality. Social equality is the 
right to demand the treatment of men 
from your fellow man. To ask less is to 
acknowledge your own lack of manhood. 
RESOLUTIONS AT COOPER UNION ON 
LINCOLN'S BIRTHDAY. 
THE National Association 
for the Advancement of 
Colored People was first 
called into being on the 
one hundredth anniversary of the birth of Abraham Lincoln. It conceives its mission to 
be the completion of the work which the 
great emancipator began. It proposes 
to make a group of 10,000,000 Americans free from the lingering shackles of 
past slavery—physically free from peonage, mentally free from ignorance, 
politically free from disfranchisement 
and socially free from studied insult. 
We have refused for a moment to 
contemplate a great democracy like this, 
with all its wealth and power and 
aspiration, turning back in the onward 
furrow when once it set its hand to the 
plow. 
Great as are the forces of reaction and 
race and class hatred at all times, and 
bitter as is the concerted and organized 
effort to increase color prejudice in this 
land and beat back the struggling sons 
of the freedmen, we are still confident 
that the inherent justice and sense of 
fair play in the American people both 
North and South is never going to permit the past crime of slavery to be 
increased by future caste regulations 
leading straight to oligarchy and 
spiritual death. 
But we know that if this crime of 
crimes is not to be perpetuated this 
nation must immediately take its feet 
from the paths wherein they are now 
set. The horror of 2,600 prisoners 
murdered without trial in twenty-seven 
years, the tens of thousands of unaccused black folk who have in three 
years been done to death and worse than 
death, the widespread use of crime and 
alleged crime as a source of public 
revenue, the defenseless position of 
colored women now threatened again in 
six legislatures, the total disfranchisement of three-fourths of black voters, 
the new and insidious attack on property rights, the widespread, persistent 
and growing discrimination in the 
simplest and clearest matters of public 
decency and accommodation—all these 
things indicate not simply the suffering 
of a mocked people, but greater than 
that, they show, the impotence and 
failure of American democracy. 
If it be not possible in the twentieth 
century of the Prince of Peace, in the 
heyday of European culture and world 
revival of brotherhood for a cultured 
people, to extend justice, freedom and 
equality to men whom they have cruelly 
wronged, but who, despite that, have 
done their hard work, fought their battles, saved their Union, upheld their 
democratic ideals, and showed themselves capable of modern culture—if it 
be not possible for America to yield 
these men what they have justly earned 
and deserve, then America herself is 
impossible and the vast dreams of 
Washington, Jefferson and Lincoln are 
vain. 
But it is not so. We can be just, we 
can be law abiding, we can be decent. 
All we need to know and realize is the 
truth about this awful failure to live 
up to our ideals; and so on this anniversary of the great man who began the 
emancipation of the Negro race in 
America and the emancipation of 
America itself we, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People, again appeal to the nation to 
accept the clear and simple settlement 
of the Negro problem, which consists 
in treating all men, black and white, as 
you would have them treat you. THE MA N WH O WON-( A Story) 
By HARRY H. PACE 
I. 
THE keeper of the livery 
stable at Golden, S. C , was 
seriously puzzled. He stood 
in front of the stable door, 
his brow contracted in 
thought, gazing at a top 
buggy fast receding in the distance. Ever 
and anon he emitted an interjection characteristic of the section and cast a curious 
look at the pieces of silver in his hand. 
The midday express from Washington had 
left a solitary passenger, in itself an unusual 
occurrence. The stranger, fair of face, well 
dressed and of commanding appearance, had 
come to his place and requested a buggy to 
take him out into the country. 
"Goin' to Edgefield's, ain't you? " said the 
liveryman genially. 
"No . I'm going to And y Wyatt's," 
responded the young man, whose name was 
Russell Stanley. 
"Goin' to come right back? " came the 
second question curiously. 
"I'm going to stay," was the positive reply. 
Consequently the keeper was puzzled. 
Wyatt was a Negro, one of the biggest cotton 
planters in the State, owned ten square miles 
of land and had an army of tenants, croppers and workmen surrounding him. He 
was openly admired and respected by the 
blacks of the entire district, and secretly 
envied and feared by a large portion of the 
whites. But he kept a cool head, raised more 
cotton than anybody else, had the finest 
stock, paid his bills promptly, and his credit 
was gilt edged. His nearest neighbor and 
keenest rival was Col. James Edgefield, the 
Democratic boss of the State and Congressman from the fifteenth district. Edgefield's 
hospitality was well known; so was the 
beauty of his daughter and only child, 
Elsie. It was a common thing for young men 
to drop off at Golden and run out to Edgefield's place for a day or two. One young 
man had stayed two whole weeks. But what 
any white man was doing driving off to Andy 
Wyatt's to stay was what puzzled the 
liveryman. 
Nevertheless, the buggy and the driver, 
with its passenger, were soon out on the 
dusty road that led to Wyatt's farm. The 
liveryman had made a careful inspection of 
Stanley to see if he might not he mistaking, 
as he said, "a Nigger for a white man." But 
the features, the pale skin and brown halfcurling hair, together with the general air 
of culture and refinement unknown to any 
Negro he had ever seen, confirmed him in 
his first opinion. 
To the driver, on the way out, Russell 
made no effort to conceal the fact of his connection with the black race, despite his appearance. He was an entire stranger to the 
South, its people and its ways, though he 
was born on the very farm to which he was 
now driving. He knew in a general way of 
the prejudices and restrictions of this section. He had never been entirely free from 
them in New York. He remembered well 
how it came to him one day in the street 
not far from the glitter and glare of Broadway. One of his playmates called him a 
"Nigger " and said something about his 
"Nigger " mother. He whipped him mercilessly and then went home crying to her to 
find out what the boy meant. Little by 
little there came to him, with his advancing 
years, the meaning of it all, the situation of 
his race, and more particularly his own 
peculiar condition. He watched the line 
across his mother's brow grow deeper day by 
day and sorrowed with her in the life once 
so full of hope that had been swallowed up 
in the shame of Ms birth. He almost hated 
his own existence that had brought to her 
such sorrow and distress. To him she was 
always good, pure and noble. His father he 
did not know; only one thing he knew—that 
his father was white. 
Year after year, as soon as he was old 
enough, the lad had struggled along in the 
bustle of New York to support his mother 
and educate himself. And when he sat beside her bed and saw her life come peacefully to a close far away from home and 
kindred and friends, alone, forgotten and 
almost despised, his heart beat furiously and 
he lifted his eyes and prayed for revenge on 
the one who had caused it all. 294 TH E CRISI S 
Thus it came about that he was on his 
way to And y Wyatt's farm. Fo r And y was 
his mother's brother, and it was from here 
she had fled long ago. He was to be Andy's 
bookkeeper and general assistant. The cares 
of his estate were getting too heavy for the 
farmer, despite his robust health and vitality. 
He wanted to train up a younger man to take 
up the burden when he should die, lest his 
wife and daughter be robbed by the unscrupulous of the fruits of his life's toil. 
Consequently, when Russell's letter of inquiry came unexpectedly to him one day, 
Andy asked the boy by return mail to come 
and live with him. 
The buggy turned from the dusty road 
into a sheltered driveway and into the yard 
of Wyatt's home. It was a two-story frame 
building, typical of the old South. Around 
the doorway of the quaint old-fashioned 
porch twined honeysuckle and wild roses. 
Andy's wife, Clara, came out to meet him in 
her plain farmer's white clothes. His appearance surprised her. She had expected to 
see a very fair young man. But he was white, 
so white she was afraid she was mistaken. 
Added to his natural complexion was the 
pallor of the city dweller and the indoor life. 
He kissed her in the simple Southern fashion, 
and she led the way into the front room 
which she had opened and aired for this 
occasion. And y came in at the close of the 
day and the welcome was complete. Sitting 
that night before a wholesome country meal, 
Russell surveyed his new surroundings. He 
could see that these people were lovable, true 
and good, and he rejoiced that he was there. 
The household was small; the little girl, 
Ruby, 10 years of age, was the only other 
member. 
Russell went to work daily with the men 
and worked along beside them. Though his 
bones ached night after night and he went 
wearily to bed, yet he perceived a quickening of strength, a healthier color in his face 
and a glow of vigor which he had never before known. He worked hard to please his 
uncle and his efforts won him not only 
esteem, but brought from the hearts of those 
two lovable people all that pent-up affection 
they had hoped to lavish on their own lost 
son. 
A short way from the big house were the 
houses of tenants and immediate employees, 
and scattered here and there over these ten 
square miles were other tenant houses, barns 
and stables. A large ginhouse, around which 
were stored hundreds of bales of cotton, was 
down near the creek. The commissary at the 
back of Wyatt's house from which the whole 
section was fed completed the establishment. An d a happy establishment it was. 
He had often heard of the songs of the 
Negroes on the farm. Coming home late in 
the evenings, as the sun died away to rest 
and all was clear and still, the men used to 
burst out into singing which floated off into 
the distance until the sweetness was absorbed 
by the trees and the flowers. He found himself joining in and singing with them. He 
had never seen such happy, care-free people. 
They were not troubled by any race problem, 
any bugaboo of social or political equality. 
They worked and earned their bread as God 
intended, lived in this out-of-doors all day 
and slept soundly at night and were happy. 
Ah ! what he had missed away from this life 
so long. And now he was into it he meant 
to stay and live, forever and always, simple 
and honest as they. 
Some nights when he came home less 
fatigued in body and mind he would go into 
the front room of Andy's simple home and 
open the quaint old square piano that had 
lost none of its harmony, and accompany 
himself in some plaintive far-away song of 
the heart. His voice was a clear, sweet tenor 
and he had studied some at spare moments in 
New York. Sometimes, when he found himself drifting off into some sorrow song, little 
Ruby would come in quietly and lay her little 
head against him. "Don't play that way," 
she would say-. "D o you think nobody loves 
you? Me and mama and papa all love you." 
"He is our boy now, " Clara said as she 
laid her hand on her husband's shoulder one 
night; "we must be mother and father to 
him." 
"An d such a boy! " responded Andy, his 
eyes glistening with pride. "Ah ! he would 
make my old daddy feel good toward him, 
though he died heartbroken by his birth." 
He wiped away a tear, for the remembrance 
brought him sorrow. 
"He worked in the bottom to-day almost 
knee deep in the mud and water. Jones told 
me how all the men had fallen in love with 
him. It's the same everywhere; there isn't a 
man who wouldn't almost die for his mere 
approval. I think he's working too hard. 
To-morrow I'm going to send him off to 
Carter's for a change." TH E MA N WH O WO N 295 
Next day, in the dim gray light of morning, Russell set out to Carter's, ten miles 
away, on an errand of minor importance. He 
spent the middle of the day there and made 
an early start so as to be home in time to 
check off the incoming squad and to get the 
work planned for the morrow. 
The ride had done him good and he felt 
at peace with the whole world. His errand 
quickly accomplished, and finding that he 
had plenty of time before him, he had let 
his pony drop into a walk and with his feet 
thrown carelessly on one side of the saddle 
he rode along singing. The woods caught up 
the echoes and sent his song back in grotesque 
snatches that made him laugh. 
"Ho w merry goes the day when the heart 
is young," he sang joyously, and rounding 
a corner of the woods he came upon another 
rider, a girl, fair of face and pretty, 
motionless in the road upon her horse and 
listening intently to his song. At sight of her 
he hesitated, then settling into his saddle prepared to strike up a faster gait and go on. 
But she stopped him. 
" I heard you singing," she said in a soft, 
mellow voice, "and liked it; please don't 
stop; I want you to sing some more for me. 
I'm going your way, too, " she added frankly. 
Her simplicity and directness confused 
him. He scarcely knew how to reply, for 
instinctively he recognized her for whom she 
was: Colonel Edgefield's daughter Elsie. He 
had not seen either of these personages since 
his arrival here, though once in New York he 
had heard Edgefield speak to a large crowd in 
Cooper Union about the inherent inferiority 
of the Negro. 
He tried to stammer out some reply to her 
words, but before he could do so something 
happened that made it unnecessary. Her 
pony, which had grown restless standing so 
long, seeing a rabbit cross the road, shied and 
jumped out of the roadway. He landed in a 
brush heap whose crackling twigs frightened 
him. Instantly he bounded down the road 
at full speed, the girl taken unawares, clinging desperately to the pommel of the saddle, 
the reins beyond her grasp. 
It had happened so quickly that Russell 
did not take in the situation until horse and 
rider were started and making wildly for 
the steep rocky slope beyond the bend. But 
his own horse had felt the spirit of the 
chase and needed only the quick command, 
"Go , Benny, catch her!" Like a flash he sped 
after her and the woods echoed the clatter 
of horses' hoofs on the rugged road. Benny 
was young and just broken to the saddle and 
he could run. He was gaining on the girl 
every minute. But in the few seconds before 
Stanley took up the chase the girl's horse 
had covered several yards. Only a short 
distance away lay a rocky and treacherous 
slope, and if her horse took it at its present 
pace grim disaster would follow. No horse 
could hold its footing on that slope at even 
half such speed. 
"Go , Benny! Go, boy, catch her!" he cried 
again into Benny's ears. One moment more 
and he dashed swiftly past her, grabbing the 
loosened reins as he went. It was the work 
of a few seconds then to stop both horses, 
dismount and lift her gently to the ground. 
She was nearly exhausted, but bore up 
bravely, refusing to faint, and shortly afterward was ready to resume her journey. 
"How can I thank you? " she said simply. 
"Yo u should not ride so far alone and on 
such an animal," was his practical reply. 
"Belle is usually good and gentle. I don't 
know what possessed her to-day. But I want 
my father to see you and thank you. I'm 
sure he would be happy to do so." 
They had ridden quickly and were almost 
at the road that led off to Edgefield's home. 
"I live in that big house yonder," she said, 
pointing to a large white house half concealed behind a row of cedars leading up to 
the front door. "Won't you come up there 
now and let me introduce you to my father? 
His name is Colonel Edgefield, and I'm his 
daughter Elsie. But," she said hesitatingly, 
"I don't know your name yet." 
"My name is Russell Stanley," he said 
slowly and firmly as he realized the crisis 
before him. "I live with my uncle, Andy 
Wyatt, across the way yonder. I cannot go 
with you because I'm a Negro and your 
father wouldn't like it." 
She opened her eyes wide in astonishment 
and surprise, and looked at him strangely. 
"Wh y didn't you tell me this at first?" she 
demanded coldly. 
"Yo u didn't give me a chance," he 
answered. "And then it ought not be necessary for me to tell it. I once heard your 
father say that there could be no mistaking 
Negro blood." 
"That's quite true," she added, recovering 
her composure and becoming transformed in 
the minute. "My father was right. He hates 
Niggers and so do I." And touching the 
whip to her horse she was soon out of sight. 
(To be concluded in the May CRISIS) NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT 
OF COLORED PEOPLE 
ENDORSEMENT. 
AT the interdenominational preachers' 
meeting of New York and vicinity, 
held on February 10, which was addressed by 
Dr. M. C. B. Mason, the following resolutions were unanimously adopted: 
First: That we endorse the work and 
usefulness of the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People. 
Second: That we open our churches to 
Dr. Mason and the other representatives of 
this organization and pledge our moral and 
financial co-operation in the promotion of) 
its cause. 
SUFFRAGE PARADERS. 
MRS . CARRI E W . CLIFFORD , of the 
Washington branch, makes the following report upon the representation of 
colored women in the woman-suffrage parade: 
"The first parade of the National Woman's 
Suffrage Association, held in the capital, is 
now a matter of history. The colored women 
were represented as follows: 
"Artist, one—Mrs. May Howard Jackson; college women, six—Mrs. Mary Church 
Terrell, Mrs. Daniel Murray, Miss Georgia 
Simpson, Miss Charlotte Steward, Miss Harriet Shadd, Miss Bertha McNiel; teacher, 
one—Miss Caddie Park; musician, one— 
Mrs. Harriett G. Marshall; professional 
women, two— Dr. Amanda V. Gray, Dr. Eva 
Ross. Illinois delegation—Mrs. Ida Wells 
Barnett; Michigan—Mrs. McCoy, of Detroit, 
who carried the banner; Howard University— 
group of twenty-five girls in caps and gowns; 
home makers—Mrs. Duffield, who carried 
New York banner, Mrs. M. D. Butler, Mrs. 
Carrie W . Clifford." 
One trained nurse, whose name could not 
be ascertained, marched, and an old mammy 
was brought down by the Delaware delegation. The women all report most courteous 
treatment on the part of the marshals of the 
parade, and no worse treatment from bystanders than was accorded white women. 
In spite of the apparent reluctance of the 
local suffrage committee to encourage the 
colored women to participate, and in spite 
of the conflicting rumors that were circulated and which disheartened many of the 
colored women from taking part, they are to 
be congratulated that so many of them had 
the courage of their convictions and that they 
made such an admirable showing in the first 
great national parade. 
CONFERENCE. 
THI S number of TH E CRISIS goes to press 
too early to include anything but a 
preliminary notice of the coming conference. 
Dates for the annual conference have been 
set for April 23, 24 and 25, in Philadelphia. 
The conference will devote itself largely to 
the consideration of work, wages and property as affecting the colored people. There 
will be six sessions, beginning Wednesday 
evening, April 23. One session, set for the 
morning of Friday, April 25, will be an 
executive session and largely devoted to the 
work of branches. 
INTERMARRIAGE. 
THE association has opposed anti-inter-
-*- marriage legislation in the following 
States: District of Columbia, Illinois, Wisconsin, New York, Ohio, Michigan, Kansas, 
California and Iowa. The bills in Wisconsin TH E N. A. A. C. P. 297 
and in Kansas have been defeated largely 
through the efforts of the local branches. 
Assurances have been received that it is highly 
improbable the bills will pass in the District 
of Columbia and in New York State. The 
Chicago branch reports that they are organizing for vigorous work against the Illinois 
bill. In Ohio but one vote is needed to 
defeat the measure, and Dr. Mason is to appear in person before the legislative committee which has it in charge. A letter from 
a friend in Cleveland says that members of 
the Ohio legislature advise him that the legislature has been flooded with letters from 
some "National Negro Association" with 
headquarters in New York urging the passage of the anti-intermarriage bill and saying that the colored people desire it. 
m 
BALTIMORE. 
THE Baltimore branch has been holding 
a series of meetings in the various 
churches for the purpose of setting forth the 
aims of the National Association and its 
work. Among the speakers have been Rev. 
G. R. Waller, Dr. A. O. Reid, Dr. F. N. 
Cardoza, Mr. W . Ashbie Hawkins, Mr. 
George Murphy and Mr. G. D. MacDaniels. 
The annual meeting has been announced 
for April 1, with Dr. Du Bois, Professor 
Spingarn and Dr. Mason as speakers. 
At the meeting of the school board on 
February 26 Commissioner Biggs introduced 
a resolution calling upon the board of 
superintendents to make an examination of 
the curriculum of the colored high school 
with a view to the ultimate exclusion of 
languages, biology, physics, chemistry, etc , 
and the substitution of a course of study in 
which the industrial branches alone are to 
be found. In Mr. Biggs' opinion, the subjects he suggests eliminating are luxuries 
when incorporated in the curriculum of a 
Negro high school, and in support of his 
position he quoted Mr. Booker T. 
Washington. 
The Baltimore branch is prepared to address an open letter to the school board 
condemning the Biggs resolution. 
Mr. Samuel T. West, the author of the 
West segregation bill, is preparing to introduce into the city council a bill providing for 
"Jim Crow" street cars. 
CHICAGO. 
A COMMITTEE on membership has been 
formed to start a vigorous campaign 
for new members. -A legislative committee 
has been appointed to oppose the bills introduced into the legislature discriminating 
against colored people. Mr. S. Laing 
Williams has been elected vice-president in 
the place of Mr. Aldis, who is out of the 
country. Mr. Packard and Miss Tibbs have 
been elected directors in the places of Mrs. 
Wooley and Mr. Paris, who could not 
serve. 
m 
DETROIT. 
THE branch is planning for a large meeting to be held early in April with Dr. 
Mason as speaker. Resolutions endorsing 
woman's suffrage were adopted by the branch 
and forwarded to the Michigan Equal Suffrage Association. The anti-intermarriage 
bill under consideration by the legislature 
was defeated largely through the efforts of 
the branch. 
gg 
INDIANAPOLIS. 
THE Indianapolis branch reports meetings at Allen Chapel on February 12 
and on February 21, at the home of Mrs. 
Clay, which was addressed by Mrs. 0 . B. 
Jameson, a prominent clubwoman of Indianapolis. The subject of the address was 
"Woman Suffrage." The branch has succeeded in interesting several influential white 
friends in the matter of local discrimination 
against the colored people. 
m 
NEW YORK. 
TH E New York branch has reorganized 
its vigilance committee as follows: 
New headquarters have been opened in room 
111, 203 Broadway, and these headquarters 
will be in charge of Mr. Gilchrist Stewart, 
who is now serving as the executive secretary 
of the committee. The president of the 
branch, Dr. Spingarn, is chairman of the 
vigilance committee, and Dr. Elliott continues as vice-chairman. The legal advisory 
board includes the six lawyers already on 
the list and Mr. Arthur B. Spingarn. THE BLACK HALF 
By JACOB RIIS 
A LITTLE while back I arrived 
in an Arkansas town and 
addressed a large audience. 
I told them several stories 
of the emigrants who come 
to this country, among 
which was the story of the 
Irishman who went to Wall Street in the 
time of the panic. On this day, when we 
were all scared stiff, when the newspapers 
were filled with stories about the panic, this 
Irishman walked down into Wall Street with 
a bundle done up in a yellow bandanna. 
There was something about the man which 
compelled attention. He entered one of the 
offices and opened up the bandanna. Inside 
of the bundle was a long stocking from which 
he pulled all sorts of scraps of money— 
25-cent pieces, 10-cent pieces, and even a 
little gold. When he had it all out it made 
quite a little heap. He said: "Mother and 
me saved this money in the forty-one years 
we have been in this country against the 
time I could not work any more. Last night, 
sitting by the stove, mother read to me that 
the country was in great trouble and needed 
money, and so I brought this here." This 
man, a foreigner, who had himself chosen 
to be an American, one not to the manor 
born, one who had chosen freedom for himself, was ready to cast into the Treasury at 
Washington every cent he had. 
My audience was greatly moved by this 
story, which was perfectly natural, and I 
was greatly pleased. I had come quite close 
to them. I liked them and they liked me. 
I was leaving the town on the midnight 
train, and when I reached the station a man 
was there waiting for me, who had come to 
see the town and was leaving at the same 
time. This man drew for me a picture of 
social conditions in that town, of the social 
relationship between the whites and (he 
blacks, that beat anything I ever heard of 
or dreamed of in all my days. He told 
me that the blacks there were deliberately 
forced into ignorance and dependency by 
social machinery. I said to him that I hoped 
that this was simply a resurgence of the 
spirit of the war and that the new generation would have a different story to tell. 
He replied: "I wish I could think as you 
do, but I have been here forty years and it 
is worse to-day than it was when I came." 
' After this I simply could not sleep. I 
thought how strange it was that these people 
who were so moved by the Irishman's story 
had forgotten absolutely the affection that 
they had received in such full measure all 
these years from these black-skinned brethren, from whom they had no right to expect 
it. I wondered if they had forgotten the 
songs that lulled them to sleep, the devotion 
of the colored mammy, the care and tenderness that watched over the step of the growing child. I wondered how all of this could 
have passed out of their minds when they 
were so ready to be stirred by the Irishman's 
story. I was so worked up that night that 
I not only did not sleep, but when I arrived 
in New Orleans I got into the black end of 
one of the "Jim Crow" cars. No sooner was 
I seated than the conductor came to me 
and asked me to go into the other part of 
the car. I told him I preferred to remain 
where I was, but he insisted that I move, 
saying it was against the law for me to ride 
in the colored portion of the car. 
That thing kept on working on me, and 
when I was visiting a friend that evening I 
gave expression to my indignation and this 
was the only answer I received: "Well, you 
don't understand." No, I don't understand. 
I didn't then and I don't now. They have 
their problems. I don't understand them 
because I don't live there. But I do live in 
the North, and how about us in the North? 
When we face our Lord and think of the 
problem we have here in the North, we must 
be ashamed when we put the question to 
ourselves whether He makes any difference 
between the blacks and the whites. What 
is the cause of this prejudice? Is it because the colored race is a criminal race, a 
vicious race? 
Fo r twenty-five years I was a reporter in 
police headquarters. I saw crime in all its 
forms. That was my business. Fo r almost TH E BLACK HALF 299 
a whole lifetime I had to do with crime and 
only crime. In those days the colored population of New York was in what was known 
as "Old Africa, " on Thompson Street. This 
section certainly had its share of criminality, 
and ought by right to have been all crime if 
there is any truth in the saying that the 
slums naturally breed vice and crime. This 
was a district where the tenement houses 
were the nastiest ever—not even fit for pigs 
to live in. The landlord made no repairs, 
but took all he could get out of the houses, 
allowing them to stand and rot. But "Old 
Africa " was just the reverse of what it should 
have been. All the black crime with which 
I had to deal during these twenty-five years 
did not leave a single black mark on my 
memory. 
Since then the population has scattered. 
Wherever these colored people have gone 
they have been good tenants, extra clean and 
always prompt to pay. An y landlord will 
make no bones of telling you about it. They 
ought to be favored some as tenants and 
they are. It reminds me of a conversation 
I had with a man whom I met on the train 
the other day. I was speaking of the large 
colored population in New Jersey. He said: 
"They are good people, but they haven't any 
chance. They are not tolerated in any trade. 
They pay the highest rents." That is precisely what the landlord all over is doing. 
He gives them a good name, says they are 
prompt in their payments and sticks $2 extra 
a month on the rent. He acknowledges that 
he does this and gives as his reason: "Once 
a colored house, always a colored house." 
The landlord deliberately exploits the prejudice against the black man to make it pan 
out a profit for him. 
I am here reminded of one of my early 
experiences with the color problem. I came 
from Denmark. Here there is no color 
problem. The colored people coming from 
the West Indies to Denmark are regarded 
as curiosities, and crowds of children will 
follow a colored person up and down the 
streets. 
What is more charming than a colored 
baby? The first time I came across one was 
right here in New York City. It was in a 
nursery where mothers used to take their 
children to be cared for. There were two 
colored babies here among all the whites in 
the nursery. They were fine babies and at 
the age when they are always crying. But 
these little colored babies cried so much that 
the doctors thought something must be the 
matter and tried to find out what it was. 
It turned out that there was in the nursery 
a vicious nurse who had all the prejudice of 
many of her kind concentrated in her. She 
made a practice of pinching the little colored babies. Had she wanted to, she would 
not dare to pinch the white babies because it 
would show on their flesh, but because the 
skin of the little black babies was dark she 
felt that she was safe. This was many years 
ago, but it left its mark on my soul. 
It does not seem to occur to us that as a 
man soweth so shall he reap. Our misdeeds 
will all be visited upon our children and our 
children's children. These black people did 
not seek to come here. W e brought them 
here by force. Every day there are more of 
them, and they are our neighbors. Sometimes I think that a nation's fitness to live 
will certainly be judged by its treatment of 
its dependents. Suppose we were to be 
judged in the eternal scales by our treatment 
of the Negro and the Indian—that is, the 
civic end of it. As Christians we must believe that a man's measure is taken by his 
capacity for service. 
Now, as I am concluding these remarks, 
let me just add this with regard to work in 
our settlements. We often hear of ingratitude on the part of those whom we are trying 
to help in the white settlements, but I have 
yet to hear of the first instance of this on 
the part of the black man. Never have I 
heard it, and I never will, and you never 
will. The only report that comes back to 
us is that of loyalty, affection and gratitude. 
These black people never utter one word of 
reproach. They are willing to let bygones 
be bygones and say: "Just give us your 
hand and let us all be brothers." Shall we 
withhold that hand? THE NEGRO AND THE TRUST. 
THE enterprising colored community at 
Kowaliga, Ala., is threatened by the 
water-power trust. Kowaliga was founded 
forty years ago by John Benson, an exslave, and has been recently extended and 
developed along modern lines by his son, 
William E. Benson. Not only has Mr. 
Benson succeeded in concentrating here an 
investment in lands and industrial plant 
representing over $200,000, but he had 
actually begun the construction of twentyeight miles of railway from the nearest connecting line through the heart of this settlement in order to transport and market valuable timber, until they were held up pending condemnation proceedings by the Interstate Power Company. This is an English 
company with millions back of it. It bought 
out extraordinary rights under a bill slipped 
through the Alabama legislature ten years 
ago, and is now proceeding to condemn 
60,000 acres of farm land, including Ko ­
waliga. The Montgomery Advertiser is helping the steal by headlines like this: 
"THE POWER COMPANY, THE NEGRO 
AND THE RAILROAD!" 
Thus the Negro problem having served to 
put the South into political slavery is now 
being used to fasten the chains of a trust 
which, as a Congressman recently said, will 
make other trusts seem "as mere benevolent 
societies organized for the dissemination of 
Christian charity." 
The Kowaliga community has taken the 
matter to court. 
FROM A WHITE LABORER. 
"I THIN K Alabama has the worst labor laws 
of any in the States. A man can be sent 
to jail for hiring a worker away from another 
man. A striking workman, under the law, 
has no rights; no need for the employer to 
get out an injunction in the same troublous 
manner as the Northern employer has to do ; 
the necessary law is on the statute books now 
which will send the obstreperous worker to 
the coal mines for speaking to a scab or 
picketing or loitering around the master's 
property. 
"Out-of-works are picked up as vagrants 
by deputy sheriffs for the fees there are in 
them, and then railroaded to the coal mines 
or lumber camps for so much a head, where 
they are worked like slaves. In Clarke 
County, Ala., it is a common thing for 
planters to send out agents provocateurs, so 
it is stated, who get stout, husky-looking 
'Niggers' into crap games, card games, or 
sell them a pistol cheap, or get them to bootleg whiskey; then report them to the sheriff, 
who promptly arrests them and a ready judge 
fines them heavily. 
"Then the needy planter offers to pay their 
fine for them if they will make a court contract to work it out with him at from $5 to 
$10 a month. Of course, the poor devils are 
eager to get out of a jail where they are 
half starved by those who have the contract 
at so much per diem to feed them, and they 
agree. 
"The planter then has what are practically, to all intents and purposes, slaves, 
more securely held than before the war because he does not even have to catch them 
if they run away. The sheriff does that at 
so much per head, paid by the county, and 
if the man or the men die, then the planter 
ceases his monthly payments on the fine to 
the county. Could anything be more 
diabolical ? 
"I could fill pages with perfectly true 
stories of convicts on the farms and in the 
mines and forests of Alabama which would 
make any real man's blood boil, but this does 
not seem to affect the Southerner."—New 
York Call. 
THE BURDEN FROM WHITE FOLK. 
To begin, I am a white woman, and have 
loved the colored race from infancy. I happened to pick up a copy of TH E CRISIS and 
was truly shocked at its tendency; so far as 
I can see your book only creates discontent 
among your people. 
If you had the least idea of the harm you 
are doing you would stop it. Social equality 
you will never have, but there is chance 
to improve conditions of a race that can be 
magnificent without social equality. 
(Signed) E. J. H. 
Many thanks, my dear CRISIS, for your 
prophetic monthly. It started our way as 
a Christmas present a few years ago. The 
bitterness of so many of my people toward 
the problem they themselves brought to this 
country fills me with sadness; but Love 
is Life—there is no other life. It must win 
since God is. God, who sees beneath all nonessentials, and the deeper the experience 
passed through the higher the heights attained. Oh, I sorrow with you, almost I 
believe as one of you, in the insults my race 
heaps upon you. But steady, brother mine, 
nothing can hurt us save our own wrongdoing. There is no death. Covered in darkness for a day, it will be light for you 
forever. 
God bless you and keep you on the Heights. 
Most gratefully and fraternally, 
(Signed) VICTOR LYNC H GREENWOOD. 
m 
LINCOLN UNIVERSITY, March 8, 1913 . 
Please discontinue my subscription to 
TH E CRISIS. GEORGE JOHNSON, 
gig Dean. 
FROM COLORED FOLK. 
DEAR SIR : 
I wish to say to you that there is much 
truck grown in this section of North Carolina by the colored people, and the white 
man has been shipping it for us to the whiles 
North, etc. Now we are becoming restless 
about it somewhat and want to know if there 
are any colored commission merchants in 
New York. If so, will you kindly put us in 
touch with them? If not any there, can't 
some one come to the front and be one for a 
few months in the year in order that we may 
ship at least some of our truck to them. I 
mean some good man who will deal fair with 
us and give us a living price for it. There 
are many, many thousands of crates that 
are shipped from this point every year, such 
as peas, beans, cabbage, etc., and many 
thousands of dollars are made by the commission merchants who handle it, and it seems 
to me that there ought to be in New York, 
Philadelphia and Boston at least one colored 
firm of commission merchants who would or 
could handle a portion of the Southern 
colored produce. There is money in it for the 
right man. W e will begin to ship about the 
18th or 20th of April, and if, as I have 
said, you can put me in touch with someone 
whom you think would like to take up the 
matter with me, I will be very glad to hear 
from them. 
Thanking you in advance and anxiously 
waiting to hear from you, I am, 
Yours respectfully, 
I have found truth and the bright side o f 
the Negro in TH E CRISIS, from the first 
time of its publication. 
J. W . FISHER, 
Wallingford, Conn. 
m 
CRISIS bearing fruit here; one of most 
eagerly sought for of our magazines in college library. HARRY H . JONES, 
Oberlin, O. 
LETTERS 302 TH E CRISI S 
TELLING A STORY 
To friends who know you, may be easy, but "putting one over" to 
strangers is quite different. 
Telling a busy, business man about your services or your merchandise is still less 
a "cinch, " for he hears the same story every day a dozen or more times. 
A clever speaker, before a sleepy or hostile audience, puts a good, stiff punch 
into his very first remark. This "knocks 'em off their feet" and they listen. 
Your business letters may be good, but if they lack the "punch" they won't "pull." 
Correct business stationery is the "punch" that hits the busy man "right in the eye" 
and makes him read your letter. 
We'll show you the sort of stationery we create, if you write us. 
W e print for Mr. Conde Nast, of Vogue; we print TH E CRISIS. 
ROBERT N. WOOD , Printing and Engraving 
202 EAST 99th STREET NEW YOR K 
'Phone 6667 Lenox 
Mentio n The Crisis. 
While at Miami, Fla., the other day I 
noticed a sign in the postoffice which read 
as follows: "No Negroes Allowed at This 
Desk." There is another sign, however, which 
informs Negroes that they may use a certain 
desk in the lobby of the office. 
Is such a discrimination constitutional in 
such a place of that kind? If you will look 
into this matter it will be highly appreciated 
by me. Yours very truly, 
* * * 
<I A letter to TH E Crisis says: 
"This is only among the few atrocious 
acts committed by white officers down here: 
The fourth Sunday morning in November, 
at Beaumont, East of Hattiesburg (Miss.), 
at the Kansas City Railroad junction, a marshal killed a young colored man because he 
made a mistake in entering a white waiting 
room. " 
"IT PAYS TO KICK" 
DEAR Sir : 
It may be of interest to you or to some 
of your readers to know that the poem quoted 
in full in TH E Crisis for January and said 
to be entitled. "It Pays to Kick, " and to have 
been attributed by the Woman's Journal to 
Cotton's Weekly, was written by Major 
Holman F. Day, whom I regard as the most 
gifted and original Yankee humorist now 
living. It is to be found on page 87 of his 
volume of verse "Up in Maine" (Small, 
Maynard & Co., Boston, 1904), where it is 
called "The True Story of a Kicker." 
Holman Day was not reared in an atmosphere like that of the classic city of Cambridge. He was born in the little village of 
Vassalboro, Me., and educated at the "freshwater college," Colby, at Waterville. When 
the writer first knew him he was the editor 
of a typical country weekly called the Dexter 
Gazette, and his genial personality made him 
a universal favorite in that portion of Penobscot County, where at least nine-tenths of the 
population • speak Yankee pure and 
undefiled. 
The little poem quoted by you is by no 
means one of Day's best, but it partakes 
somewhat of the general qualities of his 
work, as above outlined. Some of your 
readers might be interested in the foregoing 
estimate. 
Yours truly, 
(Signed) SAMUEL C. WORTHEN. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 303 
Publishers' Chat 
TH E GROWT H O F "TH E CRISI S 
COPIES PRINTE D 
I hereby certify that I have printed the following numbers of copies 
of TH E CRISIS for the months indicated: 
1910—Novembe r 1,00 0 
1911—Marc h 6,00 0 
July 15,00 0 
1912—Apri l 22,00 0 
Decembe r 24,00 0 
1913—Apri l 30,00 0 
Sworn to before me this 15th day of March, 1913. 
FRAN K J . DALY , 
Commissioner of Deeds, New York City. 
ROBER T N . WOOD . 
NE T CIRCULATIO N 
The net paid circulation of TH E CRISIS for March was 23,250 
copies. Three days after publication there was not a copy left in the 
office for sale. . TH E CRISIS has to-day a circulation twice as large as 
that of any other Negro publication—weekly or monthly. 
COMIN G NUMBER S 
The May number will contain the startling climax of H. H. Pace's 
story, an interesting pictorial study of marriage among colored folk, and 
other articles and features. 
In the near future expect the unpublished letters of Robert Gould 
Shaw, a study of crime among Negroes, and a few good short stories. 
Mention The Crisis. 304 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The very Business Opportunity for which. YO U 
have been looking may possibly be here on this page. 
EAR N WHILE YOU LEARN 
A splendid opportunity for 
ambitious young men and 
women. 
W e teac h Shorthand , Typewriting , Bookkeepin g 
an d Busines s Arithmetic , accordin g t o th e latest 
method s of moder n business science . Earnest , 
efficient instructors. 
We also maintai n a n EMPLOYMEN T BUREA U t o 
assist ou r students an d graduate s in securin g positions. Man y of the m no w hol d stead y position s 
wit h som e of Ne w York ' s largest business houses. 
Th e servic e of th e Burea u is FREE . Correspondenc e 
invited . Addres s 
Harlem Commercial School 
F. WALTE R MOTTLEY , Principal 
4 7 West 139th Street New Yor k 
SELLS LIKE HOT CAKES 
Agent s wante d 
everywher e t o sel l 
this ironin g wa x in 
pa d form . I t perfume s th e clothe s 
wit h a lastin g viole t 
perfume -
WAX-IN-PA D MANUFACTURER S 
Lynbrook - - - - - New Yor k 
AGENTS
 $45.0 0 TO $80.0 0 
Thousands of dollars paid to agents 
already in the field. Will Gunckle, of 
Ohio, got $240 worth of orders first 
week. A. Bernider, of Kansas, made 
'$30 in four hours. Made eight calls, took 
six orders. Well, of Missouri, made $10 
in one hour. Hamilton, of Wyoming, 
made $60 first two days. We want good agents in every 
county in the United States, Canada and Mexico. 
NEW INVENTION Just out. Nothing like it. FOLDING BATH TUB. Gives to every 
home a complete bath room in any part of the house—without 
expense. Biggest, quickest, surest money-maker of the 
century for agents. Territory being rapidly assigned. Send 
your application to-day. 
100% PROFIT W e back you with our capital and 
i. • • '<. experience. We give you complete instructions, assistance and co-operation. No charge for territory. Don't delay. Send your name at once. Write plainly 
and give name of your county. Complete particulars FREE. 
Writs to-day. 
ROBINSON MFG. CO., 111 Vance St., Toledo, O. 
$10.00 A DAY AN D MOR E 
T O LIV E AGENT S 
10 0 per cent, profit; sells to every colored man 
and woman on earth. This is the quickest kind of 
easy money. Send 15 cents in stamps or coin for 
50-cent sample and terms; money back if not satisfied at first glance. 
INTERNATIONA L SPECIALTIE S CO. 
Republic Building Chicago, Ill. 
SPAR E TIM E WOR K 
Colored agents, male or female, are wanted everywhere to take orders for our high-grade calling 
cards, invitations, etc. W e are furnishing highgrade calling cards in correct styles and sizes for 
ladies or gentlemen at 50 cents for 10 0 or 2 5 cents 
for 50 ; no extra charge for address. Big demand 
everywhere. Liberal commissions allowed. Outfit 
free. Exclusive territory given. Writ e now for 
terms. 
TH E HOUS E OF CHOWNIN G 
Indianapolis - - - - Indiana 
LE T U S STAR T YO U I N BUSINES S ANY ­
WHERE . Don' t b e a wag e slave ; ge t ou t of th e 
rut ; ge t gri t an d develo p backbon e an d g o in 
business fo r yourself . I f yo u ar e capabl e of earn ­
in g from $5 to $1 0 a da y yo u ar e th e perso n we 
ar e lookin g for. B y unitin g wit h u s yo u are on 
a beelin e to larg e incom e an d independence . WRIT E 
NO W FO R OU R PROPOSITION ! 
Th e NELSO N SUPPL Y COMPAN Y 
Silverware Specialties Harrisburg, Pa. 
JUS T THIN K O F I T 
Gordo n Safet y Razor s mad e t o retai l fo r 25c . Shaves 
a s smoothl y a s som e of th e high -price d razors 
Splendi d seller. Wil l last a lifetime . Sample , 10c. 
GORDO N COMPAN Y 
Northwestern Building Chicago, Ill. 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MORE 
than $200 PER MONT H acting as 
AGENT S for the sale of our properties in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . 
The real coming country where there are 
opportunities and openings for all. Write 
us to-day, giving your age and experience, 
and we will offer you a FIN E PROPOSITIO N WHIC H WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVES REALTY CO. 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ames Bldg. Muskogee, Okla. 
AGENTS—Bi g money. Johnson-Flynn 
fight and other copyrighted Negro pictures. Portraits. Pillow Tops. Catalog 
FREE. 30 days' credit. 
PEOPLES PORTRAIT CO. 
Station U, Chicago, Ill. 
BOKAR A DIAMONDS . Agents, everyone, to wear 
an d sell ou r famou s Bokar a diamonds. Writ e for 
sampl e offe r an d catalogu e free . 
NORTHWESTER N JEWELR Y COMPAN Y 
Dept. 2 4 
214 1 Summerdale Ave . Chicago, Ill. 
$50 TO $1OO A MONTH 
WAN T ACTIV E MA N EACH LOCALITY 
16 to 60 years. Introduce us to friends. 
Grand world-wide Society. Pays largest 
sick, injury, death benefits for smallest cost. Helpful, inspiring, PROFITABL E ! Made thousands happy and prosp
quick for big Cash-Bonus offer. 
I L U 
Mentio n Th e Crisis. 
EXPERIENCE. 
NO T J 
NEEDEDJUST 
SPARE 
TIME TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 305 
REA L ESTAT E 
Buy Brooklyn Property 
Are you a bonafide purchaser? Have 
you money to invest? No w is the time. 
Values are low. $500 cash buys well-built 
brick house. Balance on easy terms. Convenient location, etc. Houses for sale in 
every section of the city. For particulars 
G. JOHNSO N 
19 6 Putna m Ave . Brooklyn, N . Y . 
WANTE D 
500 Negro families (farmers preferred) to settle on FREE Government Lands in Chaves County, New 
Mexico. Blackdom is a Negro colony. 
Fertile soil, ideal climate. No "Jim 
Crow" Laws. For information write 
JAS. HAROLD COLEMAN 
Blackdom, New Mexico 
Telephone 404 8 Prospect 
JOH N B. MOSELE Y 
REA L ESTAT E and INSURANC E 
S40 Fulton Street Brooklyn, N. T. 
Own Home in the North 
If not, why not ? W e have an increasing demand 
for ambitious, progressive colored people who are 
seeking homes in the North. W e are the medium 
through which these demands can be supplied. 
Only such as can satisfy us that they are desirable 
will be considered. Get our Property Bulletin. 
It is free for the asking. 
P. H . SYKES , Real Estate 
Cor. 19th and Ellsworth Sts. Philadelphia, Pa. 
A PLAC E T O STO P 
HOTE L WASHINGTO N 
First-class Service for First-class People 
3252 Wabash Avenue, 
Chicago, Ill. 
FURNISHE D ROOM S for respectable people. All 
modern conveniences. Apply 33 West 131st 
Street, New York. 
TYPEWRITER S 
Remingtons, Densmores, 
Jewetts , $11.5 0 each; 
Franklins, Postals, Hammonds, $9 each. Bargains in 
Underwoods, Smiths and all 
others. All guaranteed. 
Supplies. 
Standard Typewriter 
Exchange 
23B Park Row, New York 
PRESIDENT S 
NEGR O REPUBLI C 
in colors and a short history of Liberia. 16 x 20 . 
Heady to hang on the walls; only 50c. prepaid; in 
told frames $1.25 . Everybody wants one. Writ e 
NEGR O PRESS , Box 126 ; Gainesville, Fla., U. S. A. 
1,000 agents wanted. 
UNDERTAKER S 
Telephone Columbus 393 5 Open All Night 
RODNE Y DAD E & BROS. 
Undertakers and Embalmers 
Notary Public 
Funeral Parlor and Chapel Free. 
Licensed Lady Embalmer Prompt Service 
28 6 West 53d Street New York, N. Y . 
Between Broadway and 8th Avenue 
Smart Men Wanted 
$5 to $10 a Day 
For Men Who Can Talk 
Smart men, clever talkers, good "Just Like 
mixers—send us your name and Finding 
address. We'v e got a truly Money' 
wonderful proposition for men 
like you. W e start you in 
tailoring business, furnis h 
everything, back you to the 
limit. Hustlers make $5 to $1 0 
a day. 
Be a Money-Maker ! Look Prosperous! 
Don't be a wage slave on small pay. 
Be your own boss! Make money fast 
and easy. Mix with prosperous people. 
Dress in the height of style. Our men 
are pointed out as top-notchers, winners, envied by all. 
Grand FREE Outfit—Write for it To-day 
This big, wealthy tailoring concern 
spares no expense to Start you right. 
Furnish Grand Free Outfit, handsome 
color plates, elegant cloth samples, tape 
measure, complete instructions and 
selling helps—everything free. No 
money or experience necessary. Just 
write. 
Start a Fortune in Spare Time 
You can do it. Whol e time or spare time. For 
20 years this company has been famous for making 
the swellest, best-fitting, longest-wearing made-tomeasure clothes. Writ e to-day for Free Outfit. 
The Progress Tailoring Co. , Dept. 864 , Chicago, Ill. 
Mentio n T h e Crisis. 306 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LEGA L DIRECTOR Y 
This is a ready reference of some of the 
best lawyers in the country. 
If you are a lawyer and your name is 
not listed here you should write us at once. 
Residence 254 6 Michigan 
Bell Phone E-216 1 
Office Phone 
Home 58 Main 
C. H. CALLOWA Y 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
11 7 W . 6th Street Kansas City, Mo . 
FRANKLI N W . WILLIAM S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
Real Estate Conveyancer 
20 6 Parrish Street Durham, N. C 
Office L. D. Telephone 329 7 Marke t 
Residence L. D. Telephone, 5277-M Market 
GEORGE A. DOUGLAS 
Counselor-at-Law 
Rooms 613-614 , Metropolitan Building 
11 3 Marke t St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
Telephone 557 4 Beekman Rooms 90 5 to 90 7 
WILFOR D H. SMITH 
Lawye r 
15 0 Nassau Street New York City 
Uptown Office—136 West 136th Street 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRIS 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
102 0 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
BROW N S. SMITH 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610 , Sykes Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
GEORGE W . MITCHELL 
Attorney-at-Law 
90 8 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Tel. 202 6 Fort Hill Cable Address Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMIN 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
3 4 SCHOO L STREE T Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbie Hawkins George W . F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md . 
LEGAL DIRECTORY—Continued 
Telephones: 
Central 104 W 
Main 61 
HARR Y E. DAVI S 
Attorney-at-Law Notary Public 
160 7 Williamson Bldg. Cleveland, O. 
ELIJAH J. GRAHAM , Jr. 
Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public 
102 6 Marke t Street Wheeling, W . Va . 
ARCHITECT S 
WIGINGTO N & BELL 
Architects 
Karbach Block Omaha, Neb. 
H. HENR Y HARRI S 
Architect 
Cor. 8th and Princess Streets 
Wilmington, N. C. 
MOVIN G 
Telephone 421 4 Greeley 
BRANIC'S EXPRESS 
PACKIN G AN D SHIPPIN G 
ANDRE W J. BRANI C 
469 SEVENT H AVENU E New Yor k City 
Orders by mail or 'phone receive prompt attention 
TRUNK S STORE D 25c . PE R MONT H 
Official Expressman for the C. V . B A. 
PERSONA L CARD S 
Telephone 527 7 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUD E E. CURTIS 
Surgeon Dentist 
188 West 135th Street, New York City 
Telephone 488 5 Morningside 
DR. D. W . ONLE Y 
Surgeon Dentist 
S. W Cor. 133 d St. and Leno x Ave., New York 
Office Hours: 9 to 1 2 a. m., 1 to 9 p. m. 
Sundays by Appointment 
REGALI A 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO. 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E. Cor. 8th and Plum Sts. 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
Mention The Crisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 307 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D PEOPL E 
OFFICES: 2 6 Ve«ey Street, New York. Incorporated May 25 , 1911 
National President—Mr . Moorfield Storey, Boston 
Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Rev. John Hayne s Holmes, New York. 
Mr . John E. Milholland, New York. 
Bishop Alexander Walters. New York 
Rev. Garnet R. Waller . Baltimore. Md 
Miss Mar y Whit e Ovington, Brooklyn. N. Y 
OFFICER S 
Chairman of the Board of Directors— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard, New York. 
Treasurer—Mr . Walte r E. Sachs, New York. 
Director of Publicity and Research— 
Dr. W . E. B. Du Bois, New York. 
National Organizer—Dr. M. C. B. Mason, Cincinnati. 
Secretary—Miss Ma y Childs Nerney, Brooklyn. N. Y . 
The Fifth Annual Conference will be held in Philadelphia 
April 23, 24 and 25, 1913 
Among the speakers invited are: 
Senator Robert La Follette 
John Mitchell, Jr. 
Judge Mayer Sulzberger 
President John Hope 
Mrs. L. H. Hammond 
Mayor Rudolph Blankenburg 
Mrs. A. W. Hunton 
Rabbi Joseph Krauskopf 
Hon. Albert E. Pillsbury 
Bishop J. H. Coppin 
F. D . Weatherford 
Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard 
Dr. M. C. B. Mason 
Dr. James H. Dillard 
John E. Milholland 
Moorfield Storey 
Dr. W. E. B. Du Bois 
SESSIONS A T WITHERSPOO N HALL, TH E FRIENDS' MEETING 
HOUSE AN D TEMPLE KENESETH ISRAEL. TH E PUBLIC IS 
CORDIALL Y INVITED. 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE. 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in Class 
paying $ a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name 
Address 
Class 1. Donors, paying $100 to $500 per Class 3. Contributing Members, paying 
year. $2 to $10 per year. 
Class 2. Sustaining Members, paying Class 4. Associate Members, paying $1 
$25 per year. per year. 
The subscription to TH E CRISIS is $1 extra, except to members paying $2 or more, 
who signify their wish that $1 of their dues be considered a CRISIS subscription. 
All members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the 
Annual Conference of the Association. 
PLEAS E MAK E CHECK S PAYABL E TO NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF 
COLORE D PEOPLE, 2 6 VESE Y STREET, NE W YOR K CITY . 
Mentio n Th e Crisis . 308 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
SCHOOL OF BEAUTY CULTURE AND HAIR DRESSING 
Manicuring, Shampooing, Hai r Dressing, Marcel Wav ­
ing, Facial and Body Massage, Hai r Making, Chiropody, 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimited practice in parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summer Course, S7.5 0 up. Send for 
booklet. Mme . A. Carter Kelsey, Gen'l Intr.; Dr. Samuel 
A. Kelsey. Chiropodist, President and Gen'l Manager . 
HARRIE T GIBBS-MARSHALL , President LOUI S G. GREGORY , Financial Secretary 
HARR Y A. WILLIAMS , Vice-President GREGORI A A. FRASER , Recording Secretary 
The Washington Conservatory of Music 
and School of Expression 
Piano, Violin, Wind Instruments, Piano Tuning, Vocal Expression, History of 
Music Theory and Modern Languages 
The first and only Mission Music School founded and controlled by Negroes 
in America. 
Many scholarships awarded. Talented students never turned away unaided. 
902 T Street, N. W . WASHINGTON , D. C. 
Mrs. DAISY TAPLEY TO MUSIC LOVER S 
Teache r of voic e an d pi a no . wil l take a limite d A price list of recent additions to our 
numbe r of pupils durin g th e summe r months. , • •; . . - T 
„ . . , , . . , , , stock of music. All by Negro composers. Choruse s trained, soloists coached . Fo r term s an d
 J 0 
appointments address th e studio : T n j T I 
J. Rosamond Johnson 
172 West 133d Street NEW YORK 
For Thee $0.25 
HARMON Y AN D COMPOSITION De Little Pickaninny's Gone to Sleep 40 
TAUGH T B Y MAI L 
Interesting and Comprehensive Course. 0 « . . , 
Small monthl y payments.
 S
- Coleridge-Taylor 
Addres s O Mistress Mine $0.4 0 
J. HILLAR Y TAYLO R Once Only .40 
Directo r Th e Succes s Pian o School . 
4 3 O Street, N. E . Washington, D. C.
 Sh e Reste d b y th e Broke n Brook .40 
Bel l Telephone . Until .35 
Mme . MARI E JACKSO N STUART' S H T Burleigh 
School of Expression, Music and Dramatic Ar t 
A thorough , well-define d cours e of instruction , Jean $0.4 0 
designe d to give the studen t a comprehensiv e gras p _ _ 
of each subject in th e shortest time . Term s
 0 Love of a Day .40 
reasonable. 
Dramas staged, Amateur s trained . Play s revised . 
ADDRES S Jas. Reese Europe 
3 3 West 131st Street New York The Clef Club March $0.20 
Miss MINNIE BROWN (A DECIDED HIT) 
Send for complete price list. The above 
SOPRANO musi c wil l b e sen t pos t paid On receip t 0 f 
May be engaged fo r commencements, concerts an d 
• , r. J J price, recitals Fo r term s address : 
172 West 133d Street NEW YORK
 TH E
 DUNBA R COMPAN Y 
Care of Tapley Studio 26 Vesey Street New York 
Mentio n T h e Cr isis. 
KELSEY'S 
Telephone. Morningside 816 2 
14 3 West 131st St. 
NE W YOR K The Cr
309 
MENTION THE CRISIS 
SUMME R SESSION A T WILBERFORC E UNIVERSIT Y 
Under such prominent educators as Dr. W . E. B. Du Bois, Prof. Kelley Miller, Dr. L, B. Moore, Prof. G. N. Grisham, Edwina B 
Kruse, Jennie C. Lee, Dudley W . Woodward and a number of other well-known instructors. Courses in Psychology, Education, Ethics, 
History, Methods, Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics, Music, Art, Physical Culture, Household Sciences and Industries. June 23 to 
August 1, 1913 . EAR L E. FINCH . Director Summer Session 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH , President Wilberforce, Ohio 310 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Our wonderful "Book of Gold" tower 
head and shoulders ove r anything ever 
attempted by any Made-to-Measure Tailoring House . Free outfits cost us$48,000 
—others can't imitate—in actual gold -
Agents quickly throw awa y ordinary 
outfits moment they see this dazzling 
"BOO K OF GOLD! " Neve r before such 
a wonderful chance for you to make 
$6 0 a Wee k Easy 
BOO K OF GOLD"—with pick of 5,000 
Swell Samples, 60 wondrous fashion 
plates —make s success sure. N o experience or capital needed. Go out any day 
and clean up $5 to $15 in few hours. Orders come easy—satisfaction guaranteed 
by $5,000 cash bond—you simply can't fail 
with our help! W e stand back of our work 
with a real —not sham—guarantee. W e 
prepay express charges on all orders. 
Your Own Clothes Free 
Send us a hurry-up postal for your own free 
suit offer and complete free sample outfit, 
charges prepaid. Your suit will prove a 
magnet—draw a crowd— 
compel admiration—orders will swiftly follow 
your appearance — the 
u
 BOOK OF GOLD " 
does the rest—positively 
no competition. 
W E PA Y EXPRES S 
CHARGE S EVE N O N 
YOU R FREE SUI T 
Get Our Startling Offer 
Biggest—best—grandest money making chance—for new 
or old agents. Trial will prove! Let us show you. Send name 
today and see what we send you FREE! Don't miss this. New 
—Different—Original. Write quick, forget everything and 
• rush your application. Postal Brings Everything FREE! m 
GREA T CENTRA L TAILORIN G COMPANY , 
Dept.756 Jackson Blvd. , CHICAGO , ILL. 
The TRAINED MA N 
IS THE ONE WHO GETS 
THE POSITION HIGHER UP 
If you will give us a small amount 
of your spare time, we will fit you for 
the position higher up—the position that 
pays salary, not wages. 
W e train men in higher accounting 
and business efficiency, and the course 
of instruction is designed by Charles E. 
Mitchell, certified public accountant. 
Our graduates are prepared to pass 
any state or territory examination in 
bookkeeping. 
Enroll to-day—the call for competent bookkeepers cannot be supplied. 
Twentieth Century Business 
Methods 
Box 81 Institute, W . Va. 
The 
Perfect Washing Machine 
Pric e $1.50 
Saves your time, 
labor and hands 
from rubbing on 
the washboard. 
Washe s your 
clothes by compressed air and 
suction, the water 
and soap being 
forced through the 
clothes. Work s 
on the principle 
of the vacuum 
carpet cleaner. 
Your clothes 
are not subject to 
the wea r that is 
caused by the 
beating and batting process used 
by other makes. 
Wit h this washer 
it is soap and 
water that do the 
work. 
Lace curtains and the most delicate 
fabrics can be cleaned without the 
slightest damage. Will wash a tub of 
clothes in 5 to 1 0 minutes. 
An y woman, or even a child, can operate this washer. 
Sen t prepai d on receip t of retai l price , 
$1.50 . Anybody can afford to buy it; 
nobody can afford to be without it. 
AGARD NOVELTY CO., Distributors 
38 West 136th Street New York 
Good proposition for agents. 
FLUFFS-MOQUET TRADE MARK 
REGISTERED 
THE PERFECT WASH 
FO R TH E HAI R 
Contains no soap; composed of 
materials better suited for the purpose. Insures your hair the cleanest, 
fluffiest, most delightful and satisfying wash it has ever enjoyed. 
Send 2-cent stamp for trial package. Agents wanted. 
132 Nassau Street 
Felix Tempest, Co. American Ma
New York 
Mentio n T h e C risis. 
BOOK OF GOLD 
Free To Agents Safel y Secure d Firs t Mortgage 
AND 
Firs t Mortgag e Bond s 
Capital Demands Higher Wages 
Capital that used to work for 3% to 4 1/2% is now demanding higher wages to meet 
the increased cost of living. We offer capital employment at 5 1/2 % to 6% secured 
by first mortgage on newly improved Chicago income Real Estate, in the form of 
bonds, in amounts of $100, $300 and $500 and individual mortgages in amounts from 
$1,000 to $25,000, in periods from one to six years. All titles guaranteed by Chicago 
Title an d Trust Company, Capital and Surplus over Six Million Dollars. 
H. David MURRAY & Co. 
MORTGAGE BROKERS ((Kb™))) REAL ESTATE 
LOANS ^ INSURANCE 
Bank Floor S E Cor S TAT E & 31S T S T S 
CHICAG O 
Established 1876 Telephone 1708 Harlem 
The MANDO 
Mozar t Conservatory of Music , Inc. 
2105 Madison Avenue New York 
Branches of Instruction: 
Violin, Violoncello, Harmony, Ensemble Playing, 
Chamber Music. The course of instruction adopted 
throughout all departments is thorough and precisely the same as taught in the leading conservatories in this city and in Europe. 
The Conservatory Sextette and Concert Orchestra, 
Mrs. Eliza Mando, Conductor, is open for engagements for concerts and all occasions where superior 
music is required. Terms reasonable. 
For further information address 
MRS . ELIZ A MANDO , Director 
D O YO U WAN T A PROMOTION ? 
Positions filled in ever y line of educationa l work . W e hav e a 
specia l deman d fo r 
Music Teachers Domestic Science Teachers 
High School Teachers Bookkeepers and Stenographers 
Agricultural Teachers Manual Training and Industrial Teachers 
W e ha d calls fo r teacher s in 191 2 from 
Alabama Georgia Mississippi South Carolina 
Arkansas Kentucky Maryland Tennessee 
Delaware Louisiana New Jersey Texas 
Florida Missouri North Carolina Virginia 
West Virginia 
Schoo l officials ar e beginning no w to select their facultie s for 
the comin g schoo l term. Registe r early and ge t in touch with them. 
Blank s an d information furnished fre e upon application. 
MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
133 5 T Street, N . W . Washington , D . C. 
Mention The Crisis. CAP E MAY , N. J. 
This magnificent hotel, located in the heart of the most beautiful seashore resort in the world; 
replete with every modern improvement, superlative in construction, appointments, service, and refined 
patronage. Orchestra daily. Garage, bath houses, tennis, etc., on premises. Special attention given to 
ladies and children. Send for booklet. E. W . DALE . Owner. 
Don't Strive for Another Complexion 
BEAUTIFY THE 
ONE YOU HAVE 
A lady writes us: 
"I have a very dark-brown complexion, and the 
white face powder I use gives me an ashy appearance. Your brown powder is just the thing. I 
like it." 
Whether the complexion is cream, olive or brown, 
we have a tint to match it. Price 50 cents per box. 
Send 2-cent stamp and name of druggist for sample. 
TH E DUNBA R CO. , 26 Vesey St., New York 
Perfect Face Powde r 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 