Volume Two OCTOBER , 1911 Number Six 
FRO M "TH E QUES T ΟF TH E SILVE R FLEECE " 
TH E CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION for the 
ADVANCEMEN T of COLORE D PEOPL E 
(Incorporated Ma y 25, 1911) 
OBJECT.—Th e National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People 
is an organization composed of men and 
women of all races and classes who believe that the present widespread increase 
of prejudice against colored races and 
particularly the denial of rights and 
opportunities to ten million Americans of 
Negro descent is not only unjust and a 
menace to our free institutions, but also 
i i a direct hindrance to World Peace 
and the realization of Human Brotherhood. 
METHODS.—Th e encouragement of 
education and efforts for social uplift; the 
dissemination of literature; the holding of 
mass meetings; the maintenance of a lecture bureau; the encouragement of vigilance committees; the investigation of complaints; the maintenance of a Bureau of 
Information; the publication of TH E 
CRISIS ; the collection of facts and publication of the truth. 
ORGANIZATION.—Al l interested 
persons are urged to join our organization 
—associate membership costs $1, and 
contributing and sustaining members pay 
from $2 to $25 a year. 
FUNDS.—W e need $10,000 a year 
for running expenses of this work and particularly urge- the necessity of gifts to help 
on our objects. 
OFFICERS.—Th e officers of the 
organization are: 
National President — Mr . Moorfield 
Storey, Boston, Mass. 
Chairman of the Executive Committee— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard, New 
York. 
Treasurer—Mr. Walter E . Sachs, New 
York. 
Director of Publicity and Research—Dr. 
W . E . B. DuBois, New York. 
Secretary—Miss Mary W . Ovington, 
New York, 
COMMITTEE.—Ou r work is carried on under the auspices of the following General Committee, in addition to the 
officers named: 
MIsa Gertrude Barnum. New York, 
Miss Frances Blascoer, New York. 
•Rev. W. H. Brooks, New Yerk. 
Prof. John Dewey, New York. 
"Dr. John Lovejoy Elliott, New York. 
•Mr. Thoa. Ewing, Jr., New York, 
"itev. John Haynes Holmes, New York. 
M r. Hamilton Holt, New York. 
Mlas Maud R. Ingersoll, New York. 
"Mrs. Florence Kelley, New York. 
"Mr. Paul Kennaday, New York, 
•Mrs. F. R. Keyaer, New York. 
Dr. Chaa. Lenz, New York. 
Mr. Jacob W. Mack, New York. 
•Mrs. M. D. Maclean, New York. 
•Mr. John E. Milholland. New York. 
Itev. Horace G. Miller, New York. 
Mrs. Max Morgenthau, Jr., New York. 
Mr. James F. Morton. Jr., New York. 
Mr. Henry Moskowltz, New York. 
Miss Leonora O'Kellly, New York. 
•Re". A. Clayton Powell, New York. 
"Mr. Charles Edward Russell, New York. 
Mr. Jacob H. Setoff, New York. 
Prof. E. R. A. Sellgman, New York. 
"Dr. Joseph Silverman, New York. 
Mrs. Anna Garlln Spencer, New York. 
•Prof. J. E. Spingara, New York. 
Mrs. Henry Villard. New York. 
"Miss Lillian D. Wa'.d, New York 
•Mr. Wm. English Walling, New York. 
"Bishop Alexander Walters, New York. 
Dr. Stephen '6. Wise, New York. 
Mlas M. E. Lyons, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
•Dr. O. M. Waller. Brooklyn. N. Y. 
Mr. D. Macon Webster, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Mr. Geo. E. Wlbecan, Jr., Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Mrs. W. H. Talbert. Buffalo, N. Y. 
Hon. Thoa. M. Oaborne, Auburn, N. Y. 
•Mr. W. L. Bulkley, Itldgefleld Park, N. J. 
Mr. George W. Crawford. New Haven, Conn. 
Miss Maria Baldwin, Boston, Mass. 
Mr. Francis J. Garrison, Boston, Man . 
Mr. Archibald H . Grimke, Boston, M»n. 
Miss Adelene Moffat, Boston. Mass. 
•Mr. Albert E. Pillsbury, Boston, MasB. 
Mr. Wm. Munroe Trotter, Boston. Mass. 
Dr. Horace Bumstead, BronkHr.o, MaBB. 
Miss Elizabeth C. Carter, New Bedford. MAI L 
Rev. Harvey Junuston, Baltimore, Md, 
Ret. Garnett R. Walter, Baltimore, Md. 
Prest. Chaa. T. Thwlng, Cleveland, O. 
Mr. Chas. W. Chesnutt, Cleveland, 0 
Hon. Harry C. Smith, Cleveland, O. 
Prest. H. C. King, Oberlln. O. 
Prest. W. S. Scarborough. Wllberforce, O. 
•Miss Jane Addams, Chicago, 111. 
•Mrs. Ida B. Wells Bamett, Chicago, I1L 
"Dr. C. E. Bentley, Chicago, HI. 
Miss Sophronlsba Breckenrldge. Chicago, 111. 
Mr. Clarence Darrow, Chicago, 111. 
Mr. Juliu3 Rosenwald, Chicago, 111. 
Mrs. Cella Parker Woolley, Chicago. 111. 
Mr. F. L. Mcfihae. St. Paul, Minn. 
Miss Frances Bartholomew, Philadelphia, Pa. 
•Dr. N. F. Moseell. Philadelphia. Pa. 
"Dr. Wm. A. Sinclair, Philadelphia, Pa. 
MISB Susan Wharton, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mr. R. R. Wright, Jr., Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mr. W. Justin Carter, Harrlsburg, Pa. 
Rev. Harvey Johnson. D.D., Baltimore. Md. 
Hon. Wm. S. Bennet. Washington, D. C. 
Mrs. Carrie W. Clifford. Washington, D. C. 
Mr. L. M. Hershaw. Washington, D. C. 
Prof. Kelly Miller. Washington. D. C. 
Prof. L. B. Moore. Washington. D. C. 
Justice W. P. Stafford, Washington, D. C. 
"Mrs. Mary Church Terrell. Washington, D. C. 
•Rev. J. Milton Waldron, Washington, D. C. 
Prest. John Hope, Atla nta. Ga. 
Mr. Leslie P. Hill. Manassas, Va. 
Mr. William Pickens, Talladega, Ala. 
•Executive Committee. 
OFFICES : 
Suite 311, 20 Vesey Street, New "York. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RAGE S 
Published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 
20 Vesey Street, New York City. 
W . E . BURGHARD T DUBOIS . Editor ( OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D 
™f™£ C ™NFR'r^" M &°£b.
Ut[al \ CH M A
A RX LE B
S
A
f DWAR D RUSSEL L FRAN K M . TURNER , Circulation Manafer Editor* J W S BRAITHWAIT E 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY , Advertising Manatfer ( KELL Y MILLE R 
CONTENT S FOR OCTOBER , 1911 
Page 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 227 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 234 
OPINIO N 237 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 240 
EDITORIA L 242 
TH E FIRS T BLOODSHE D O F TH E CIVI L WAR : By M . D. Maclean.. .. 246 
A LETTER : From John Haynes Holmes 251 
TH E COWARD : By Will. N. Johnson 252 
WOMEN' S CLUBS : Mrs. S. J . Garnett. By Mrs. W. A. Hunton 253 
TH E BURDE N 254 
WHA T T O REA D 256 
AS OTHER S SEE US 
"We have received for review a number of 
copies of TH E CRISIS , a magazine which announces itself as 'a record of the darker races-' 
1t undertakes to give every month a resume of 
the situation in regard to the race problem in this 
country and is the organ of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 
20 Vesey Street, in this city. 
"It carries out its mission very well, as might 
be expected from the names of the editorial board. 
The editor-in-chief is Dr . W . E . B. D u Bois, the 
well-known Negro writer and sociologist, and the 
author of that remarkable book, 'The Souls of 
Black Folk.' Assisting; him are Messrs. Oswald 
Garrison Villard , the journalist and historian of 
John Brown ; Charles Edwar d Russell, Kell y Miller , 
the essayist, and others. Th e purpose of the 
magazine is declared to be the collection and 
publication of the exact facts in the effort _ to 
secure justice for the black man."—Times, New 
York. 
"The cause of the colored folk is to be ably 
defended by a new periodical, TH E CRISIS , 
already well started in New Yor k by the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People. Dr . W . E . B. D u Bois, the Negro writer 
and sociologist, is editor-in-chief, and one is glad 
to find Garrison blood in at least one of his corps 
of associates—Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard , historian of John Brown and president of the -New 
Yor k Evening Post Co. It is to be noted, further 
that 20 Vesey Street, the address of the Post, 
is also that of TH E CRISIS , and that among 
the members of the new Association are Miss 
Jane Addams, Professor John Dewey, Mr . Jacob 
Schiff, and others of prominence and influence. 
Th e truth and the whole truth about the black 
man, and the securing of justice for him, are 
the primary objects of the little magazine, which 
also contains some matter of more general interest."—Dial, Chicago. 
"TH E CRISI S ' is published by the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 20 Vesey Street, New York. This is the 
office of the New Yor k Evening Post, and one 
of tne sponsors for the paper is Mr . Oswald 
Garrison Villard , who is the president of the 
New York Evening Post Company. Th e securing 
of justice for the black man is the aim of the 
paper, and it will be fearless in its insistence— 
being sane, but showing no spirit pi temporizing 
with great injustices."—Christian W ork^, and 
Evangelist, New York. 
"TH E CRISI S for August, that splendid race 
magazine which is filling an important mission in 
the literature of the times in building up healthy 
public sentiment rega/ding the Negro people."— 
National Baptist Unwn-Review, Nashville. 
Agenti wante d wh o ca n furnish references. 
Entere d u leoond-cla M matte r I n tn e post office a t Ne w Yor k City . 224 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
FISK University 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Sixty-five College Freshmen . 
A Ne w Department of Sociology . 
A Notabl e Equipmen t in Lan d and 
Buildings. 
Successful Graduates in Nearl y Ever y 
State. 
Endorse d by the Genera l Education 
Board . 
Fo r information address 
GEORG E A. GATES , President. 
Uirginia Union University 
RICHMOND, VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological 
seminaries. 
A n Academy, with manual training, giving 
a preparation for life or for college. 
The positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of 
CI.ISB work, its fine new buildings and wellequipped laboratories and library , prepare a 
faithful Btudent for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVE Y Preiident 
Shaw University 
This institution of learning, established in 1865, 
has industrial departments for both young men 
and young women, a? well as college, normal and 
preparatory departments. Ther e are also Schools 
of Law, Medicine. Pharmacy and Theology. 
Th e facilities have recently been increased. 
Other improvements are being planned that will 
be completed within the next two years. 
Applications should be made several months or 
a year in advance, for it has become impossible 
during the last few years to receive all who apply. 
The present enrollment is over 500. 
Th e academic year begins on the Thursday 
nearest the first day of October and continues for 
thirty-two consecutive weeks. Th e charges are 
moderate. Catalogues furnished upon application. 
Address TH E PRESIDEN T 
Shaw University, Raleigh, N . C 
FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SO N OF F T O 
Wilberforce University 
Th e only school in the country for 
Negro Yout h which has a Militar y Department equipped by the National 
Government, and commanded by a detailed 
United States Arm y Officer. 
DEPARTMENT S 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L TECHNICA L 
COMMERCIA L THEOLOGICA L 
CLASSICA L MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Bankin g taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank . Twelve 
Industries, ISO acres of beautiful campus, 
Te n Buildings. Healthful surroundings, 
exceptional community. Maintained in 
part by the State of Ohio which supplies 
facilities for the thorough training of 
teachers. 
Fal l term began September 19th, 1911. 
Writ e for Catalog. 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH , President 
WM . A . JOINER , Superintendent, C. N. 
I. Department. 
Address all communications to 
BO X 36, WILBERFORCE , OHIO . 
Mention T H E CEIIII . Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High School, 
Grammar School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fall Term Opened Sept. 27, 1911. 
For information address 
Presiden t R . W . McGranaha n 
KNOXVHXE, TENN. 
Atlanta Baptist College 
ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Established 1867 
A School for Boys and Men 
DEPARTMENTS : 
GRADE S FIN E EQUIPMEN T 
ACADEM Y STRON G FACULT Y 
COLLEG E DIVINIT Y SCHOO L 
Societies. Debating Clubs and Athletics. 
For further information address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
National Religious 
Training School 
Offers special training to young 
men and women as Settlement 
Workers, Association Secretaries, 
Missionaries, Literary and Other 
Branches. 
The following departments are now 
in successful operation: 
Commercial, Literary, Music, Theological 
Religious Training and Industrial 
FAL L TER M OPEN S OCTOBE R 12 
SUMME R SCHOOL. 
The Summer School and Chautauqua opened July 5, 1911, and closed 
August 14. 
The attractions and advantages 
offered in the Summer School are 
unsurpassed in the country for colored young men and women. 
Applications should be sent in at 
an early date. 
Loan Scholarships have been established for deserving young men 
and women. 
For further information address 
The President, National Religious 
Training School, Dwhani, N. C. 
Mention 
THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 225 
American Church Institute 
for Negroes 
SI X SCHOOL S 
Th e Bishop Payne Divinit y School, Petersburgh, Va. , Warden, tho Reverend C. B, Bryan , 
D.D. ; St. Auguatino's School, Raleigh, N. 0., for 
normal and collegiate training, the Reverend A . 
B. Hunter , Principal; the St. Paul Normal and 
Industrial School, Lawronceville, Va. , the Reverend James S. Russell, Principal; St. Athanasius* School, Brunswick, Ga. , Mr . A . N. Perry , 
Principal; St. Mark's School, Birmingham, Ala. , 
(he Revorend C. W . Brooks, Principal; the 
Vicksbur g Industrial School, Vicksburg , Miss., 
the Reverend W . H . Marshall, Principal . Fo r 
information apply to the principal at any school 
or to the Reverend Samuel H . Bishop, General 
Agent, 416 Lafayette Street, New Yor k City . 
BOOKS 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
13 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A. G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
JOINING TH E NAVY ; OB, 
ABROAD WITH UNCLE SA M 
B y JOH N II. PAYNTEE , A.M . 
First Race Contribution to Navy 
Literature 
Ordered by the Government for Librarie s of 
Wa r Vessels 
"It is a perfect picture of life on board 
ship when I first went to sea. Th e story is 
told so simply and in such good style, and 
holds its interest so, that I read it through 
at one sitting."—Richardso n Glover, Rear 
Admiral , U . S. N. , Retired. 
Cloth Bound. 300 Pages. Full y Illustrated. 
SECON D EDITIO N 
Sent Postage Pai d on Receipt o f On * Dollar 
Address care of 
STJDWABTH PRINTING CO. 
WASHINGTON , D . 0. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
JAME S F . MOBTON , JR. , A.M. , Author and Publisher 
Forceful, rational, comprehensive. A n arsenal 
of facts and unanswerable arguments. Invaluable 
for propaganda. Read the chapter on "Th e Bugbear of Social Equality." which is a veritable eyeopener. Thousands already sold. Agents wanted 
everywhere. 
PRIC E 25 CENT S 
Address the Autho r at 244 West 143d Street, 
. New York , N . Y , 
TH * CRISIS, 226 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Magazine Efficiency—The Real Test 
One of the beet evidences of the growth and worth of a magazine is the presence in its 
columns of advertising of real value to the reader and to the advertiser. It has been our 
aim to solicit those advertisements that we think are of real value to our readers, and when 
we find our advertisers growing enthusiastic about TH E CRISI S as an advertising medium we 
are convinced that our plans are right. 
One advertiser writes: ' 'I am pleased to inform you that my advertisement in 
TH E CRISI S has brought satisfactory results; you may continue it until furthe r notice." 
Anothe r writes: " I think TH E CRISI S is being well circulated, for many letters come to me 
from distant States and foreign countries.'.' 
These letters are on our files, and we will gladly give the names and addresses to our 
readers and prospective advertisers. 
As a furthe r test of our growth, we are this month carrying the advertisement of the 
International Realty Corporation, one of the most efficient business colleges in the Middl e West. 
Thei r advertisement appears on page 262, and we are proud to announce that many similar 
advertisements will appear in subsequent issueB. 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY , Advertisin g Manage r 
Thi s Is 
THE CRISIS 
Fe w peopl e se e yo u 
Many people see your letters 
Correct in Type, 
Proofreading and 
Style. I print it. 
Why? 
Use Good Stationery 
Correct in Type, 
Proofreading and 
Style. I print it. 
Why? 
Not the cheapest; but the 
best for the money charged 
• •— SPFPIA I T V 
Correct in Type, 
Proofreading and 
Style. I print it. 
Why? 
Wedding Invitations printed 
or engraved — correct style 
Wedding Invitations printed 
or engraved — correct style 
As k Edito r 
W . E . B. Du Bois 
by permissio n WRIT E O R 'PHON E T O 
ROBER T N. WOOD, Printe r 
202 East 99th Stree t Ne w Yor k Cit y 
'Phone Lenox 6667 
Mention TH E CRISIS. Along the Color Line 
A N IMPOSTOR . 
Ou r readers in Oklahoma and Kansa s 
are warned against Eugene Howard , wh o 
is without authority takin g subscriptions 
for T H E CRISIS. 
MEETINGS . 
August and September are the months 
of meetings, and there have been an unusually large number, many of whic h are 
noted elsewhere. 
<J A n important meeting was that of the 
Nationa l Medica l Association , whic h held 
its thirteenth annual session at Hampto n 
Institute. Some 500 delegates and 
friends were present and Dr. A . M . 
Curtis presided. Man y reports were 
made and Dr. H . F . Gamble , of Charleston, W . Va. , was elected president for 
the ensuing year. 
<J Th e meeting of the Knights of 
Pythia s at Indianapolis was one of the 
most spectacular meetings that colored 
people ever held. Thirt y thousand visitors were said to have been present, and 
the parade was unusually brilliant. Th e 
Supreme Chancello r announced that the 
Supreme Lodg e is prepared to- fight to 
the last ditch to maintain its rights as 
Pythian s and citizens in the States of. 
Georgi a and Tennessee. I*i both States 
the cases brought against colored men 
by white Knights of Pythia s have been 
wo n and are now pending on appeal, he 
said. In this connection the total collections up to Jul y 1, 1911, for the purpose 
of defending these actions at law amount 
to $18,964.43. 
S. W . Green was re-elected Supreme 
Chancellor. H e gave the followin g statistics: Twenty-si x grand lodges, 3,058 
subordinate lodges, 142,569 members. 
Valuatio n of the property owned, $1,-
500,000, and in the last dozen years 
nearly $4,000,000 has been paid the 
widows and orphans of deceased members. W e publish the picture of the 
camp where the 8,000 colored troopers 
live d during the session. 
Othe r large meetings of the Knights 
of Pythia s have been already held in 
Ne w Jersey and Alabama . 
<J Th e fortieth annual session of the 
Gran d Lodg e of the Unite d Brothers of 
Friendshi p has been held in Kansa s City , 
wit h 1,000 delegates and 4,000 visitors. 
<I Th e fifty-fifth annual session of the 
Galilean Fisherme n was held in Baltimore . 
<] Th e Associatio n of Colore d Nurses 
met in Washington . 
<J Th e seventh annual convention of the 
Nationa l Colore d Men's Hotel , Clu b and 
Liquo r Dealers' Associatio n was held in 
Washington . 
f$ Gran d lodges of Mason s have been 
held in many States and the Noble s of 
the Mysti c Shrine met in the thirteenth annual session in Atlanti c City . 
<! Th e seventeenth annual session of the 
Afro-America n Counci l of Californi a 
took place in Lo s Angeles. 
IJ Throughou t the Southern States colored agricultura l fairs are being held and 
planned. Thos e in Bonham, Texas; 
Jackson County, Kan. ; Gallatin, Tenn., 
and Washingto n County , Ky. , have already been held. 
POLITICS . 
Th e most important event in the political worl d has been the meeting of the 
Nationa l Independent Politica l Rights 
League in Boston. Th e address to the 
cdujitry said: "I n view of the extraordinary and alarmin g state of affairs we 
ask of the Federa l Government in the 
interest of justice, equal rights and the 
security of the country: (1) Th e enforcement of the Constitution, to stop disfranchisement and peonage. (2) Th e passage of a Federa l anti-Jim Cro w law for 
interstate passengers. (3) Federa l aid to 
education with the same schooling for 
all. (4) Th e restoration of the discharged 
Brownsvill e soldiers. (5) Legislation 
makin g lynchin g a capital offense under 
the Federa l jurisdiction. " Th e election 
of Mr . J. R. Clifford, of. Martinsburg , 
W . Va. , to the presidency over W . M . 
Trotter, of Boston , caused some dissension; otherwise the meeting was unusually successful. Muc h outspoken feeling against Mr . Taft developed. 
*J Ther e is evidence of considerable 
politica l activity among Negroe s in the 
South. Th e colored voters in Atlant a 
are being appealed to by the advocates 
of the old system of government as 
against the commission plan. 
<J Th e registration of Negr o voters in 
Memphis is said to be the largest in 
years. It is estimated that 5,000 wil l be 
eligible to vote. In a communication to 
the Memphis Commercia l Appea l a 228 THE CRISIS 
ENCAMPMEN T O F TH E KNIGHT S O F PYTHL f 
Southern write r says that while they 
have thousands of Negr o voters "I do 
not think we have had over fifty votes 
cast in any election during the last ten 
years." Th e Colore d Citizens' Associa ­
tion is responsible for the new activity 
amon g Negroes. 
<J Th e Democrati c convention of Mary ­
land has returned to the fight for what 
they are pleased to call "white supremacy. " Their platform concludes wit h 
these words: "Speaking for the Democ ­
racy of our commonwealth, we declare 
that the politica l destinies of Marylan d 
should be shaped and controlled and its 
internal tranquility guarded and preserved by the white people of the State; 
and whilst we disavow all intention to do 
injustice to our colored population, we 
declare without reserve our resolute determination to preserve in every conservative and constitutional way the 
supremacy of our race." 
(ft Bosto n has a funny evolution of color 
prejudice. A colored man was appointed 
as one of the election officers. Imme ­
diately certain of the white officers 
threatened trouble. Th e matter got into 
the papers and now the white officers are 
busy denying that they ever had the 
slightest feeling on the subject. Th e colored man wil l serve. 
Joseph C. Manning , a white Alabama 
Republican, said in a recent speech: 
"Ther e are over 2,000.000 black men in 
Alabama wh o should vote. Onl y about 
3,000 of this number are 'allowed' to 
vote. To-da y in the South it is just the 
same as it was before the Civi l War , 
when a small minorit y controlled. Ar e 
yo u longe r goin g to allow a small minority of white voters to insult the Ameri ­
can Constitution and the America n people by depriving the majority of the 
right of a ballot for such candidates as 
they see fit? It is the humble man who 
needs the ballot, and in the South there 
are thousands of them, black and white, 
wh o have turned appealing eyes to you 
of the North . Yo u cannot have one way 
of votin g in Alabama and another way 
in Massachusetts. " 
CJ Th e Socialist party of Lo s Angeles, 
Cal. , has nominated a colored man for 
the city council. 
(ft Thoma s Richardson , a colored man, 
wh o for thirty-three years has been postmaster of Port Gibson , Miss. , has resigned. He^wa s among the very few 
Federa l officers left under the Taft 
policy. 
<I Th e woman's suffrage advocates have 
appointed a special worke r amon g the 
colored people of California . 
(ft Th e chairman of the Anti-Prohibitio n 
Organizatio n of Texa s says: "The prohibitionists exerted every effort within 
their powe r to procure the vote of 
Negroes, and thousands that could not 
be influenced nor controlled by them to 
vote for the amendment through the persuasion and domination of the Negr o 
ministers were intimidated by threats 
and assaults either to vote for the amendment or stay away from the polls. A 
complete analysis of the vote wil l show 
that only a very small percentage of the 
51,000 Negroe s holdin g poll-tax receipts 
or those additiona l ones exempt by reason of over age voted at all, and that 
fully 60 to 70 per cent, of these voted for 
the amendment. " 
(ft Th e new Haytia n Ministe r to the 
Unite d States is to be Genera l Solon 
Henos, wh o succeeds the Honorabl e 
H . P. Sanon. ALONG THE COLOR LINE 229 
M INDIANAPOLIS , IND. , AUGUST , 1911 
<J Willia m M . MacDonal d is fighting the 
Lil y Whit e movement in Texa s and has 
issued a call to arms. 
•J Amon g the colored men in diplomati c 
service to-day are ministers and secretaries to Hayt i and Liberia , two consuls 
in Franc e and three in South America . 
ECONOMICS . 
The chief economi c news of the month 
centers in the insurance associations, the 
labor movement and the report of the 
census. 
Q Th e Unite d States census reports 
917,465 farms conducted by colored people in the Unite d States. This is both 
absolute and relative increase since 1900, 
when 767,764 farms were conducted by 
these people. 
<J Th e indicted grand officers of the 
True Reformers' Industria l Insurance 
Associatio n have all been replaced. W . 
R. Griffin is now Gran d Worth y Maste r 
and has begun a policy of retrenchment. 
<I Th e St. Luke's Orde r has just closed 
its forty-fourth annual convention and 
seems to be in a very prosperous condition. 
<J Th e last Congress passed a law requirin g a $25,000 deposit from industrial 
insurance companies in the Distric t of 
Columbia . Th e Colore d Nationa l Benefit 
Associatio n 's amon g those wh o have 
complied wit h this condition already. 
<J Th e America n Federation of Labo r 
has started to unionize the Negroe s of 
the Pittsburg h district. Mr . Fran k Mor ­
rison, secretary of the America n Federa ­
tion of Labor, writes us as follows: " I 
beg to say that the special representative 
of the A . F . of L . in Pittsburgh is now 
workin g along the line of organizing the 
colored workme n of that city into a Fed ­
eral labor union to be directly affiliated 
to the America n Federation of Labor. A 
charter has not as yet been issued, but 
when formal application is made the 
charter wil l be promptly issued and this 
union wil l be accorded all the rights and 
privileges of any other affiliated organization under the laws of the America n 
Federation of Labor. You r attention is 
called to section 6, Articl e II, of the 
constitution of the A . F . of L. , which 
reads as follows: 
" 'Separate charters may be issued to 
central labor unions, local unions or Fed ­
eral labor unions, composed exclusively 
of colored members, where, in the judgment of the executive council, it appears 
advisable and to the best interest of the 
trade-union movement to do so.' " 
This represents another step in the 
long fight of union labor to exclude colored men, and is on the whole reassuring ; although it must be noted that the 
Negroes are not being admitted to white 
unions. 
<J A n interesting report of the business 
of colored men in Ne w Orleans shows 
that they pay over one millio n dollars 
in taxes. In the industries in Ne w Orleans, the Negr o is very largely master. 
Sixt y per cent, of the hard labor, the 
Advertise r declares, is done by Negroes; 
80 per cent, of the bricklayers arc Ne ­
groes, 60 per cent, of the carpenters, 
and most of the caterers and butlers of 
the city are Negroes. 
^ Th e recent hurricane did great injury 
to the colored land owners of the sea 
islands off South Carolina . The y are 230 THE CRISIS 
appealing for aid, but the Charleston 
News and Courie r and other white influences oppose this aid. The y want to 
compe l the Negr o to wor k for the white 
people at low wages rather than to continue to wor k their own land. 
q It is said that of perhaps 30,000 Ne ­
groes in Pittsburg h fully half of them 
are employed in the steel industry. 
q Th e carpenters' labor union in Ke y 
West, Fla. , has compelled the re-employment of two colored workme n wh o 
had been discharged. 
q Fo r some time Negr o laborers have 
been employed in the district around 
Coatesville, Pa., and many of them earn 
as hig h as six and seven dollars a day. 
Their wor k is very exacting, but irregular, and their presence accounts for much 
of the new race prejudice in that part of 
Pennsylvania . 
SCHOOLS . 
Th e opening of the schools brings the 
educational situation to the fore again, 
and it is said that the educational conference at Houston , Texas, wil l frankly 
take up the subject of Negr o education. 
«J The schools of the Distric t of Colum ­
bi a are still in turmoil. Ther e is a new 
white superintendent, but R. C. Bruce, 
the colored assistant superintendent, is 
meeting much opposition. It is said that 
practically all of his recommendations at 
the end of last year were ignored by the 
board. Mrs. M . C. Terrel l has been replaced by Mrs. Harris on the school 
board. Ther e is just complaint in Wash ­
ington against the beginning of a system 
very commo n where there are separate 
schools: that is, the givin g of old and 
abandoned white schoolhouses to the Ne ­
groes and building new ones for the 
whites. 
q Nashville , Term., is the center of two 
new educational projects. One is a State 
norma l school, whic h is to cost $100,000. 
Contracts have already been let for most 
of the work . The second venture is that 
of the white churches whic h have started 
training schools for social workers. 
The y have already met some opposition 
in their efforts to get a location. 
q Mr . W . H . Lewis, Assistant Unite d 
States Distric t Attorney , is sending his 
children abroad to be educated. 
q Th e city of Augusta , Ga., is followin g 
other Southern cities in cutting down its 
school wor k for colored children. Here ­
after only industrial training wil l be 
given in the eighth grade and very 
largely in the seventh grade. This wil l 
make it impossibl e for a Negr o child to 
prepare for high-school wor k i n the public schools. 
«J Morga n College has raised $50,000, 
whic h wil l insure an additiona l $50,000 
from Andre w Carnegie. 
q Th e A . M . E . Zio n Churc h is to raise 
$100,000 for its schools this year. 
Q Th e Cushin g fund of $32,000 is about 
to be distributed for Negr o education. 
Mr . Archibal d Grimk e is one of the two 
trustees. 
q Charle s H . Crippen, of the Stuyvesant 
Hig h School, Ne w York , has won a 
scholarship at Cornel l University . 
q Th e State department of Wilberforc e 
Universit y wil l receive $137,720 from the 
States of Ohi o durin g the years 1911 and 
1912. 
q Dr. W . A . Fountai n is the new president of Morris Brow n College , Georgia . 
q Ther e are 150 students i n the new 
freshman class at Howar d University . 
q Th e Washingto n Conservatory of 
Musi c is beginning its new year's work 
under unusually favorable circumstances. 
This conservatory was founded in 1903, 
and is the first school for the development of the artistic talent of the colored 
race and the preparation of teachers of 
music and elocution in our public schools 
and universities. Mor e than 1,000 
students have been enrolled. Seventeen 
diplomas have been awarded in the departments of piano, voice, voca l expression and piano tuning. Thirty-two 
scholarships have been bestowed on 
talented and faithful students. "Th e institution, " writes ex-commissione r Mc -
Farland, of the Distric t of Columbia , 
"has passed the experimenta l period and 
wit h enlarged means wil l render important service." 
q A s an indication of the kin d of teachers whic h the white school authorities of 
Georgi a are choosing for their colored 
children, we reprint a note received by a 
colored college president from a colored 
teacher of the largest county school. She 
receives a sum of $14 a mont h for teaching over 100 children : 
my 12, 19011. 
Prof. I drop yo this card 
to let yo kno w that i wil l be in on that 
early train munday mornin g tell mrs. 
markos to meet the train. 
yours ALONG THE COLOR LINE 231 
CHURCHES . 
Th e event of the mont h in religious 
circles has been the great meeting of the 
Baptists. Some 3,000 delegates and visitors assembled at Lun a Park, Pittsburgh, 
for the annual meeting of the national 
Baptist convention. Th e local arrangements were wretched, and to the casual 
visitor the meeting of this mass of men 
and wome n looks like a great unregulated assembly. Gradually, however, beneath the crudeness and lack of system, 
one sees the tremendous powe r and possibility of these men. The y represent 
2.411.701 members, they have 18.000 
churches, wort h $25,000,000. and they 
spend each year $2,371,176. Their schools 
enroll 18.540 students and are valued at 
$3,500,000. Muc h of their wor k has been 
organized, and more and more strong 
men like R. H . Boy d are organizing particular parts. Dr. Boyd , wh o is at the 
head of the publishing house, reports 
gross receipts of $187,753 last year. H e 
has mailed during the past twelve months 
9,000,000 periodicals and articles. The 
women, under the presidency of Mrs. S. 
W . Layton . held an interesting series of 
meetings. Dr. E . C. Morris presided, and 
W . E . B. D u Bois was amon g the 
speakers. 
<J Th e Lot t Care y Baptist convention 
met i n Wilmington , N . C , in fifteenth 
annual session. 
«J Th e A . M . E . Churc h in Kansa s Cit y 
is remodeling its loca l church so as to 
make it institutional. It wil l also be 
made larger to accommodate the general conference whic h meets next May . 
<J Bisho p W . J. Gaines is makin g an unfortunate attack upon editor R. R. 
Wrigh t of the A . M . E . publishing house. 
Mr . Wrigh t is the most successful man 
that has ever been at the head of the 
rather discredited publication business of 
the Africa n Methodist Church , and has 
introduced business methods that have 
incurred the enmity of certain interests 
and ambitions. 
q Rev. S. P. W . Dre w (colored) was the 
only Washingto n ministe r who volun ­
teered his services for pauper funerals 
in the Distric t of Columbia . 
<I Th e fourth biennia l session of congregational workers amon g colored people has met in Ne w Orleans. 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
Th e retirement of Majo r Joh n R. 
Lynch , paymaster, one of the five Negr o 
officers -on the active list of the army, 
is an event of unusual importance. Majo r 
Lync h was born a slave in Concordi a 
Parish , La. , on September 10. 1847. A 
purchaser of his mother carried her, wit h 
her children, to Natchez , Miss., where, 
when the Unio n troops took possession, 
he attended evening school for a few 
months. H e was engaged in the business of photography at Natche z until 
1869, when Gen. Adelbert Ames, then 
provisiona l Governo r of Mississippi, appointed him a justice of the peace. H e 
was elected a membe r of the Legislatur e 
of that State in 1869, and was re-elected 
in 1871, serving the last term as Speaker 
of the House . H e was elected to Con ­
gress in 1872, and was returned again 
in 1880. Majo r Lync h was temporary 
chairman of the Republican national 
convention in 1884, and was appointed 
fourth auditor of the treasury four years 
later. In June, 1898, he was appointed 
an additional paymaster of volunteers, 
wit h the rank of major, and when honorably discharged in 1901 entered the regular service as a paymaster. H e received 
his majority in 1906. 
*I Fifteen colored delegates were among 
the 1,700 letter carriers wh o attended the 
eighteenth biennial session of the national association at Rochester, N . Y . 
<I Miss Ann a E . Grinnage, a clerk in the 
Patent Office of Washington , was a delegate from the Department of the Poto ­
mac to the Gran d Arm y encampment in 
Rochester. It was Miss Grinnage and 
not Mrs. Bal l wh o made the calculation 
concerning slaves' wages mentioned i n 
last month's CRISIS . 
<I A Negr o society for historica l research has been formed at Yonkers, with 
Joh n E . Bruc e as president and A . A . 
Schomber g as secretary. 
<I Th e adjutant-general of the army 
writes us with regard to the promotio n 
of Captain Charles Youn g as follows: 
"Whe n Captain Youn g shall become the 
senior captain of cavalry and shall have 
passed a satisfactory examination to determine his fitness for promotion he wil l 
be promoted to the grade of major upon 
the occurrence of a vacancy." 
<I Th e colored people of Ne w Orleans 
have organized for the purpose of helping the better sanitation of the city. 
<I Th e colored Eight h Regiment of 
Illinois has been drillin g at camp before 
the Governo r and a large outpouring of 
colored and white citizens. 
CJ Lev i Anderso n and John R. Lyons, 
of the Tent h Cavalry, a Negr o regiment, 
are to receive certificates of merit for 
riskin g their lives in rescuing a companion from drownin g Jul y 6 in Mallett's 
Bay, near Fort Etha n Allen , Vermont. 
Th e man had sunk in fifteen feet of 
water. Th e certificate of merit carries 
extra pay of $2 per month to each of the 
recipients. 232 THE CRISIS 
<J Th e colored people of Atlant a are still 
strivin g for a Negr o reformatory. 
<I A new home for colored girls has 
been established in Cincinnati. 
<I Th e colored people of Houston , 
Texas, are to have a $15,000 Carnegie 
library. Th e colored people are givin g 
the ground and the city is to maintain it. 
fft Danie l Moore , a colored policeman 
in Philadelphia , has resigned after twenty 
years' service. 
IJ Collier's Weekl y has a flippant but interesting account, of Nanc y Hill , a colored woma n of Jackson, Miss., wh o took 
care of 108 orphan waifs, black and 
white, during her life. 
TH E GHETTO . 
Discriminatio n against colored people 
in all walks of life has been widespread 
during the last month. Th e most striking 
case has beer, the objection to the election of Assistant Unite d States Distric t 
Attorne y W . H . Lewis to membership 
in the Ba r Association . 
(ft Th e Clamorga n case, which made such 
a tempest in a teapot in St. Louis, has 
suddenly ended in the most natural way. 
Th e youn g people have gone back to each 
other and all is forgiven, even the drop 
of Negr o blood. 
<J In Ne w Yor k the effort of colored 
people to get decent dwellin g space in 
Harle m is continuing to cause trouble, 
and white tenants and property owners 
are holdin g futile meetings to protest. 
Meantime the colored people are continuing to move in. 
(ft Wheneve r a new Negr o school is proposed in the South white neighbors object to its establishment. In Ashland , 
Va. , the city council has tried to prevent 
a school by segregation law. In Doug ­
lass County, Mo. , there is objection to a 
girls' reformatory. 
(ft Th e colored people in Lo s Angeles, 
Cal. , declare that the teachers in the 
schools discriminate against colored children so as to make them drop out of the 
higher grades. 
(ft Whit e citizens of Louisville , Ky. , and 
Scranton, Pa., are protesting against 
Negr o playgrounds in their neighborhood. 
(ft The police of Alexandria , Va. , arrested a colored man wh o had $230 in 
his possession. The y did not think he 
ought to have so much money, but at 
last reluctantly allowed him to go. 
•J Separate dinin g rooms for colored 
and white convicts have been started at 
the Kentuck y penitentiary, thus removing the fear of socia l equality. 
<J Hobso n City , a Negr o town of Ala ­
bama,' is celebrating its anniversary. A 
new Negr o town is being planned near 
Nashville , Tenn . 
<J A Sunday-school convention of Rhod e 
Island is preparing to separate white and 
colored Christianit y during their meeting. 
(ft Th e old Da y Lin e steamers on Chesapeake Ba y wil l sell only inside staterooms to colored travelers. 
<I A theatre in Evanston , III, is tryin g 
to discriminate against its Negr o patrons. 
(ft Whit e citizens in Monroe , Ala. , are 
drivin g out Negr o laborers. 
(ft South Carolin a statesmen are considering how they can keep colored people 
from eating terrapin. 
(ft Th e various labor unions of Cincin ­
nati drew lots for position in the Labo r 
Da y parade. A Negr o union secured 
first place. Th e Negroe s could not, however, secure a union band because Negr o 
bands are not admitted to the union. 
Thereupo n they were not allowed first 
place and refused to march. 
LYNCHING . 
Th e authorities at present seem to be 
sincere about pressing the charge of 
murder against the Coatesvill e murderers. Eigh t are under arrest as we go to 
press. Norma n Price , 20 years old, of 
Thorndale , Pa., and Chester Bostick. 19 
years old, whose home is in Marietta , 
Pa., have turned State's evidence. The 
men they named as havin g been among 
those wh o burned Walke r alive are Oscar Lamping , a loca l preacher, fireman 
and policeman of Coatesville ; Willia m 
Gilbert, of Coatesville ; Capt. Albert 
Berry , an itinerant aeronaut wh o recently 
came to Coatesville : Joseph Schwartz, 
nf Coatesville ; George Stahl, 16 years 
old, a native of Marietta , wh o has been 
a temporary resident of Coatesville ; 
Joseph Schofield, of Parkesburg, and 
themselves. Lamping , they said, was the 
organizer of the mob. Schwart z assisted 
him. Capt. Berr y and Gilbert were sent 
to the hospital to get an idea of the place 
and to point out to the mob exactly 
where Walke r lay. Schofield got the 
woo d for the fire. Pric e and Bostick 
participated in the lynching , they said, 
although they had nothin g to do with 
the actual burning. 
It is said that from 1,000 to 2,000 persons followed the mob. Othe r arrests 
may come later. Everythin g goes to ALONC THE COLOR LINE 233 
show that a very slight effort on the part 
of the authorities woul d have prevented 
the lynching . Officers in an automobile 
arrived at the hospital after Walke r was 
taken out but did not try to overtake the 
crowd . Long-distanc e messages were 
sent saying that there woul d be a lynch ­
ing that night. 
<J In an Indian Springs, Ga., hotel trouble arose between a white clerk and a 
colored bellboy. Lane , the white man, 
"struck the boy over the head wit h a 
pistol and in doing so the gun went off," 
says the news dispatch lucidly. Th e 
bellboy threatened to kil l the clerk and 
this threat "threw fear into the whol e 
. hotel." Th e proprietor of the hotel, at 
the representation of the bellboys, discharged Lane , but "the county officers 
were notified," continues the dispatch, 
and they "came to arrest the Negroes. " 
A riot ensued. Tw o white men were 
killed durin g an exchange of shots. Fou r 
Negroes were captured and were "about 
to be lynched, " but were hurried to 
Atlanta . Tw o of them have turned out 
to have had nothing to do wit h the fight. 
Colore d people were attacked and beaten 
all through the countryside. 
q In Pineville , La. , a race war began 
September 12 over the shooting of a 
white man by an unknown Negro . Si x 
colored men were shot and two killed . 
The Negroe s were notified to leave the 
town and several hundred of them did 
so. Others, however, are preparing to 
resist rather than leave their homes, and 
it is from such resistance that the rioting- resulted. 
q A t Jackson, Ga., "three buggy loads 
of citizens " whipped a colored man, because of his failure to give them as much 
of the road as they wished, or for some 
other reason, fancied or real; they 
stopped the mule and lashed the Negr o 
with a buggy whip till his clothes were 
bloody. 
<J A t Kansa s Cit y fifteen Mexican s and 
two colored men were sitting in a Missouri-Pacific bunk car listening to a phonograph. Suddenly at one side door appeared two policemen and one at an 
opposite door. One officer shouted, 
"Hand s up! " and immediately the officers 
began shooting through the roof to the 
right and to the left as the men in a 
panic scattered through every outlet. 
Th e testimony was to the effect that 
none of the surprised laborers had any 
weapons, and never had had any in the 
car. On e Mexica n was killed . 
<J Th e Waynesbor o Pennsylvani a Herald publishes the followin g society note: 
Ada m Forney , South Potoma c Avenue , 
returned Sunday from a trip to Coatesville, Pa., and brought wit h him several 
of the small bones of the body of the 
Negr o wh o was lynched there last week. 
Mr . Forne y dug the charred bones from 
the debris on the scene where the Negr o 
was burned to death. 
q In the last twenty years there have 
been the followin g lynchings in the 
North : Ne w York , 1, 1897; Iowa , 1, 
1907; Pennsylvania , 2, 1894, 1911; Dela ­
ware, 1, 1903; Illinois, 3, 1903, and race 
wars in 1906-1908; Ohio , 4, 1910, 1891, 
1892, 1904, and race wa r in Urbana ; In ­
diana, S, 1897; 2, 1900: 1, 1903. Most of 
those lynched were colored, but not all. 
q A t Purcell, Okla. , a crowd of 3,000 
men, women and children watched coal 
oil poured over a half-naked body of a 
colored man who was afterward roasted 
to death. Th e man was accused of attacking a woman . Th e colored people, 
who are often said to conceal their criminals, tried to show their devotion to law 
and order by delivering the accused man 
with the above result. 
<I A t Caddo, Okla. , as a result of clashes 
between whites and Negroe s 1,500 left 
in one day, sacrificing their property. 
<J In South Georgi a a Negr o kille d a 
town marshal. Thereupon the white people burned three lodge buildings, two 
churches and a schoolhouse. and lynched 
three men. Variou s industries which employed Negr o labor have been compelled 
to shut down. 
•I Othe r lynchings are as follows: Mile s 
Taylo r at Shreveport, La. , wh o had shot 
four white men; C. Jones at Farmersville , 
Texas, wh o was accused of insulting a 
woman over the telephone; A . Dean at 
Augusta , Ark. , wh o had killed a white 
woman. A t Granville , S. C , a colored 
boy wh o was accused of "insulting " a 
white girl, was mutilated on the public 
square. A t Louisville , Miss., the execution of a murderer was made public. 
Lemonade and peanuts were on sale. Th e 
murderer walked to his death calmly and 
with a steady step. H e probably -felt 
superior to his audience. 
q Davi d Settle, of Guilford , N . C , has 
been arrested for killin g a colored man, 
a thing which has occasioned some surprise in that section. 
q Governo r Blease of South Carolin a 
has again distinguished himself by striking a colored servant in Cleveland wh o 
was attempting to pass through a crowd. 
•I Nearl y three months have passed 
since a colored woma n at Okemeah, 
Okla. , was raped by white men, and she 
and her fourteen-year-old son lynched. 
N o effort has been made to punish the 
lynchers. Men of the Month 
JOH N E . MILHOLLAND , ESQ . 
Ther e w.ere several papers read before 
the Universa l Races Congress which 
were supplementary to those whic h appear in the published volume. Amon g 
these additional papers one of the best 
was by Joh n E . Milhollan d of New 
York . Mr . Milhollan d was one of the 
first proposers of the Congress and 
helped it financially and otherwise. 
Throug h his aid Mr . W . E . B. D u Bois 
and Dr. W . A . Sinclair were enabled to 
attend the Congress. 
Mr . Milhollan d said, among other 
things: 
"Bu t is not the Negr o a crimina l by 
instinct, and has he not demonstrated 
his incapacity for self-government? T o 
both questions my reply is an emphatic 
negative. Th e Negr o is no more a 
crimina l by instinct than any other race 
woul d be that had come up through his 
awful experience, and if slavery had any 
beneficent effect upon him it was to curb 
his tendencies in the direction of crime. 
"T o this yo u may point to the long 
ghastly record of lynchings that have 
been averaging two a week for more than 
twenty years. Th e worl d has been made 
to believe that these mob murders represent the white man's efforts to protect the white women of the South from 
bestial attacks of the Negro . Th e statement is mor e than 50 per cent, false. 
Careful investigation has demonstrated 
that of this entire numbe r of lynchings 
less than one-fourth were for the nameless crime, and of the cases alleged it 
was exceptiona l when anythin g like con ­
clusive evidence of guilt was furnished. 
One distinguished authority on crimina l 
statistics has stated that the city of 
Chicago afforded in twelve months a 
crimina l record on this point greater in 
number and more revoltin g in detail 
than that furnished by the Negroe s of 
the Southern States in ten years. 
"Again , to the reiterated assertion of 
the Negro's lawlessness by nature in 
practice, let me point out that no people 
have ever been more severely tested in 
their devotion to established institutions. 
Wit h brute force, lawlessness and destructive conditions all about them; with 
trial by jur y frequently denied; with 
freedom of speech and freedom of press 
more frequently prohibited ; wit h degrading insults and horribl e beatings; 
with lynchings and burnings; wit h reparation denied by the regularly established tribunals, and with a great nation 
seemingly indifferent to their wrongs, 
yet they have held fast to their faith 
in the ultimate triump h of strictly legal 
process and calm judicia l procedure. 
The trial has been severe; it has been 
withstood triumphantly." 
REV . E . F . BOY D MEN OF THE MONTH 235 
REV . DR. R. H . BOYD . 
A t a recent meeting of the Internationa l Sunday-school Association, held at 
San Francisco , Cal. , the Rev. R. H . Boyd , 
D . D. , of Nashville , Tenn., secretary and 
founder of the Nationa l Baptist Publish ­
in g Boar d and secretary of the Hom e 
Missio n Boar d of the Nationa l Baptist 
convention, was elected a member of the 
executive committee. This is a recognition of the two and one-half millio n Baptists who m Dr. Boy d represents in his 
Sunday-school and Hom e Missio n work. 
Dr. Boy d was one of the members of the 
Christia n conference, held at Dyk e Roc k 
Cottage, Clifton , Mass., and also an active member of the Interdenominationa l 
Sunday-school Publishers' Council . A s a 
membe r of the executive committee of 
the International Sunday-school Associa ­
tion Dr. Boy d wil l have a wonderful 
chance for usefulness to his people. It 
might be added that Dr. Boyd's report 
before the Nationa l Baptist convention in 
Pittsburgh, Pa., shows that the publishing board has transacted a business of 
$187,577.70 for the fiscal year which 
closed August 31. 
JAME S B. CLARKE . 
Some months ago the good old university of Cornel l began to show signs 
of drawin g the color line. Cornel l has 
always been a staunchly democratic place 
where a man was valued for what he 
was, and it seemed especially disheartenin g to find there had been objection to 
JAME S B. CLARK E 
DR . RICHAR D R. WRIGHT , JR . 
the admission of two youn g colored girls 
to the college dormitory. A t this crisis 
the college journa l published a warm 
protest from a student who signed himself James B.. Clarke . 
W e give herewith the portrait of Mr . 
Clarke , wh o so gallantly championed the 
cause of the distressed youn g ladies. His 
claim to distinction, however, does not 
rest solely on his chivalry. In June one 
of the most valued prizes in Americ a in 
the department of modern languages fell 
to him. In the last annual competition 
of the Nationa l Society of Frenc h Pro ­
fessors in America , Clark e led fifty-seven 
selected students of Frenc h by winnin g 
the first prize for translation, first prize 
for Frenc h writin g and the first honor 
prize, the medal of the society, for general excellence. Clarke is a member of 
the societies Le s Cabotins and 1'Alliance 
Francaise, and has spoken before the latter on the Frenc h West Indies and on 
Haiti . 
MISS MAR Y FRANCE S GUNNE R 
W e give a portrait of Miss Mar y 
Frances Gunner, the daughter of the Rev. 
and Mrs. Byro n Gunner, of Hillburn , 
N
T
. Y. , wh o during her course at the 
Suffern Hig h School made a remarkable 
record. Miss Gunne r was the only colored girl in her class and led it throughout the course, makin g a uniformly 
higher average than any other pupil. Th e 
school is made up of girls and boys, so 
this youn g lady is an argument for wo ­
man suffrage as well as for the intelligence of the Negr o race. She wil l continue her studies in Middlebur y (Vt.) 
College,.where we are sure she wil l make 236 THE CRISIS 
MIS S MAR Y I". GUNNE R 
as fine a record for herself and the race 
there as she did in Sufifern. 
Miss Gunner's father is vice-president 
of the Politica l Equalit y League and her 
mother is the president of the Ne w Yor k 
State Federation of Women's Clubs, so 
she has had a good example of service 
set her. 
R. R. WRIGHT , JR. 
Mr . R. R. Wright , Jr., the son of R. R. 
Wright , the president of Georgi a State 
College and at present manager of the 
book concern of the A . M . E . Church , has 
just had the degree of Docto r of Philosophy granted to him by the Universit y 
of Pennsylvania . His work, whic h was 
two-thirds in sociology and the other 
third in economics and history, was practically completed in 1907, but for various 
reasons he did not present his thesis until 
this year. H e has taken for his subject 
"The Negr o in Pennsylvania , a Study in 
Economi c History. " This treatise deals 
with economic conditions and the point of 
view is largely that of a social economist, 
not of a special pleader. Th e titles of 
the chapters are: 
(1) Negr o Slavery in Pennsylvania ; 
(2) Th e Abolitio n of Negr o Slavery and 
Its Causes; (3) Fre e Colore d People 
Prio r to the Civi l War ; (4) Th e Negr o 
Populatio n Since the Civi l War ; (5) Oc ­
cupations of Negroes in Pennsylvania ; 
(6) Business Enterprise s of Pennsylvania Negroes; (7) Propert y Ownershi p 
and Savings; (8) Th e Negr o Churc h and 
Secret Societies; (9) Education ; (10) 
Crime ; (11) Interracia l Contact and Social Lif e Amon g Negroes; (12) Conclu ­
sion: Th e Problem of the Negr o and 
Wha t It Is. 
Th e followin g colored men have received the Ph . D . degree from universities of the first class: 
Edwar d A . Bouchet, Yale , 1876. 
Willia m L . Bulkley , Syracuse, 1893. 
W . E . B. D u Bois, Harvard , 1895. 
T. Nelso n Baker, Yale , 1903. 
Lewis B. Moore , Universit y of Penn ­
sylvania. 
Charle s H . Turner, Universit y of Chi ­
cago. 
Pezavi a O'Connell , Universit y of Penn ­
sylvania, 1898. 
HARR Y H . PACE . 
Mr . Harr y H . Pace, wh o has just been 
elected to the office of Gran d Exalte d 
Ruler of the Internationa l Brotherhoo d 
of Protective Orde r of Elk s of the 
World , is one of the most successful 
youn g Negr o business men of the country. H e has been the cashier of the 
Solvent Savings and Trust Compan y of 
Memphis, founded in 1906, for the last 
three years and a half, and in that period 
the deposits have risen from $35,000 to 
$103,000. Durin g the same time the bank 
has earned fully $15,000 and has paid 
stockholders five semi-annual dividends 
of 3 per cent. Th e company is now one 
of the four largest Negr o banks in 
Americ a and is on a thoroughl y sound 
footing. Mr . Pace is a graduate of 
Atlant a University . 
HARR Y H . PAC E OPINIO N 
TH E REIG N O F TERROR . 
Th e outbreak of crime against the 
black man, the lynching , the burning 
alive, the destruction of property that 
bids fair to make 1911 a gruesome year 
in this country's history, has occasioned 
a vast amount of comment. Most papers 
mark a steady increase in race prejudice. 
Some of the Southern editors exult at 
the crimes of the North , but there has 
nevertheless been a good deal of heart 
searching. 
"Coatesville, " says the Pittsburg h 
Dispatch, "is reported to be shocked by 
the declaration of the judge that any 
one who was in the mob that participated 
in that lynchin g and knew for what 
purpose the mob was gathered was guilty 
of murder. Ye t it was just this deficiency 
of understanding, this failure to appreciate individua l responsibility that made 
the atrocity possible. If there had been 
no mob of curious spectators to swarm 
around the hospital and follow the ring ­
leaders to the commission of the crime, 
if the actual murderers had not been encouraged by the sanction of the mob and 
the courage of numbers, Coatesville 
woul d not have been disgraced by this 
orgy of lawlessness. Th e rulin g of the 
Chester judge ought to be brought home 
to everyone. Properl y digested, it may 
spare some other communit y the shock 
just experienced by Coatesville. " 
Th e Leadvill e (Col.) Heral d calls race 
prejudice a reversion to the barbarous. 
"Th e idea that white men, the representatives of the triumphal, conquering and 
civilizin g 'Anglo-Saxon ' livin g in communities back of whic h are hundreds of 
years of law and order, humanity and 
education, can so suddenly revert to the 
primitive savage is almost unthinkable. 
It takes some such outbreak as that at 
Coatesville to remind us that we haven't 
traveled so very far from prima l cave 
man after all. Ho w can the white man 
talk of justice to the black when he so 
flagrantly denies that precious boon to 
him. " 
"O n August 14 a Negr o wh o was alleged to have assaulted a white woman 
was lynched at Durant. Okla. , and his 
body was burned to ashes," relates the 
Buffalo Express. "Te n days later another Negr o was accused of a simila r 
crime at Purcell, Okla. , and was burned 
to death by a mob after having been 
arrested by two members of his own 
race, wh o appear to have been the most 
law-abidingme n in the community. Nevertheless, the whites opened a general campaign against Negroes, particularly at 
Durant and Caddo, a neighboring town, 
with the purpose of drivin g them out of 
the community. Man y Negroes have fled 
for their lives. A white man was killed 
by a Negr o at Durant. Th e victim's 
companions say that they were fired 
upon whil e passing the house occupied 
by the Negroes. Th e blacks say that 
the men were tryin g to blow up the 
house and that they fired in defense of 
their property. Th e Negroes, however, 
are likely to be lynched before their story 
can be investigated by a court. Con ­
ditions in this part of Oklahom a demonstrate the easy way in which crime leads 
to crime and lynchin g to lynching. " 
Th e Utic a Press says we do not begin 
to hear of all the lynchings that take 
place. "Lynching s of Negroes in Southern States have become so commo n occurrences, even for trivia l offences, that 
news agencies nowadays pay little or no 
attention to them as matters of general 
interest, unless the atrocity reveals unwonted cruelty on the part of the mob. 
The growin g infrequency of such items 
in the daily news does not indicate an 
abatement of the mob spirit or lawlessness in certain communities, as might 
be inferred from the greater comparative absence of these outbreaks as news 
features than formerly. Lynching s do 
not give desirable advertising to a State 
and tend to keep away from it settlers 
whom the authorities are endeavoring to 
attract. In consequence of this many 
news items relating to lynchings have 
not been given general dissemination. " 
Th e Litit z (Pa.) Express urges the 
sterner measures on the ground that 
"the country must quarantine itself 
against the contagion of such madness. 
The sporadic cases of fanatical mob murder must be isolated and stamped out 
in order to save the country from a devastating plague of barbarism. " 
Th e Fort Wort h (Texas) Star-Tele ­
gram shows the manner in which the 
lynchin g fever has grown. "The contention made by those who see only evil in 
mob executions, whatever the circumstances, that lynchin g for one crime 
naturally leads to lynchin g for another 
and for many others, finds corroboration 
in the mob record indicated. First hangings and burnings for the crime against 
women only; then for murders or assaults to murder; next for arson, forgery 
and theft; finally on suspicion only of 
guilt in relation to any of the felonious 
crimes in the calendar." 238 THE CRISIS 
Th e Washingto n (D . C.) Star says: 
"Th e cry of 'lynch him' uttered in a 
crowded street spreads like the cry of 
'fire' uttered in a crowded house. An d 
unfortunately both cries often proceed 
from irresponsible sources. A half-grown 
boy without any appreciation of what he 
is doin g may plunge a crowd of grown 
men into uncontrollabl e fury by a call 
to their worst passions, whil e a mere 
child, frightened by a spark, may by 
uttering one wor d cause hundreds to be 
trampled to death. Bot h the fury and 
the panic in mankin d lie near the surface 
and are easily aroused. An d the fury is 
having many red days in Americ a just 
now—so very many days and so very 
red that unless some appeal can be effectively made to the high impulses of 
the people to uphold the law, the law 
wil l become but a mockery. " 
Th e Knoxvill e Sentinel, referring tn 
the Oklahoma lynching , remarks that 
that State is now figuring in the unenviable role of chief lyncher. "Th e latest 
instance at Purcell had the most powerful motive, but it seems doubtful if the 
right Negr o was caught. Th e correspondent sends along wit h the usual tomfoolery about the orderliness of the proceedings and the determination of thecitizens—actually it was a wil d frolic of 
hoodlums—a rumor of a confession. This 
is fair evidence that the identification of 
the Negr o was extremely hazy. Th e 
peace officers found a new way of evadin g their obligations, goin g into the court 
house and having themselves locked in. 
Altogethe r the thing looks as bad as can 
be imagined. " 
Th e Chattanooga Time s thinks the 
trouble very deep seated. "W e may set 
all the enginery of the law at wor k and 
impose the full measure of its penalties 
upon the offenders, but penalties do not 
regenerate nor do they elevate—they 
scourge one guilty person into resentment, whil e others just as guilty go free 
more than ever ready to do the same 
thing for having so often escaped the 
law. W e are growin g to be too much a 
people of 'laws' and less a people of in ­
dividua l responsibility of personal mora l 
accountability and of conscience." 
Th e Louisvill e Courier-Journa l believes 
we tolerate lynching : "A n Englishman , 
writin g to the Ne w Yor k Heral d about 
a recent lynchin g in America , says: 'It 
is indeed incredible that a people calling 
themselves civilized and humane should 
tolerate such atrocities, conceivable only 
amon g barbarous redskins. Ar e yo u 
willin g but powerless to prevent these 
occurrences? Th e proverb, "Wher e 
there's a wil l there's a way, " applies 
more truly to a State even than to an 
individual.' 
"Tha t such atrocities are in fact 'tolerated' cannot be denied when local public 
opinion is so favorable to the perpetrators that investigations confine themselves to purely forma l 'ringin g charges' 
to the grand jur y that result in no indictments and are not expected to brin g 
any results other than to allow the circuit judge to appear upon the front page 
as an enemy of lawlessness. " 
Th e Baltimor e Star thinks Pennsylvania is givin g the South a lesson: "Th e 
energy wit h whic h the authorities at 
Coatesville are proceeding towar d prosecution of the leaders of the mob indicates that they do not intend to make 
that town an example to whic h certain 
Southern communitie s can point in extenuation of their own offenses. Th e 
district attorney's activities are to be 
commended, whethe r or not they have 
the sanction of popula r sentiment. " 
This represents the best white opinion 
in the South. Othe r papers are all but 
openly pleased at Coatesville , like the 
Ne w Orleans Times-Democrat, which 
says: "It is too muc h to expect that 
the white Nort h wil l confess its ancient 
error all at once, but it is highl y encouraging to find growin g numbers of fearless men and newspapers in that section 
willin g to acknowledge their inherited 
views of the race question mistaken, and 
to confess that 'race prejudice' is spreading wit h the spread of Negr o population 
over the country, without regard to 'sectional' lines." 
Th e Maco n Telegraph remarks that 
southern Pennsylvani a was a stronghold 
of the Abolitionists and is of the opinion 
that it has "pampered the Negro " and 
got what it deserved. 
Th e Negr o press comments with natural bitterness on the outrages and on the 
absence of protest either from the President or from the prominent clergy. 
"But, " says- the Philadelphi a Tribune , 
"what other results are to be expected 
from a populace that is daily educated 
to be ' prejudiced to colored people? 
Whe n people are taught that a colored 
boy or girl cannot wor k in the same factory or mill , cannot attend the same public school, nor obtain wor k in the same 
offices or stores wit h white boys or girls: 
is it not quite natural that those same 
white employees, those same white 
scholars and their children's children, 
should grow up wit h embittered feelings 
against, and disrespect for, the class 
ostracized ?" 
Th e Topek a Plai n Deale r insists that 
if Congress and the President wil l not 
interfere Negroe s should appeal to foreign nations whic h feel free to protest 
against outrages in other barbarous 
countries. "W e advise the colore d people to send communications to the 
crowned heads of Europe , to the Mikad o 
of Japan to intervene in the cause of 
righteousness and fair treatment of the 
America n colored man by his white 
America n brother. N o civilized nation OPINION 239 
should stand and look at such outrages 
as are being perpetrated in the Unite d 
States without saying or doing something. " 
Th e Christian Recorder, of Philadelphia, Pa., has a very outspoken editorial. 
"Wha t does it all mean?" it asks and 
answers: "This—tha t wit h each day the 
value of a Negro's life is less and less 
in this country. Tha t the policy of those 
wh o woul d not protest against lynchin g 
and wrongdoin g most vigorously and by 
every known means is wrong . Th e 
Negroes must awake to their manhood. 
Ther e is nothing to gain by the* closemouth and do-nothing policy. Ther e is 
nothing in it but annihilation. W e are 
now on the eve of possibly the bitterest 
politica l campaign waged in this country 
since Lincol n was elected. Taft has 
proved himself incompetent so far as 
we are concerned, and we should not be 
stupid enough to pretend that we are 
fooled because we get a few offices. Al ­
ready his black supporters are sending 
out to the papers articles to show how 
much he has 'done' for the Negro . The y 
say he has given us 'so many jobs,' and 
that black men draw 'so much pay;' he 
has made Lewis attorney general, etc., 
etc. Ar e Negroe s fools to sell their 
liberty for jobs, to jeopardize their families' lives for a job for Lewis or anybody else? W e do not want merely jobs. 
For, whil e Lewis gets one bi g job, a 
thousand poor Negroe s are run from 
their homes, a score of Negr o families 
are left fatherless and the prejudice 
which woul d deprive us of our very life 
stalks abroad and the President says he 
can do nothing—'it's the State's business.' Wha t are jobs against life? Jobs! 
Yes, jobs!! It's time for us to be men 
and to show our utmost contempt for 
those politicians wh o woul d have us sell 
our rights for 'a job.' W e want liberty, 
we want life, we want protection, we 
want justice. Jobs don't satisfy us." 
Th e Recorde r goes on to flay the 
"church congregations " reported as followin g the mob and to point out that no 
minister raised his voice to restrain the 
murderers. "Ho w can human men respect such a ministry ? Ho w can godly 
men affiliate with such a Church ? A s a 
whol e the America n Churc h has sunk to 
the lowest depth. W e are mindful that 
all have not bowed the knee to Baal. 
But as a whole the Churc h does not reflect the teaching or spirit of Christ. 
Half of the Episcopa l bishops wil l go 
into hysterics over the proposed marriage of a divorced man and occupy columns upon top of columns of the newspapers, but they never say a wor d when 
a human being is burned. The y indeed 
'pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin , 
but have omitted the weightie r matters 
of the law, judgment, mercy and faith.' 
Th e America n Churc h too often does the 
things which might be left undone, and 
omits the things which ought to be done; 
they strain at a gnat, but swallow a 
camel. 
"If the Christian Churc h had the courage, if it had to-day one-tenth of the 
courage of a Marti n Luther, or a John 
Knox , or of a Willia m Lloy d Garriso n 
it could stop lynching. If it loved justice more than money; if its enthusiasm 
were bent to the neighbor at their door 
half as much as the heathen of Japan 
or the oppressed in Russia ; if it dared 
raise.its head for a few moments from 
the feet of Mammo n in order to catch 
the eye of the sympathetic Jesus it woul d 
accomplish wonders. But, like Samson, 
the Church—the white Church—lie s in the 
lap of a harlot, and while it enjoys the 
ease and prestige of its sinful alliance 
it is being shorn of its power. Tha t 
is wh y the workingme n of the country 
are leaving it—they see its hypocrisy ; 
that is wh y even Delila h herself mocks 
it; that is wh y Mammo n disregards it— 
because it is powerless as a broken reed." 
The Reverend Reverd y Ransome , in a 
sermon widely quoted in the Ne w Yor k 
press, said: "This public opinion has 
been educated for more than thirty years 
with all the vigilance of an academician. 
Its teachers have been the columns of 
the America n press, the silent acquiescence of the America n pulpit and the 
persistent attitude of the Southern 
States to repress the Negroes. 
"Bu t the Negroe s themselves are 
largely to blame for the contempt in 
which they are held and the impunity 
with which their liberties and their lives 
may be invaded. Sheriffs, mayors, courts, 
governors wil l not take seriously into 
account the interests of a people wh o 
have lost or surrendered the right to retaliate or call them to account at the 
ballot box. Mob s do not quail when 
there is no fear that their wil d brutalities 
will be answered by a volley of bullets. 
Me n would be slow to apply the match 
for the incineration of a livin g victim if 
it were probable that the answering torch 
woul d kindle a flame in their midst. 
" I am unwillingl y but slowl y comin g 
to the conclusion that the only way for 
the Negr o in particular and the dark 
skinned peoples in general to win and 
hold the respect of white people is to 
mete out to them a white man's measure 
in all the relations of life. Pious professions and solemn proclamations have 
little weight when they come from a 
people whose character has been so 
clearly disclosed. " 
Th e editor of the Oklahoma Guide isan old man and he closes his comment 
on the outrages with a pithy reminiscence: "I n Arkansas, 1873, we adopted a 
remedy for lynchin g and that was to kil l 
the lynchers. Therefore we had no 
lynchin g in that end of Pulask i County. " 240 THE CRISIS 
DESPISIN G MEN . 
Th e Continent, a Presbyterian journa l 
published in Philadelphia , has a good 
editorial on "Th e Sin of Despisin g Men. " 
It takes the Races Congress as its text, 
and says race prejudice has at last been 
challenged to show cause for its existence. 
"Rac e prejudice survives in the world, " 
says the Continent, "because it has 
cheated men into thinkin g of it as something inevitable and fundamental—a 
native instinct life self-preservation, a 
social safeguard like modesty, or a big 
loyalty like patriotism. But if either 
fanatics or philosophers, dreamers or 
statesmen, come by and insist on demandin g of it its credentials of honor, 
honesty, reason and righteousness, what 
can race prejudice say for itself? Th e 
day it is questioned is its day of fate. 
"Fro m the ordinary white America n 
to-day race contempt is likely to radiate 
in one or two or three or all of four 
directions—toward the ' Negro , toward 
the Oriental, toward the Jew and toward 
the peasant immigrant. In each of these 
directions analysis proves it compounded 
in varyin g proportions from two elements of commo n human feeling: 
"First of all, there are in it certain 
marked remnants of that old savage in ­
stinct which ignorantly considered men 
of all other tribes than its own outlandish and brutish. Nex t to that and 
greater comes the inveterate human conceit whic h insists on finding somebody 
on whom it can look down. O f these 
two elements in race hatred neither can 
endure if fairly subjected to the light of 
modern social and politica l thinking. " 
Th e Continent says the argument that 
prejudice is necessary to prevent intermarriage is "twisted and self-defeating. 
O n the contrary, givin g him reason to 
honor his own kith and kin d is the most 
efficient means of maintaining in him the 
proper incentive to marry within his own 
racial lines. A n entirely simila r remark 
applies to the notion that race prejudice 
is necessary to restrain certain races 
withi n their historic bounds and prevent 
migrations likely to obliterate America n 
civilization. Her e again the fact trends 
exactly the other way. 
"Fightin g race prejudice is not fighting 
ancestral loyalty, national solidarity, intrarace sympathy nor the preservation of 
distinctive racial traits. It is not tryin g 
to break up circles of social congeniality 
or the fellowships of like habits and like 
tastes. Abov e all, it is not workin g 
against the only norma l type of matrimony—marr.iage according to racial 
identity. 
"Bu t war on race prejudice in the name 
of humanity and of Go d is a war on all 
despising of men by men ; on all opprobriums whic h woul d make shame out 
of certain colors of flesh and certain 
lines of descent; on every fillip of human 
contempt or flash of human hate that 
signals envy when the inferior man 
shows himself able to be something better than inferior. " 
T o lead such a wa r should be, says the 
Continent, the wor k of the Churc h whic h 
has not greatly emphasized latterly the 
brotherhood of man. "Th e Churc h is under the greatest obligation to begin once 
more and teach it anew wit h the convinc ­
ing apostolic earnestness." 
A . STI R AMON G LAWYERS . 
"W e are about to have the race issue 
raised in a most impressive way, sectional, if not national, in scope." So says 
the Chattanooga Times, and it means 
that W . H . Lewis, assistant attorneygeneral, has been elected to the Ameri ­
can Ba r Association , and Southern members don't like it. Th e Time s continues: 
"A s soon as the man's standing and his 
color became known a large number of 
Southern delegates—a numbe r of North ­
erners and Westerners sympathizing— 
held a meeting and requested Lewis to 
resign, which , in an impudent and insulting reply—so we are informed—he declined to do. An d now there is a probability of a secession from the association, a call for which , it is stated, wil l 
shortly be made. 
"It is for those wh o do not find it at 
all necessary to their business, personal 
or social taste, to be thus brought into 
close relationship wit h a man whose only 
claim to special distinction was his color 
and his politica l influence, to withdraw 
from an association wit h whic h he is 
identified, and that is what, it is stated, 
a large numbe r of the members are going 
to do. It is a very simple proposition, 
and one about whic h there wil l be no 
apology or unnecessary explanations. 
Thos e wh o do not care to be thus put 
upon such close personal and social 
equality wit h Lewis wil l withdraw, as 
they have a right to do; those wh o have 
no objections to it wil l remain. " 
Th e Savannah News does not think 
the objection is to Mr . Lewis personally, 
but quotes a South Carolinia n as saying 
that the wor k of uplifting the Negr o in 
that State woul d be hampered if the colored lawye r met wit h the association 
once a year. It says Mr . Lewis is selfish 
in not resigning at once. 
Th e Rochester Union-Advertise r remarks: "If the America n Ba r Associa ­
tion can find nothing of mor e importance 
than this to exercise itself over, it had 
better dissolve. " 
q Says the St. Luk e Heral d (colored), 
of Richmond : "Man y of our white 
friends continue to harp upon the Ne w 
South : but somehow the Ne w South still 
clings to the idols of the Ol d South— 
Vardama n still controls Mississippi. " TH E N . A . A . C. P. 
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People is made 
up of colored and white Americans of all classes and creeds who believe that race 
prejudice is the most insidious enemy this country faces to-day, and are determined 
to fight it with all their might. It refuses to admit any sort of discrimination 
against man or woman because of the color of skin. It declares that unless the 
present course of injustice to the Negro, in the North as well as in the South, is 
opposed with all the earnestness of effort, in word and deed, of which right-minded 
persons are capable, the ideal of democracy in this country is destined to become 
a laughing stock. 
It points out that since 1890 seven Southern States have DISFRANCHISE D 
the Negro, while he is by various devices, to a great extent, disfranchised in several 
other States. He can demand no rights, and he receives only such treatment as the 
white man thinks good for him. What that is may be judged by the fact that 
there have been in the last 20 years OVE R 2,000 LYNCHING S (the number 
increasing immediately upon disfranchisement), and that NO T ONE-HAL F of 
the Negro children in those States have a chance to go to school. 
In the North lynchings are becoming not infrequent, and the colored man, 
whoever he may be, is discriminated against in every walk of life. And this prejudice, carefully cultivated by fanaticism and snobbery, is GROWIN G RAPIDLY . 
Our Association is fighting this evil by taking up cases of injustice and by 
carrying on a campaign of information and dignified but most energetic protest. 
We are young and we are poor. We MUS T HAV E MEMBER S who contribute 
from one dollar upward annually. We have no endowment from millionaires 
and no hope of ever acquiring any. We must live on the small contributions 
of many. 
WIL L YO U HELP ? The question is vital. Write to us THI S DA Y 
and pledge yourself as a member. 
The Nationa l Associatio n for the Ac}-
vancement of Colore d Peopl e has had 
during the last mont h two particularly 
gratifying experiences. I n Detroit and in 
Seattle organizations of citizens determined to fight race prejudice have asked 
to affiliate wit h the Nationa l Association . 
It is not necessary to say that what the 
Associatio n most desires is just such cooperation. Ther e are people enough in 
this country, we are convinced, to put up 
a brave front against the growin g prejudice that seeks not only to degrade the 
black man, but to destroy the ideal of the 
brotherhood of man and to make worl d 
peace impossible. Th e battle is going to 
be hard and nothing can be done unless 
right-minded people get together and organize. T o create such groups is, of 
course, the main purpose of the Nationa l 
Association ; to supply them wit h information and help is the main purpose of 
TH E CRISIS . 
W e venture to print the letters we have 
received from Detroit and Seattle: 
Detroit, Mich. , August 19, 1911. 
W e have just organized a society for 
the prevention of unjust race discrimina ­
tion here in Detroit. I have been requested to writ e yo u asking whether it is 
possible for our society to affiliate wit h 
the Nationa l Associatio n for the Ad ­
vancement of Colore d People as a local 
branch of that organization. If this is 
possible, what steps wil l be necessary to 
such affiliation? 
Th e executive committee of our organization meets Tuesday, August 26. If 
possible please let me hear from yo u before then. Sincerely, 
R. W . BAGNALL . 
Fro m Seattle the followin g letter-came 
a few days after that from Detroit: 
Seattle, Wash. , August 12, 1911. 
Gentlemen: 
B y the authority of the Northwest 
Equit y Congress of this city, I write yo u 
seeking information relative to the possibility of co-operating wit h your organization along the lines indicated in TH E 
CRISIS . Th e congress is composed of representative citizens of this city, and has 
methods and objects simila r to the wor k 
of your organization but entirely local in 
its scope. 
W e believe to identify our local body 
wit h your organization woul d be the 
means of creating a greater local interest 
in our organization, and, at the same 
time, of promotin g the cause yo u represent. W e note that there is no branch 
connected with your Associatio n outside 
of Ne w Yor k Cit y [except Boston, Phila ­
delphia and Chicago—Ed . CRISIS], and, 242 THE CRISIS 
further, there is no individua l representative on you r Genera l Committe e in the 
entire Wester n territory. 
If our organization had you r sanction 
and approva l by an acknowledged affiliation, we woul d aim to put TH E CRISI S 
to the forefront in the Northwest. W e 
woul d do it by payin g for the subscription out of our funds and have yo u send 
it to people of this section of the country, 
both friend and foe. W e believe wherever TH E CRISI S goes, prejudice must 
leave. An d the Northwest is a good field 
for this kin d of propaganda. 
Th e circulation of TH E CRISI S and the 
wor k of you r Nationa l Associatio n are 
doing more to combat the forces of race 
prejudice than all other agencies combined. 
If yo u deem our object and proposition 
worth y of attention we shall be glad to 
furnish individua l references for our 
membership. A s stated at the outset, our 
organization is composed of representative men and wome n of Seattle. Ou r 
wor k is entirely local. Heretofor e we 
have not sought publicity, but have contented ourselves with the loca l field. Bu t 
the opinion of the younge r membership 
is moldin g a sentiment for more publicity 
and greater work. Th e Northwest people are inclined to do something. 
Hopin g that yo u can offer some suggestion or advise along the line of wor k 
outlined, we beg to remain, 
Yours for humanity, 
TH E NORTHWES T EQUIT Y CONGRESS , 
(Signed) R . V . RANDOLPH , 
Secretary. 
H Th e ever active Ne w Yor k branch has 
been doing a number of things that some 
people might think of mino r interest, but 
which , on closer inspection, are of supreme importance. Th e great problem is 
not so much lynchin g and disfranchisement' as the daily, unceasing insults 
whic h lead ignorant whites, and also a 
good many who should know better, to 
look on the black man as less than 
human. If the Negr o was not discriminated against every day in every walk of 
life there woul d not be room for the 
growt h of the spirit which makes possible these larger evils. So the Ne w Yor k 
local, in taking up the cudgels against 
discrimination in comparatively mino r 
ways, is strikin g at the root of the 
matter. 
It has concerned itself with a case of 
discrimination against a colored man in 
a soda-water shop, at Cone y Island, and 
although the law in this respect is too 
faulty in Ne w Yor k to warrant very 
vigorous proceedings (since to fight a 
case and lose it woul d be to advertise defeat all over the State), the officers of the 
branch feel that the effect of its agitation 
was good. Judge Geismar, of Coney 
Island, administered a severe rebuke to 
the man wh o had refused to serve the 
soda water and told him that his action 
was undoubtedly against the spirit of the 
law and might prove to be against the 
letter also, should the case be fought 
civilly . A s a result colored men have 
since been better treated at Cone y Island. 
Th e Ne w Yor k branch has also protested against, a bad case of beating by 
policemen. A colored man wh o had left 
a package in a shop went back to claim 
it. Th e proprietor protested violently 
that it was not there and called the polic e 
to take the man out. Amon g them all 
he was severely beaten. Congressman 
Willia m S. Bennett was so goo d as to 
represent the Associatio n in court on this 
occasion and we are tryin g to secure the 
punishment of the guilty persons. 
q Th e Nationa l Associatio n itself is takin g up a case of discriminatio n in an 
amusement park in Ne w Jersey, just 
across the rive r from Ne w York . Mr . 
Pau l C. Bolin , organist at St. Phillip's 
Episcopa l Church , in Ne w Yor k City , recently went to Palisades Amusemen t Par k 
across the Hudson , together with a number of his choir boys. Th e ticket sellers 
refused at first to let them enter, but Mr . 
Boli n protested firmly and was given admittance. Late r on Mrs. Bolin , wit h two 
friends, went to joi n the party and this 
time the ticket agents absolutely refused 
admission. "Ge t out of here," was the 
courteous way of explaining to the lady 
that the park drew the color line. 
q Wor d was sent to us recently that a 
colored employee of the city of Milwau ­
kee had been dismissed for no other reason than his color. Th e Associatio n at 
once wrote to the Socialist mayor, Mr . 
Seidel, asking for an explanation and received the followin g letter, whic h we 
take pleasure in publishing : 
September 12, 1911. 
Dea r Sir: 
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of 
your letter of September 7. Mr . Joh n A . 
Hal l was discharged by Mr . L . J. Klug , 
the Superintendent of Bridge s and Publi c 
Buildings, and was immediately reinstated by Mr . Harr y E . Briggs, the Com ­
missione r of Publi c Works, upon his return to the city. Mr . Klug , by the way, 
is not a social democrat, although his 
superior officer, Mr . Briggs, wh o was 
appointed by me, is. I offer this explanation inasmuch as yo u ask whether 
this discharge is in accordance wit h socialistic principles. It certainly is not, 
and in order that yo u may be fully informed on this matter, I am asking Mr . 
Brigg s to writ e yo u a letter. Permit me 
to thank yo u for you r efforts to learn the 
facts in this case. 
Ver y truly yours, 
EMI L SEIDEL. 
Mayor. EDITORIA L 
MR . TAFT . 
MR . WILLIA M TAFT , President of these United States, 
shows a marvelous facility 
for getting on the right track and 
saying the wrong thing. The most 
glaring example of this is, of course, 
the tariff, but his attitude toward the 
American Negro is a fatal second. 
Not only is Mr . Taft particeps criminis with the late Mr . Roosevelt in the 
crime of Brownsville, but he added to 
that the Taft Doctrine of recognizing 
race prejudice, instead of fitness, in 
Federal appointments. O n top of this, 
and in the face of a record of murder, 
lynching and burning in this country 
which has appalled the civilized world 
and loosened the tongue of many a 
man long since dumb on the race problem, in spite of this, Mr . Taft has 
blandly informed a deputation of colored men that any action on his part is 
quite outside his power, if not his 
interest. 
Finally, Mr . Taft has several times 
expressed himself on Negro education. First he was quite enthusiastic 
for the education of the Negroes' 
hands. Then—on the eve of his nomination to the presidency—he discovered at Fis k University a few black 
brains that deserved cultivation, but 
sparingly—sparingly. H e would not 
overdo this sort of thing. Lately, on 
the eve of his campaign of renomination to the presidency, Mr . Taft has 
again declared that the Negro "ought 
to come and is coming more and more 
under the guardianship of the South !" 
This statement is, to speak mildly, extraordinary; and it will make thinking 
black men carefully considerate as to 
whether they are willing to enthrone 
this policy in the Whit e House for 
another four years. 
Le t us examine the dictum: Whe n 
a guardian is appointed it is because 
he has shown in the past some capacity 
for the position. One would not 
usually ask a murderer to guard life, 
nor a slave driver to direct labor, nor 
a libertine to protect girls. O r if by 
chance such an one is so appointed, it 
could only be that despite a forbidding 
past he had shown unmistakable signs 
of repentance, and will and ability to 
do right. W e ask now in all charity 
and calmness: Have the Southern 
States of this land in the past or in the 
present exhibited any desire or ability 
to settle the Negro problem in accordance with reason and justice? The 
answer lies in nine burning .words: 
Slavery 
Peonage 
Mulattoes 
Murde r 
Mobs 
Lynching 
Disfranchisement 
Illiteracy 
Prejudice. 
W e submit to any unprejudiced 
judge that a people that have shown 
no greater capacity for dealing with 
a great social problem than these fearful words indicate are not fit to be 
given sole and exclusive charge of ten 
million cattle much less ten million 
human souls. 
An d we further declare that a man 
who in the light of the history of this 
land can stand up and deny to the conscience and ability of the Nort h and 
West any right to help in the settlement of a problem which belongs to 
them just as much as it belongs to the 
South, if not more—we declare that 
such a man has no business to be 
President of the United States. 
FORWAR D BACKWARD . 
TH E nemesis of every forward 
movement in the United States 
is the Negro question. 
Witness Woma n Suffrage, the 
Liquo r Question, Political Reform, the 
various efforts to revivify the Chris-244 THE CRISIS 
tian Church, and Socialism. Mrs. 
Ann a Shaw, president of the Woman's 
Suffrage Association of America , recently made the extraordinary statement that all Negroes were opposed 
to woman suffrage. This is, of course, 
a barefaced falsehood. But assuming 
that Mrs. Shaw believes it true, what 
is Mrs. Shaw's conclusion? The traveler from Altruri a might assume that 
she would say : 
"Therefore let us work to enlighten 
these colored men and women and 
show them that disfranchisement, 
whether by sex or race, is wrong. " 
Not so does the astute Airs. Shaw 
advise. O n the contrary, she says: 
"D o not touch the Negro problem. It 
will offend the South." This is the 
advice that is generally given to an 
organization which sings in its recently 
adopted hymn : 
W e the People ! Al l the People ! Ho w 
it rings! 
Justice broad and free, the livin g heart 
of things! 
Sisters workin g for the light, 
Brothers striving for the right, 
W e the People ! Al l the People ! Ho w 
it rings! 
Such contradiction hurts the Wo ­
man's Suffrage movement far more 
than it hurts black folk. The strength 
of the woman's movement in England 
is that it is honest and unselfish, aristocrat and working woman working 
hand in hand. But in America , despite 
the brave effort of women like Mrs. 
Belmont and Mrs. Villard , the war cry 
is rapidly becoming "Votes for Whit e 
Wome n Only. " 
N o wonder Europe sneers at American democracy. Small wonder that 
we ourselves lose the faith in ourselves which we so sorely need. W e 
would like to believe that a great uplift movement of young people who 
profess to follow the precepts of Jesus 
Christ would first of all condemn murder, lynching and lawlessness in this 
land. A s a matter of fact, the recent 
national meeting of the Christian En -
deavorers refused even to consider 
such a resolution. Ye t this was the 
organization that made the welkin ring 
last year to prevent the exhibit of a 
black man's victory in a prizefight! 
Consider again the effort of the 
South to regulate the sale of liquor. 
"The Negroes oppose us," many 
Southerners complain. This is untrue. 
A very large proportion of the Negro 
vote can be counted on to oppose the 
liquor traffic. But suppose that many 
or all did oppose certain prohibitory 
laws, the remedy would be to educate 
and persuade those voters. But no, 
the "reformers," who for eleven 
months in the year take every opportunity to show their contempt for a 
black face, suddenly a few weeks before election order the Negro voters 
to vote for their measures on pain of 
further disfranchisement. Whe n some 
Negroes refuse to do this, we are told 
in triumphant tones that Negroes are 
not worthy of the ballot! 
O f all recent forward movements 
the Socialists have rung truest on the 
race question in their theoretical statements. But here they have usually 
stopped. "Wh y do not Negroes join 
the Socialists?" they ask. They do 
not ask such silly questions of white 
folks: They go and see why they do 
not join. They teach, agitate and 
proselyte; while among ten million 
Negro Americans they have scarcely 
a single worker and are afraid to encourage such workers. Al l of which 
goes to show that the Negro problem 
is the door which bars progress in the 
United States and which makes us 
liars and hypocrites. Ye t the unloosening of that door is the simplest thing 
on earth : Treat human beings according to their character and not according to their color. 
HAI L COLUMBIA ! 
AMERICA N civilization moves 
steadily and graciously forward. Consider this gem 
from a Ne w Yor k morning paper: 
"Fift h Avenue, near 114th Street, 
was well filled with men and women 
as well as crowds of children at play, 
about 10 o'clock last night, when a 
young girl accosted another of about 
her age, and as the latter suddenly 
darted off along 114th Street started 
in pursuit shouting: 'Stop her! She's 
a thief!' EDITORIAL 245 
"Instantly there was a crowd of almost 100 men and women at the girl's 
heels. She ran to Lenox Avenue, the 
crowd behind her increasing in numbers, and then turned down toward 
113th Street. She ran swiftly and was 
far ahead of her nearest pursuer when 
Policeman Bernstein of the East 104th 
Street Station grabbed her at 112th 
Street." 
Wha t of it? She was a thief—a 
nasty, God-forgotten thief, and perhaps worse. Moreover, she was a foreigner. Hai l to the "almost 100 men 
and women" who ran the frightened 
thing like a rabbit to its warren. Behold our civilization at its highest and 
best; or at its lowest and worst. Ho w 
shall we, the untutored groundlings, 
know ? Wher e are our teachers in this 
day of lynching and lawlessness? 
Wha t are they saying and doing? 
Pick out the ten greatest men of 
America , beginning, of course, with the 
distinguished gentleman who has just 
declined the presidency, and coming to 
President Taft and the college presidents, captains of industry, professional men and leaders of culture. 
Wha t have they said? Nothing. 
Wha t should they say ? Something— 
anything. The symptoms fly and 
spread. They shriek to Heaven. They 
mean something. If they mean the 
glorious fruition of the best of American democracy let the leaders of this 
people speak out and say so. If they 
mean Hell (and they do), where in 
Heaven's name is the moral courage 
of this land gone to? 
The answer is not far to seek. I 
wrote to an American recently—one 
of the best specimens of American 
manhood, white and wealthy and philanthropic. I said: "Join us and fight 
lynching, lawlessness and race prejudice." He was resting in his pretty 
cottage by the blue waters of a beautiful lake with the sweet shadow of 
mountains, away from the city's fetid 
heat, daintily served by servants, surrounded by his books and interests— 
and he wrote: 
"Wit h reference to your suggestion 
that I join your association, I am, of 
course, deeply interested, but have 
been so much impressed with what 
seemed to me the bitterness and unchristian spirit I have observed in various comments from time to time that 
I have felt that only harm could come 
in the long run from that temper. I 
sympathize strongly with the dignified 
protests against the suppression of the 
vote of the Negroes, but I am myself 
profoundly against war in every aspect, and believe that Jesus Christ 
meant to turn the other cheek. I am 
sorry to say that it has seemed to me 
you definitely reject this aspect of 
Christ's teaching in any event." 
Angels and ministers of Grace, 
defend us! 
KNOWLEDGE . 
ON E of the comfortable theories 
of the South is its intimate 
and careful knowledge of 
everything relating to black folk. 
Governor Donaghey of Arkansas, for 
instance, recently said to the Negro 
Business League: 
"Whil e you are said to be an imitative race, you never suicide or suffer 
from nervous trouble. I believe it was 
your chairman who tells us of the 
young Negro in Harvard University 
who specialized on nervous diseases 
with a view of practicing medicine in 
the Mississippi bottoms. He , of course, 
would never have had a patient." 
A s a matter of fact, in 1890 American Negroes were committing suicide 
at the rate of 330 a year; in 1900 at 
the rate of 510 a year, and to-day the 
rate is undoubtedly between 600 and 
700. Agai n next to consumption and 
pneumonia no set of diseases is more 
fatal to Negroes than diseases of the 
nervous system. Ove r 30,000 Negroes 
die from this cause each year. 
Al l these figures are from the 
United States census reports and go to 
show the ignorance of knowledge 
which will not learn. 
It illustrates, too, how silly it is to 
try and draw great slashing lines 
of difference between races. Men , 
families, nations and races differ, but 
humanity is one. 246 THE CRISIS 
From a painting by C. T. Webber, Cincinnati. 
TH E UNDERGROUN D RAILROA D 
Trie First Bloodshed of trie Civi l Wa r 
By M . D. MACLEA N 
Histor y is a peculiar goddess. Nothin g 
gives her more satisfaction than to 
show mankin d its capacity for weakness 
and folly by bringin g into juxtaposition 
two events whic h set each other off 
particularly well. Thus, the birthplace 
of Abraham Lincol n became the scene 
of one of the most revolting massacres 
of Negroe s in even our annals; and recently she chose Coatesvill e and August 
13 for an exhibition of barbarity 
toward the black man that is probably 
unrivaled. 
Tha t Coatesville and August 13 made 
a fitting time and place is due to two 
facts: First, the entire neighborhood 
was one of the headquarters of the Un ­
derground Railwa y before the Civi l War, 
and the town itself is named for the 
Coates family, as true friends as the slave 
ever had and as active in helping their 
escape. Secondly, the 11th of September 
—that is, one month after the man Wal ­
ke r was burned alive—was the sixtieth 
anniversary of what was called the first 
bloodshed of the Civi l War, in the famous Christiana riot not twenty-five 
miles from Coatesville . 
Th e "progress " of Southern Pennsylvani a and the "settlement of the Negr o 
problem" have been so marked that last 
month they burned alive an injured black 
man chained to a hospital bed, at almost 
the very spot on which , sixty years before, all but a month, black and white 
men had stood shoulder to shoulder to 
defend wit h their lives the right of the 
Negr o to freedom. It is an encouraging 
sign of the times, isn't it? A s Senatorelect Vardama n woul d say, it shows the 
Nort h is getting over its mawkis h (only 
he wouldn't put it so politely) sentiment 
about the Negroe s being human and having elementary human rights. 
Th e Christian a riot has not been 
widely celebrated, like the Bosto n massacre, although it bears to the Civi l Wa r 
exactly the same relation that the affair 
in Ne w Englan d did to the Revolution , 
but it was of great importanc e and the 
unveilin g of a monument to commemorate it was celebrated last mont h by 
Southern Pennsylvania . Th e lynchin g 
was the more popular entertainment, but 
there were perhaps even mor e dignitaries 
at the unveiling. 
It is possible that one reason wh y the 
Christiana riot has not been mor e popular a subject for our historians is that 
black men gathered in quite nine-tenths 
of the glory. This was not owin g to 
lack of willingness on the part of their 
white friends to help them, but to the 
presence amon g the Negroe s of a man of 
remarkable powers of leadership, wh o 
not unnaturally attracted to himself the 
lightnin g of the occasion. Willia m 
Parke r was his name, and he. was somethin g of a figure of romance. 
Certain names of colored men and 
wome n stand out prominentl y in the 
strange annals of the Undergroun d Rail -FIRST BLOODSHED OF CIVIL WAR. 247 
way. Willia m Still , chairman of the 
Philadelphi a Vigilanc e Committee , and 
Harrie t Tubman , the "Mose s of her people, " and others are better known than 
Parker, because they shared more largely 
DINA H MENDENHAL L 
in the organization and devoted their entire time to the wor k of helping their 
brothers and sisters from slavery, but nobody could have been braver or more 
loya l than was Willia m Parke r in his 
less conspicuous way. 
H e was born a slave but he never intended to remain one. H e had no mother 
and was brought up in a cabin wit h a 
crowd of other motherless children who 
fought and scrambled like youn g animals. Ther e was this advantage, however. H e learned to use his fists, an 
accomplishment he never forgot. Whe n 
he was about eleven years old slave traders came to the plantation and William , 
wit h his chum, Levi , took refuge in a 
tree whil e the selling went on. Whil e 
perched out of sight in the woo d the idea 
of running away came to the boy and he 
put it to Levi . Lev i agreed to go if his 
mothe r was sold, but said he must first 
make sure of that, and Willia m pledged 
himself to do as his friend did. A t last, 
when all was quiet, the pair climbed 
down and ran to the quarters. 
"Mother, are yo u sold? " asked Levi . 
"No , child, " said the mother, and that 
ended the question of runnin g away. 
In the course of time Lev i was himself sold and that left Willia m alone. 
H e reasoned that he was for the most part 
kindl y treated and that as lon g as this 
went on it woul d hardly be fair to his 
master to run away, but he was decided 
that the first time he was beaten or there 
was talk of slave traders he woul d go. 
Th e great day came at last. Th e master, angered at something Parke r had 
done, struck him violently with an oxgoad. 
Parke r was a giant in strength. H e 
tore the whip from the white man's 
hand, beat him soundly wit h it and then 
ran for his life. Twic e he was nearly 
caught. Onc e his pursuers passed withi n 
a few feet of him and once a man seized 
him, but Parke r shook himself free, felled 
the man wit h his fist, and made his 
escape before the alarm could be given. 
A t length he reached Southern Penn ­
sylvani a and there he established himself. It was not a very safe place for 
black men. Ther e was a band of rowdies 
know n as the "Ga p gang, " whic h worke d 
not only to catch fugitive slaves, but also 
to lay hands on free Negroe s and sell 
them South. Frequently a man woul d 
go to the fields and never return. Fre ­
quently a woma n woul d start for market 
and her family woul d never see her 
again. It was the wor k of the "Ga p 
gang," the spiritual ancestors of the 
"prominent citizens " of Coatesville today. 
Parke r associated himself at once wit h 
the wor k of the Undergroun d Railway . 
Actin g with men like Lev i Coffin, the 
DR . JACO B L . PAXSO N 
one-eyed Quake r wh o housed scores of 
runaway slaves and could spy out a slave 
hunter quicker than other men wit h the 
norma l number of optics, and Lindle y 
Coates, the "president" of that sec-248 THE CRISIS 
tion of the railway, and Still , the colored 
post-office clerk of Philadelphia , whose 
spies were everywhere, Parke r helped 
slave after slave to freedom. 
I n Marylan d there lived a man named 
Gorsuch, not a bad-hearted man, but 
violent of temper and tenacious of his 
"rights, " even when they cut pretty 
deeply into other people's. Gorsuc h had 
a son, Dickerson , of a gentler turn of 
mind. Togethe r they took care of a 
large plantation worke d by many slaves. 
Whe n he heard that some of these 
slaves had run away the older Gorsuc h 
burst into a fury. H e woul d have his 
property back; he woul d have his rights; 
he wouldn't let the thus-and-so niggers 
get away from him—ungrateful black 
hounds after all he had done for them— 
and so forth and so on. Dickerso n endeavored to calm him. Perhaps deep in 
his heart he felt that if things were reversed he woul d himself rather strike 
for liberty. A t any rate he tried to dissuade his father from followin g the fugitives, but the old man woul d not tolerate 
the idea of staying at home and the son 
dutifully went along with him. 
Th e runaways had reached Christiana 
and were hidden in the house of Parker. 
O n the night of September 10 the Gorsuches had reached Christiana but not 
unannounced. In Philadelphi a Willia m 
Stil l was chairman of the vigilanc e committee. Throughou t the South he had 
agents wh o worke d wit h the slave catchers and kept him well informed of their 
plans, and one of these spies was attached to the Gorsuc h party. H e separated from the slave hunters just before 
reaching Christiana and brought wor d to 
Parke r that his guests were being 
sought. 
It was after midnight when Edwar d 
Gorsuc h and son rode up to the house 
of Parker, accompanied by Unite d States 
Marsha l Henr y H . Kline . Upstairs the 
slaves lay hidden, and Parker, wit h his 
two brothers-in-law, Alexande r Pinckne y 
and Abraham Johnson, were awaitin g the 
attack. It should be explained that 
Parke r had worke d out a theory of his 
relation to the Fugitiv e Slave Law . H e 
seems always to have thought out the 
arguments for and against whateve r he 
did, and he had quite decided that he 
owed no respect to the laws of the 
Unite d States. If the law did not protect 
black men, black men were not bound to 
regard it, he said, to the scandal of even 
his radical white friends. 
So when Klin e called on him to surrender his reply was very ready. 
"I am a Unite d States marshal, " announced Kline . 
" I don't care for yo u nor the Unite d 
States," returned Parke r calmly. 
Somewha t disconcerted Klin e with ­
drew for a consultation. Gorsuc h was 
for violence, but Kline , mor e especially 
as it was his business to enter the house 
first, was less eager to begin the fight. 
The y waited for some time. 
Th e first light of dawn was showing, 
and Mrs. Parke r asked her husband if 
she should not blow the horn. Th e blowin g of the horn was the signal to the 
colored men of the neighborhood to rally 
for the protection of their friends, and 
Klin e knew what it meant. A s soon, 
therefore, as the horn sounded he shot 
at the woman . She knelt beside the win -
dowsill and continued to blow to the 
accompaniment of bullets from the men 
below. 
Th e sound of the horn on the quiet 
mornin g air went far, and soon from one 
side came the forms of black men runRESIDENC'E OF JOH N VICKERS . FIRST BLOODSHED OF CIVIL WAR. 249 
ning to the rescue and from the other, 
gallopin g out of a wood, members of the 
"Ga p gang, " ready to take what advantage there might be in the fortunes of 
war. Th e situation would reach a climax 
in a few minutes. 
was one of the most important stations 
of the Undergroun d Railroad, arrived 
and took the wounded Dickcrso n into his 
charge. Parke r asked what he should do 
and Pownal l told him that his only 
chance lay in immediate escape to 
Canada, which the Undergroun d Railroad could effect. 
Dickcrso n Gorsuch was in many ways 
a typical Southerner of the best type. 
H e asked whether Parke r had been hurt, 
and when he was told he had not been 
injured said: 
"I'm glad. H e is a noble Negro. " 
Wha t he could not understand, however, was that his "boys, " the fugitive 
slaves, should have fought against him 
even in an attempt to gain their freedom. H e could not grasp the limitations 
of the patriarchal system any better then 
than many well-disposed Southerners do 
to-day. 
Th e same roof that sheltered youn g 
Gorsuc h was also a refuge for Parker, 
Pinckne y and Johnson. Pownal l smuggled them in, dressed them in the best 
of clothes and sent them walkin g casually out of the front door wit h the 
ladies of the house. In the darkness the 
guards wh o watched the place could not 
see whether they were black or white, 
and there was no suspicion that the careless gentlemen were the ex-slaves whose 
arrest was sought. 
THADDEU S STEVEN S 
Parker, whose courage alone had kept 
up the two men wit h him, opened the 
door and stepped out. Edwar d Gorsuch 
pointed a pistol at him, but Parke r 
stepped up and laid his hand on the old 
man's shoulders. 
"I've seen guns before now, " he said, 
and he added: " I don't want to do any 
harm. " 
The n he precipitated the fight by remarkin g to Gorsuch, wh o was a very 
"religious " person: 
"Ol d man, yo u ought to be ashamed 
of yourself to be in this business, and 
you a class leader at home." 
Dickerso n Gorsuch stepped forward 
angrily. 
"I wouldn't take such an insult from a 
damn nigger," he said. 
Thereupon Gorsuch fired. Th e bullet 
grazed Parker's head and at the signal 
the fight—the "first fight of the Civi l 
War"—began. 
It ended with the victory of the black 
men, but Edward - Gorsuch lay dead on 
the ground and Dickerso n had fallen, 
severely wounded, beside him. 
Durin g the fight three Quakers, Elija h 
Lewis, Eastne r Hanwa y and Joseph P. 
Scarlett, had ridden up. Afte r the fight 
Lev i Pownall , a Quake r whose house 
L 
WILLIA M STIL L 
A n order was issued for the arrest of 
Gorsuch's fugitive property, givin g their 
aliases. O n the list appeared, as aliases 
used by them, the names of Parker, John ­
son and Pinckney, although they had 250 THE CRISIS 
lon g been free Negroes. This device, 
however, did not succeed, for the three 
men, wh o had been joined by a fourth 
whose name is not known , were safe in 
the house of Isaac Mendenhall and his 
wife, two of the staunchest friends of the 
slave in that region. Ther e they spent 
the first night of terror, and the plan 
was to take them on, as was the custom 
of the "railroad, " to the home of Joh n 
Vickers, but Mr . Jacob L . Paxson , of 
Norristown , took charge. 
It was better, he said, to take them 
to the home of Graceanna Lewis, instead 
of the more notoriously abolitionist resort. In the garret of Graceanna Lewis' 
house, therefore, they hid for a day or 
two, and since the cook was not quite 
trustworthy food was secretly brought in 
from a neighbor's house. 
A friend called at the house one evening, and the dawn saw him well on his 
way to market at the next town with 
sundry "tubs of butter," covered wit h 
cloth in the bottom of his wagon. These 
"tubs" were delivered at a carpenter's 
shop in Norristown , as arranged by Mr . 
Paxson . Fo r four days the men hid under a pile of shavings. Foo d was passed 
to them at night on a long shovel over 
a four-foot alley. O n the fifth day five 
wagons exactly alike drove out of Norristown in different directions. In one of 
them lay Parker, Pinckne y and Johnson, 
with their companion. Suspicion had 
been pretty well diverted by this time, 
and if a description of the wago n was 
sent out there were four to distract attention from the important one. Th e men 
reached Philadelphia , were taken in hand 
by Stil l and were forwarded to Canada. 
Parker's wife and child, however, were 
caught by the slave hunters, presumably, 
for they were never heard of again. 
The y claimed that she gave herself up 
voluntarily. Anyway , she disappeared. 
Whil e all this was goin g on the three 
Quakers, Lewis, Hanwa y and Scarlett, 
and thirty-five Negroe s had been arrested, charged wit h treason. Th e treason 
consisted in not assisting a marshal of 
the Unite d States to enforce the Fugi ­
tive Slave La w by helping him capture 
the runaways in the house of Parker. 
The y were taken to Moyamensin g Priso n 
and lay there for ninety-seven days whil e 
the State worke d up its case against 
Hanway , the first of their numbe r to be 
tried. 
Theodor e Cuyle r defended the prisoners and Thaddeus Stevens advised him. 
Th e feeling of the communit y was 
strongly against prosecuting the accused 
men, and Mr . Cuyle r put the popula r verdict in regard to the case clearly when 
he said to the judge : 
"Sir, did yo u hear it? Tha t these 
harmless non-resisting Quarkers and 
thirty wretched, miserable, penniless Ne ­
groes armed wit h corn cutters, clubs and 
a few muskets and headed by a mille r in 
a felt hat, without a coat, without arms, 
mounted on a sorre l nag, levied wa r 
against the Unite d States? Blessed be 
Go d that our Unio n survived the shock." 
In fifteen minutes the jur y brought in 
a verdict of not guilty. Th e prosecution 
changed the charge against the whol e 
group to one of riot, and they stayed in 
jail for some time until the grand jury 
refused to consider the charge, and the 
entire case fell to the ground. 
Thus, near Coatesville, did black men 
fire the first shot of that great war, 
which, ten years later, was to give them 
freedom. 
CU T USE D I N ADVERTISIN G RUNAWA Y SLAVE S A LETTE R 
TH E CONTAGIO N O F TH E SOUTH . 
T o the Editor of TH E CRISI S : 
Th e horribl e lynchin g at Coatesville, 
Pennsylvania , in mid-August, has served 
one useful purpose at least. It has laid 
forever, it is to be hoped, that foolish 
ghost that the Negr o problem is preeminently a southern problem, and must 
be left therefore to the South for solution without any interference from the 
North . 
Her e in a typica l northern town, 
located only some thirty or forty miles 
from the great city of Philadelphia , a 
Negr o is lynched under the most hideous circumstances that could possibly 
be imagined. H e is guilty not of the 
"usual crime, " but of shooting an officer 
in a drunken rage. H e is confined not 
in a prison, but in a hospital, grievously 
wounded. H e is seized by a mob not 
of foreigners nor "hooligans, " but of 
so-called respectable citizens, including 
many wome n and church members. H e 
is kille d not by shooting or hanging, but 
by burning, and under conditions so atrocious as to preclude adequate description. 
An d the whol e miserable business is 
perpetrated on a Sunday evening, with 
the church bells ringin g the call to worship in the ears of the frenzied crowd. 
It scarcely seems possible that such a 
deed, rivalin g in horror the barbarities 
of the redskins of Nort h Americ a or the 
cannibals of the South Sea Islands, 
could take place in a sober northern 
town, whic h knows nothin g of the race 
problem in its acuter forms, whic h has 
never been inoculated wit h the virus of 
race hatred, and whic h is unaccustomed 
to visitin g injustice, violent or otherwise, upon any deliberately selected portion of the community. An d I for one 
believe that it could not have taken 
place, in Coatesvill e or elsewhere, a 
dozen or even half a dozen years ago! 
Neithe r race prejudite, whic h rears 
its ugly head in the most unexpected 
places, nor the provincialism of small 
towns, whic h enters as an important 
factor into many of the public offences 
of the country districts, nor even the 
spirit of lawlessness, whic h is increasin g at such an alarmin g rate in contemporary America n life, can adequately 
explain this fearful crime. Bac k of all 
the horror of that night of riotin g and 
burnin g there lay the psychologica l fact 
of imitation! Th e first Negr o lynchin g 
woul d have been impossible north of 
Maso n and Dixon's line. The one hundredth woul d have been improbable. 
But the two hundredth or the three hundredth was not only not impossible nor 
improbable, but was inevitable as soon as 
circumstances were ripe. I n other words, 
the lon g practice of Negr o lynchin g in 
the South has accustomed the America n 
mind, north as well as south, to this 
particular form of injustice. Shocked 
at first by the lynchin g of a black 
offender, we have of late come to regard 
it as perhaps the natural thing, and now 
are actually ready to consider it as the 
only thing. A dozen years ago, in the 
North , when a Negr o shot an officer, 
or committed a burglary, or even assaulted a woman, we arrested and tried 
and punished him, exactly as though he 
were a white man under the like circumstances. But now, through the sheer 
power of southern example, we have 
come to regard a black crimina l as in 
a different category. Wheneve r a Negr o 
commits an offence in an America n community to-day—in Pennsylvani a or Illinois, as well as in Mississipp i or Ala ­
bama—"lynch him " is the first cry ; and 
by dint of custom, therefore, it is becomin g as easy to kil l him in this way 
as, by dint of simila r custom, it has long 
since become easy to destroy a serpent 
on sight. 
Coatesville is a case very much in 
point! Ha d Walke r killed the officer a 
decade ago, under exactly the same circumstances as last August, and with 
exactly the same people about him in 
the community, he woul d have been 
quietly healed of his wound, tried in 
the court, and punished wit h due process of law. To-day, however, it is 
different. Th e people of Coatesville are 
not the same people, and the circumstances of a Negro's crime cannot be the 
same circumstances. Mont h after month, 
year after year, the newspapers have 
brought to Coatesville, as to all other 
northern towns, the accounts of lynch ­
ings in the South. Withi n recent years 
these stories have been as matter of 
fact as stories of catching fish or shooting mad dogs. Suddenly a Negr o offends 
in Coatesville itself! "Negro " at once 
suggests "lynching " to every mind—and 
a flaming pyre and shrieking victim are 
straightway the result! In other words, 
we are face to face here not with a 
social or politica l or legal phenomenon 
at all—but a psychologica l phenomenon. 
Th e old law of "association of ideas" 
is at wor k again. Prof. James' famous 
chapter on the "Psycholog y of Habit " 
has received a new illustration. 252 THE CRISIS 
No w it is this fact whic h shows how 
foolish it is to talk about the Negr o 
problem as a southern problem, and to 
declare that the Northerne r must, in 
justice to his southern brother, adopt 
the policy of "hands off." I n this age 
of quick and easy communication—of 
telephones and telegraphs, railroads and 
automobiles, newspapers and magazines, 
the ever-closer knittin g together of cities 
and States and nations in the mutual 
exchange of customs, practices and ideas 
—it is absurd to talk about any problem as being in any sense a loca l problem. N o social act can be confined 
within the bounds of any one commu ­
nity. Injustice to the Negr o in every 
form—commercial, educational, judicia l 
—is contagious, like physica l disease, 
and spreads, like the plague, from town 
to town. Lynchin g in the South, where 
it may be explainable if not excusable, 
means lynchin g in the North , where it 
is neither explainable nor excusable. 
An d it is in order to protect my city of 
New York , and your city of Boston, and 
some one else's city of Chicag o or Min ­
neapolis or Seattle—to say nothing of 
the appeal of ordinary humanity—tha t 
/ a Northerner, and you a Northerner, 
and this some one else a Northerner, 
must fight this lynchin g mani a and 
every other form of iniquit y whic h is 
now being visited upon my black brother 
in the South. Injustice to the Negr o is 
not a southern problem, nor even a 
national problem—but a worl d problem! 
Justice is everywhere endangered, so 
lon g as injustice is anywher e openly 
practised. Peace is everywher e menaced, so lon g as violence is anywher e 
tolerated. Th e brotherhood of man is 
still a futile dream, so lon g as class 
distinctions, nationa l jealousies and 
race prejudices are anywher e possible. 
W e must all be saved together or not 
at all! 
I say therefore to the people of the 
South—this problem of the Negro is my 
problem. W e wil l wor k it out together, 
in the spirit of amity and good will , if 
you say so. But if not—then, in the 
name of a just God , I wil l wor k it out 
for you, and in spite of you ! 
JOH N HAYNE S HOLMES . 
Churc h of the Messiah . 
TH E COWAR D 
By WILL . N . JOHNSO N 
H e paused and looked back upon the 
many curvin g furrows he had plowed 
across those red, unyieldin g hills. It 
was a curious clay he had been upturning. A s he leaned his great hulkin g 
form across the plow he began a quasidreaming, contemplation of the queer 
color of the clay. Wh y was the earth 
so red, so red? Thre e ghost-clad fancies 
glided across the dim edge of his mind's 
horizon : Elfis h spirits in some far-off 
yesterday had crushed a millio n poppies 
beneath as many tender heels; once upon 
a ghastly night, and by the alchemy of 
God , the moon dripped blood and the 
reddened stars stared at the wicked 
world : and the last, weirdest fancy ot 
them all—this colored clay came from 
blood clots near the whippin g post on 
the hill tops, that like three crosses 
now stood out against the whitened sky. 
A s the last thought glided by his dark 
flesh quivered! 
H e was a Horton , this plowman . Te n 
generations of Horton s were behind him, 
wit h no infiltration of alien blood. The y 
had carried the scar of servitude on 
their hearts, and it now seemed never 
to heal. H e sniffed the sweet breeze 
of the blossomin g season and counted, 
subconsciously, the many shades of 
green adown the valley towar d the 
town. Wh y had he not been a painter 
of pictures like those he had bought 
from the youn g white merchant ? Wh y 
not a write r of books, like those in 
the school for his children? Children ? 
Beyond—beyon d the years he seemed 
to see a millio n children of his race, 
all dark faced or golden or brown . The y 
looked at him wit h wondrous, questionin g eyes, as plenteous as the stars, and 
timid hands were held stretched out i n 
sad appeal. A sweet chord from the 
throat of a thrush thrummed across the 
strings of his soul. It swelled and 
swelled till it became the plaintive 
babble of a millio n young, and their 
cries set up a dizzy ringin g in his ears. 
Back in the dark night of his memor y 
there was only the sombre race of plowmen. H e seemed to see them, all prototypes of himself, in single file, plowin g 
the same furrow. Th e end—the wearying end of the lon g curvin g row—wa s 
a black chasm. This was his race, the 
Hortons. The y had borne chains wit h 
no whining ; their great broad backs had 
been lacerated there at the whippin g post 
by the biting lash, vet they never struck 
back! 
"Dam n you, nigger. " 
It was the landlord's rasping voice 
that startled the dreaming plowman . A 
frail blue-white fist stung his twitchin g 
black face. Ther e was a pause, and in 
that pause the thrush still chanted its 
anthems to Heaven ; Horton , the plowman, shrank away from the face of his 
master. Th e sweet breeze cooled his 
hot brow. H e moved on the end of the 
crazy furrow—to the brink of the dark 
chasm! WOMEN'S CLUBS 
Mr.. SARA H J. GARNETT By Mrs. W. A. HUNTON 
It may fittingly be considered a blessin g to have traveled down the years 
some fourscore, and to have gathered, 
meanwhile, "the unstudied gesture of esteem, the reverent eye made rich wit h 
honest thought," but it is a nobler blessin g to have consecrated sixty of these 
years to an intelligent and enthusiastic 
co-operation in all the social, philanthropic and religious activities of the 
passing generations. Such was the gift 
to Mrs. Sarah J. Garnett, wh o quietly 
and suddenly answered the call on the 
17th of September. 
Th e eldest of the eleven children of 
Sylvanus and Anni e Smith, Mrs. Garnett 
inherited the sterling qualities which 
have made her parents remembered. He r 
father is said to have been the first colored man to build a home for his family 
in Ne w York , and he sought for his children the best educational advantages of 
his day. 
A t fourteen Sarah was appointed monitorial instructress, under that pioneer 
colored teacher, Joh n Peterson, and had 
as her lady principa l Miss Jane Rowe , 
an Englis h lady. Fo r this wor k she was 
paid a salary of $25 per year. A t the 
age of eighteen she was married to the 
Rev. Samue l Tompkins, an Episcopa l 
clergyman , but at twenty-two was left a 
widow, and began her career as a teacher, 
which lasted some forty-seven years, and 
which was not interrupted by her second 
marriage to the noted Henr y Highlan d 
Garnett. 
It was in her wor k as an educator that 
she proved herself an ardent reformer, 
as well as a successful teacher. Afte r 
spending twelve years at the Eastern 
Distric t school of Brooklyn , she was 
called to the principalship of School 
No . 2 in Ne w Yor k City , and on the 
death of Mr . Reason, principa l of Publi c 
School No . 3, it was merged into her 
school and she became principa l of the 
famous No . 80. But it was her untiring 
efforts toward doing away with separate schools for colored children in Ne w 
York , and her zeal in the accomplishment of her purpose that has given 
her the highest rank among the teachers 
of Ne w York , and is in itself a most 
interesting story. 
She was foremost in the organization 
and support of the Woman's Loya l 
Union , whic h so ably seconded Ida B. 
Wells in her early efforts against lynch ­
ings. A s superintendent of the suffrage 
department of the Nationa l Associatio n 
of Colore d Wome n she was always alert 
to every possible means that could be 
employed for the advancement of the 
cause. 
Th e eightieth birthday of Mrs. Garnett 
was celebrated August 31, in London , 
England , where she had gone wit h her 
talented sister, Dr. S. Mari a Stewart, 
resident physician of Wilberforc e Uni ­
versity, to be present at the First Uni ­
versal Races Congress. 
Th e night after her death two friends, 
themselves women of high attainment 
and achievement, tenderly measured her 
worth—her sister, Dr. Stewart, and Miss 
Maritch a Lyons, Brooklyn's most honored school teacher. Amon g her beautiful gifts recalled was that of drawin g her 
pupils close to her. Said Miss Lyons: 
"He r boys always knew she woul d give 
them another chance." She had learned 
of Ascham that "the schoolhouse should 
be counted as a sanctuary against fear." 
Again , they said, "she was not an exceptional woman, but one that it is possible 
for every woman to emulate." 
"No w silence like a benediction falls, 
Beauty and peace fill now her perfect 
hour." 
Th e picture of clubwomen in the last 
CRISI S was by mistake attributed to Ala ­
bama. It represented the South Carolin a 
Federation. TH E BURDE N 
COLORE D ME N LYNCHE D WITH ­
OU T TRIAL . 
1885. 
1886. 
1887. 
1888. 
1889. 
1890. 
1891. 
1892. 
1893. 
1894. 
1895. 
1896. 
1897. 
78 
71 
80 
95 
95 
90 
121 
155 
154 
134 
112 
80 
122 
1898. 
1899. 
1900. 
1901. 
1902. 
1903. 
1904. 
1905. 
1906. 
1907. 
1908. 
1909. 
1910. 
102 
84 
107 
107 
86 
86 
83 
61 
64 
60 
93 
73 
65 
Tota l 2,458 
JOCKEYIN G NEGROE S OU T O F 
JOBS. 
Th e underground ramifications of race 
prejudice woul d be almost unbelievable 
at times if we did not have the cold facts. 
Fo r instance, a recent newspaper 
despatch from Ohi o said that owin g to 
a decision of the Ohi o State Railwa y 
Commission , Negroe s could no longer be 
employed as porters or third-crew men 
in that State and that the Bi g Fou r Railway had discharged all its colored employees. Th e Nationa l Associatio n at 
once wrote to Mr . Robert Barcus, a lawyer and one of our members in Colum ­
bus, and found out the followin g facts: 
Th e Brotherhoo d of Railwa y trainmen 
as an organization admits only white 
membership. In 1902 this organization 
lobbied an innocent-looking act through 
the Ohi o Legislatur e whic h required that 
a train crew should consist of an engineer, a fireman and a certain number of 
"brakemen, " according to the number of 
cars. It provided a fine for violation of 
this law and made it a duty of the railway 
commission to enforce it. Neithe r the 
railroads nor the railway commission, 
however, enforced the law until this year. 
Recently the railway commission compelled the company to drop all train employees wh o were not "-brakemen." This 
meant that some thirty colored men wh o 
had been technically called porters, and 
wh o had been in the service of the railway for ten years in many cases, were 
dropped. The y had passed their examinations; they had done their wor k satisfactorily, but they were not "brakemen, " 
nor could they be "brakemen" because 
the union woul d not admit colored 
"brakemen, " and to hire non-union labor 
meant a strike. Mr . Barcus says in conclusion: "If the company had made all 
of those men brakemen or called them 
that, the law of Ohi o woul d have been 
complied with. Th e company failed to 
do that, as it woul d very likel y have 
caused a strike. Ou r boys had to go. " 
Then , in spite of such movements as 
this the laborin g men of Americ a ask 
wh y Negr o men are "scabs." 
TH E FILIPIN O I N TH E UNITE D 
STATES . 
W e quote from the Citizen , of Spokane, Washington : 
"Tha t intelligent, industrious and lawabiding Filipin o citizens and residents of 
this country are treated wit h mor e discourtesy and disrespect in Seattle than 
the Negroe s of the South where most 
rabid race prejudice exists is the startling 
statement of M . F . Bolima , a Filipino , 
who has resided in this country for five 
years and in Seattle for three years. 
"Bolima , wh o was a school teacher in 
the city of Basey, in his native Sama r 
islands, is a youn g man of refinement and 
splendid comman d of English . H e has 
made his own way against heavy odds 
since comin g to this country, and is now 
holdin g a responsible position in the Sil ­
ver Building , First Avenu e and Cherr y 
Street. Bolima states that he, as well 
as the seventy others of his countrymen 
wh o reside in that city, constantly are 
subjected to open insults on the street, 
presumably on account of their dark 
skins and hair and racial resemblance to 
the people of the Fa r East. Bolima declares he and his countrymen, man y of 
whom are direct descendants of Spanish -
grandees, have pride in their race, which 
is daily outraged by the people of this 
country of all classes. 
"'Whe n the America n flag supplanted 
the Spanish flag in the Philippine s there 
was great rejoicing amon g the more in ­
telligent people,' said Bolima , to-day. 
'Ou r people were told by the American s 
that they were America n citizens and 
woul d be treated wit h all the courtesy 
and respect due them as such. M y own 
case is an example of what the majority 
of my countrymen suffer in this country. 
I landed in San Francisc o in 1906, and 
it did not take me two hours to realize 
that what I had been led to expect from 
the America n people in the way of fair 
treatment woul d not be forthcoming. The 
darker color of my skin, and my diminu ­
tive size, for neither of whic h I was re-THE BURDEN 255 
sponsible, seemed to mark me as a target 
for ridicul e and rough handling by ill -
mannered people of this country. 
" 'I have been forced from the sidewalk 
to the gutter to permit a drunken white 
man to pass. I have been hooted at and 
tormented as if I were a cur, and frequently have been called unprintable 
names by my fellow America n citizens. 
" 'Man y of the restaurants in Seattle 
refuse to serve me or any of my countrymen. W e may go into a restaurant with 
plenty of money to pay for what we 
order, and act in a most dignified manner, but the waiter usually asks us if we 
are Japanese or Chinese, and when in ­
formed that we are Filipinos, announces 
that our patronage is not desired. W e 
are excluded from any restaurants on 
account of the color of our skins. 
'"Wh y should this condition be? I 
believe that the intelligent classes of the 
America n people woul d like to see justice 
done to us as well as to other nationalities, and hope that this statement of 
facts may have the result of obtaining 
better treatment for myself and countrymen in this country. 
" 'W e are not asking for special privileges or favors, and we are amply able 
to care for ourselves under just conditions and the fair treatment accorded 
other nationalities is all we ask.' " 
<J Mrs. Carri e Clifford, one of the 
Washingto n members of this Associa ­
tion, sends us the letter whic h follows: 
"Cincinnati. 
"Dea r Madam : 
" I am writin g yo u concerning the jimcrow law. I remember when yo u were 
in the city and lectured, but I was unable 
to come and hear you . A s I am compelled to travel the L . and N . road so 
much there are some things I want to 
tell yo u about and also ask a little information. I have been offended so often 
that I can't stand any more ; so a friend 
told me to write you. In the first place 
I am a private cook and wor k for a club 
and I have to go two or three times each 
week to some one and I often have to 
ride with old dirty white men and they 
smoke and spit at will . An d if there is 
no room in the smoke r they don't have 
to go out, and one time I asked the 
porter and he said that when there was 
no seats in the other car they must ride 
with us. Ther e are lots of things I 
could mention but I want to tell yo u 
this one occurrence that happened on the 
30th of July. Myself and two other girls 
started to the city from Kentuck y and 
when we got on the train our little closet 
was taken wit h white and black men and 
dirty as usual. I started to the lady's 
coach and the flagman ordered us back 
in a very rough manner. I resented, for 
I could not help, I was so angry; and he 
drew an unlawful weapon, called a slingshot. I was told to report him but I 
thought I woul d write yo u first. Now, I 
have told different ones and they said if 
it happened again that I had to ride wit h 
white passengers they woul d put a stop 
to it, and Mrs. Clifford, I am against the 
jim-crow car because they don't treat us 
right. 
"I am only a poor workin g woman, but 
I want my rights, and if there is anything 
I can do or say that wil l do away wit h 
this car law I will do it for it certainly 
is humiliating. Hopin g to hear some encouraging wor d from yo u soon, 
"Ver y sincerely, 
"MRS . SUSI E GIVENS. " 
<J Th e farmers in Okfuskee County, 
Oklahoma , are tryin g to send out the 
Negroes from that part of the State and 
bring in whites. The y have formed a 
Whit e Farmers' Congress and Immigra ­
tion Bureau, whic h binds itself not to sell 
a Negr o land adjoining the property of 
a white man. These are the facts (quite 
bad enough) and thus the dispatch was, 
apparently, sent out to the press—at least, 
so it appears in some papers. In the Ne w 
Yor k Tribun e and the Ne w Yor k Tele ­
gram we note that a few lines have been 
added: "Th e organization was inspired 
by the recent attacks of Negroe s on 
white women. " Thu s is the great wor k 
of lyin g about the Negr o pursued with 
a will . 
•I "Doubtless you have heard of the many 
lynchings here in Georgi a of late. Th e 
Negroes are petitioning and are going 
in person to the councils, seeking to 
find the heart of the white man and 
secure his protection against mob vio ­
lence and lync h law. W e have never 
before been treated with such indifference by the authorities as of late. It 
looks like the time is here when the 
presence of the Negr o is not wanted, 
and that he wil l be forced to seek some 
place where he might hope to get justice in the courts. 
"A s a man whose soul has always 
sought the interest of the black criminals in that they have a fair trial, and 
receive their penalty at the hands of 
the courts and not at the hands of anarchists, as this mode l whic h can feel 
the burdens and oppressions of the 
lowly , I trust that Go d wil l put into 
your heart some definite step which we 
could follow. Oppression is felt in one 
way or another by every black man in 
America . In my city I feel it in my 
work. Certain limitations, financial and 
otherwise, are thrown around us as 
teachers. I feel like cryin g out: 
" 'Watchman , what of the night?' 
"Optimism is waning. Th e way grows 
darker before us. 
"Trustin g to hear from you, I am 
yours for the oppressed black man in 
America , in the South, in Georgia . 
(Signed) " ." WHA T TO REA D 
MAGAZINES . 
"Negroe s in Africa. " Anthropologica l 
report of the Edo-speaking peoples 
of Nigeria . N . W . Thomas. Review 
in Nature, Jul y 27. 
"Negr o in Canada. " Chautauquan, July. 
"Negr o Influences in America n Life. " 
W . W . Kenilworth . Forum , August. 
"Befor e and Afte r the Civi l War. " Independent, July 13. 
"Ne w Poin t of Vie w in the Ne w South. " 
E . M . Brooks. Independent, Jul y 13. 
"Southern Justice to the Negro. " Outlook, June 17. 
"Franc e in Nort h Africa. " H . H . John ­
ston. Nineteenth Century, July. 
" A Hym n to the Peoples. " W . E . B. 
D u Bois. Independent, August 24. 
"Th e Universa l Races Congress. " W . E . 
B. D u Bois. Independent, August 24. 
BOOKS . 
Ther e have accumulated on our book 
table a number of volumes. Ther e is 
poetry by H . Cordeli a Ray , Effie Walle r 
and Smit h Jones; surveys of worl d problems of race by Suksdorf and the Na ­
tionalities and Subject Races Committee ; 
there is Mansfeld's new "Urwal d Doku -
mente" and Schanz's "Nege r in den 
Vereinigten Staaten" and Atlant a Uni ­
versity's College-Bre d Negro. 
But first of all we place Miss Mar y 
Whit e Ovington's "Half-a-Man " (Long ­
mans, Green & Co., Ne w York) . W e have 
noted with interest the reception of this 
book by the critics: Th e review by Carl 
Kelse y in the Survey—the characteristically careless half-done wor k of a man 
wh o knows less of the Negr o than most 
"authorities " on the subject; the patronizin g loftiness of Miss Gilder, the disappointment of some colored critics. 
Ye t we have here one of the finest 
human studies done in America ; done by 
a woman who knew her subject and digested it. Ther e is probably not another 
white woma n in the Unite d States wh o 
has so thoroughly entered and compre ­
hended the black world . Most white 
folk do not need to, being naturally so 
superior and wonderful, they can evolve 
a knowledge of a few hundred millions 
by casual acquaintance wit h a maid, a 
laborer and a Negr o on the street. This 
can be supplemented by books founded 
on equal ignorance. O r if one must 
study, one can, like Carl Kelsey , study 
the Negr o at first hand by reading novels 
on the shady porch of an Alabama plantation, asking questions of accommodating passersby, and using the Unite d 
States census liberally. 
Miss Ovingto n did differently. She 
sought the friendship of Negroes. She 
lived beside them. She can count amon g 
her friends scores of colored people. She 
has read their papers, visited their 
churches, talked and discussed wit h them 
—felt their hurts and sympathized with 
the horribl e strain of prejudice. 
This knowledge has been supplemented by study and observation; not chance 
columns of figures to prove an assumed 
point, but repeated studies like figures of 
trades unions taken at two or three different periods; studies of the juvenile 
court covering three years; comparative 
and carefully tested studies of occupations. 
Al l this has been put together and 
thought through and analyzed until the 
author knew what she wanted to say. 
The n she wrote a book—not a multiplica ­
tion table or an encyclopedia, but a real 
book—a small, soberly dressed thing of 
less than 250 little pages, carefully word ­
ed, done into Englis h and designed not 
to present a mass of raw materia l but the 
conclusions of a careful study, wit h some 
of the data on which it was based unobtrusively appended. 
Th e result is a satisfying thing, a complete picture. Ther e are nine short chapters. A compact history of the Negr o 
slave and his emancipation in Ne w Yor k 
is followed by a picture of the black 
homes of Ne w Yor k and the rent problem. The n she takes this group and 
analyzes it—talks of its little children 
and the pity of their dying, and of the 
vastest of the Negr o problems—earning 
a living . This latter subject is divided 
into two parts, the first touchin g manual 
labor and the trades, trades unions and 
efficiency; the second dealing wit h business and professional men. Th e colored 
workin g woma n calls for a most sympathetic study and then the author turns 
to the environment—the distribution of 
wealth and the attitude of the day. Th e 
book ends wit h a study of the meaning 
of segregation and race prejudice which 
no America n has a right to neglect reading. "It is a brief for the Negro, " some 
have complained. It is not. It is a brief WHAT TO READ 257 
for humanity and a scientific study in the 
best sense of an overworked word, whic h 
proves the truth of Dr. Boas' foreword: 
"Man y students of anthropology recognize that no proof can be given of any 
material inferiority of the Negr o race; 
that without doubt the bulk of the individuals composin g the race are equal in 
mental aptitude to the bulk of our own 
people; that, although their hereditary 
aptitudes may lie in slightly different 
directions, it is very improbable that the 
majority of individuals comp osin g the 
white race should possess greater ability 
than the Negr o race." 
q Henr y F . Suksdorf's "Ou r Race 
Problems " (the Shakespeare Press, Ne w 
York) , is a different book. It is fat and 
important looking , and its 374 pages wander over the habitable globe and the historic and prehistoric past. It is written 
by a partially educated man of good intent but small knowledge, and his thesis 
is: that the races of the worl d are all in 
different "ages" of development. Of 
course the Negr o is a "child, " the China ­
man in his dotage, the Lati n "on the 
decline" and (mirabile dictu!) the AngloSaxons "at or near their point of culmination. " Al l of which is nonsense. 
PEO M "TH E QUES T O F TH E SILVE R FLEECE " 
A novel by W . E . B . D u Bois, which A . C. McClur g & Co. are publishing this month 258 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
WHER E T O STO P 
€J Our readers are urged to use these columns in outlining their vacation 
and travel plans. These hotels and stopping places are modern in every 
sense, and the traveling public is assured comfort and efficient service. 
For detailed information concerning resorts and hotels write 
Th e Trave l Editor of Th e Crisis, 20 Vesey St., Ne w Yor k 
NEW YORK CITY 
Marshall's Hotel 127-129 West 53d Street 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
_ f 
COMFORT — Large , airy rooms, offering genuine home comforts plus the 
conveniences and privileges of a modern hotel. 
SERVICE)—I n the hotel and dinin g room the "Marshall " service is an exceptional feature, whic h assures comfort and pleasure for our patrons. 
Restaurant open all night. Cuisine to satisfy the most discriminating 
VOCA L AN D INSTRUMENTA L MUSI C EVER Y EVENIN G 
Breakfast, 7:30 to 12:30, 30c. Luncheon , 12:30 to 3, 30c. Dinner, 6 to 8, 35c. 
Special Cours e Dinne r Ever y Sunday and Holidays, 50c. 
Telephones 4693 - 4694 Columbus J. L . MARSHALL , Proprietor 
TH E CLIF F HOUS E 
253' WES T 134T H STREE T 
NEWL Y OPENE D 
Ideal home for gentlemen. Laundry , darning 
and tailoring done on premises, and included in 
rent for room. 
Ever y modern convenience. 
MRS . W . E . PERKINS , Prop. 
'Phone Chelsea 2957 
TH E TE N EYC K HOUS E 
232 WES T 20T H STREE T 
Between 7th and 8th Avenue s NE W YOR K 
Neatly Furnishe d Rooms for Permanent 
or Transient Guests by Da y or Week 
MRS . THOMA S L . TE N EYCK , Proprietress 
'' A quiet place for quiet people to dine " 
"TH E BRADFORD " 
73 WES T 134T H STREE T 
Between Fift h and Leno x Avenue s NE W YOR K 
Oysters, Chops, Steaks, Rarebits, Salads, Club 
Sandwiches, Etc . Regular Dinner, . 25c , from 
2 p. m. to 9 p. m. Meals Served at Al l Hours. 
Privat e Dinin g Room. Furnishe d Rooms To 
Let. Permanent or Transient. 
JOH N E . BRADFORD , Proprieto r 
HARLE M PRIVAT E HOUS E 
Furnishe d rooms to let for gentlemen only. 
Hot and cold water in every room. 
MRS . BERR Y L . HICKS , Proprietress 
258 WES T 133D STREE T NE W YOR K 
Fou r doors from Eight h Avenue 
Mention TH E CRISI S 
TH E SOUTHER N RESTAURAN T 
(Unde r New Management) 
2229 FIFT H AVENU E 
Between 135th and 136th Streets NE W YOR K 
Real home cooking. Come and be convinced. 
Our motto ia to please you. Meals at all hours. 
MRS . M . J . FERDINAND , Proprietress 
NORTH CAROLINA 
SANDERS ' HOTE L 
301 S. Caldwell Street, Charlotte, N . C, 
Ideal location for transient and permanent 
boarders. Al l modern conveniences and comforts 
of home life. 
J. T. SANDER S 
Proprieto r 
'Phone 681 Ho t and Cold Baths 
"WARRE N HOTE L 
MIS S BETTI E DUNCAN , Proprietress 
First-class accommodations. Meals at all hours. 
RATE S REASONABL E 
COR . RAMSE Y AN D PROCTO R STREET S 
Thre e Blocks from LTnion Station 
DURHAM , N . C. 
IS YOURS LISTED HERE? 
IF NOT , WRIT E US . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 259 
CLASSIFIED ADVERTISING 
*I Through our Classified Advertising Service you have the opportunity 
to tell your little wants to 40,000 SELEC T readers. 
f& If you want HELP , you can find, among T H E CRISIS readers, 
graduates of Industrial Schools and thousands of young people who are 
trained for efficient, dependable service. 
I| If you want a POSITION , T H E CRISIS can help you find highclass places for teachers, managers, clerks, stenographers, hotel men, etc., etc. 
<I Yo u will find our readers very responsive to this department for 
Business Opportunities, Investments, Correspondence Schools, Agents 
Wanted, etc. 
Q Advertisers may have replies sent in care of T H E CRISIS and forwarded. 
<| Classified advertising rates made known on application. 
REA L ESTATE 
Valuable Texas Lands 
For Sale 
Larg e tracts of farm land in the bpst localities of the State for sale at very flattering 
prices. Small tracts for good lands suitable for 
farming, truck, fruits and any domestic product. 
We have for sale a number of large farms already in cultivation, good houses and barns, 
wells, and nice pasture lands, which can be 
obtained at reasonable rates. City property a 
specialty. Business lots in the best part of 
the city, improved and unimproved. Larg e lots 
suitable for factory property with switch 
facilities. 
No investment can be more valuable than an 
investment in Texas real estate. Lands are becoming so valuable that they are doubling 
themselves in value in less than a year's time. 
Fo r any investment in Texas property, write 
T. B. Madison Real Estate Company, 2415 El m 
Street. Dallas, Texas. 
To Colored People 
F
O R SALE — W e have houses from $1,000 to 
$30,000. Ou r city is the capital of Ohio 
and a great manufacturing center—plenty of 
work, a good place to locate for business. Can 
sell you a house for $50, $100 to $500 down, 
balance like rent. Fo r investment and speculating houses or business places, $1,000 to 
$5,000 down, balance on long time payment. 
Far m land prices from $1,000 to $10,000 up, 
An y of these are in good locations. Writ e for 
further information. 
THI S I S A COLORE D ENTERPRISE . 
EDWAR D A . SHANKLI N 
Real Estate 
12181 -2 M L Verno n Ave . Columbus , Obi o 
The Opportunity ot a 
Lifetime 
Te n thousand acres at $10 per acre are now 
offered to thousands of progressive and industrious colored people throughout the United 
States of Americ a to substantially improve their 
condition, regardless as to whether they are in 
moderate circumstances or wealthy, by the 
Southern Land Development Co. 
whose capital stock is $2,500,000, incorporated 
under the laws of Arizona , with general office 
at 124 Vz South Union Avenue, PUEBLO , COLO. , 
has a holding of 167,402 acres of some of the 
best land to be found anywhere in the world, 
which they are now selling at $10 per acre; 
$1.25 per acre down as first payment, the balance in one, two or three years, at 6% interest. 
This land is located in the State of Campeche, 
Mex., and is known as L a Montana Tract. It 
is noted for its dyewood. It is just nine miles 
from the Gulf on the Champoton River , four 
hundred and fifty miles southeast of Mexico City. 
QUALITY—Thes e lands have eighteen kinds 
of hardwood distributed throughout the property. 
The'y are producing oranges, limes, cocoanuts, 
pears, corn, cotton, sugar cane, bananas, tobacco, 
rice, and every other kind of tropical product; 
also henequen, the greatest product of the 
country, which yields a net profit of $70 to $80 
per acre. 
The climate is excellent, plenty of rainfall 
and no drought, cheap labor ; the best chance 
on earth for the colored man to become wealthy 
and independent. Hundreds are going there to 
live, others are buying because it is a safe 
and profitable investment. 
We want good, reliable agents throughout the 
country. If you are interested write at once 
to the 
Southern Land Development Co. 
PUEBLO , COLO . 
P. O. Bo x No 5. 
Mention Tat Cutis. 260 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
REA L ESTATE 
A n investment in New Yor k City and its 
suburban Real Estat e offers the surest road to 
success and wealth. Lots, farm lands and houses 
for sale. Out-of-town correspondence invited. 
S. AUGUSTU S DUNCA N 
REA L ESTAT E AN D INSURANC E BROKE R 
2229 Fift h Avenue New Yor k 
TRAD E JOURNA L 
SMALL'S NEGRO TRAD E JOURNAL 
A paper devoted to the commercial, financial 
and business world. 
We list you and send you our paper once each 
month—all for $1.00 a year. 
Send U B your business card. 
T. FREDERIC K SMAL L CO . 
2225 Fift h Avenue New Yor k Cit y 
HELP WANTE D 
LOCA L REPRESENTATIVE S for TH E CRISI S 
wanted in each locality. 
Some agents sell over 800 copies monthly 
Writ e for particulars. 
Address : 
FRAN K M . TURNE R 
CIRCULATIO N MANAGE R 
Suite 311 
20 Vesey Street, New Yor k 
WANTED—Competen t business man to act as 
Secretary and Assistant Manage r of Bric k 
Company. Must invest at least $500. Only 
correspondents furnishing references will be 
answered. This is a rare opportunity and 
should be investigated at once. 
Address, Box 226, Moun d Bayou, Miss. 
EMPLOYMEN T AGENCIES 
RELIABL E HEL P at all times for the most 
discriminating . mployers. 
Out-of-town correspondence invited. 
References thoroughly investigated 
Address: 
MIS S I. L . MOORMA N 
463 Leno x Avenue New Yor k 
l
T6J«r Ir^TVL^ nf f HEL P
 « POSITION ? 
Is your friend in need of I 
If so, 'phone, call or write the 
MIDDLESE X EMPLOYMEN T AGENC Y 
2229 Fift h Ave., near 136th St. 
CHAS . A . KNOWLES , Mgr . 
References Carefully Investigated 
'Phone 6370 Harle m 
CRISIS AGEN T 
TH E CRISIS 
CHARLE S D. LEV Y 
Agent, New Orleans, La . 
Mention Tax Cutis. 
JEWELR Y 
$1.00 A BEAUTIFU L 
Gold-Filled Ring 
Suitable as a present or Christmas gift. 
Writ e for particulars. 
DODSO N COMPAN Y 
Importing Jewelers 
127 W . VIN E ST. , KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
DRESSMAKING 
MRS . L . FROS T 
248 W. 133d Street New Yor k Cit y 
FASHIONABL E DRESSMAKE R 
Machine or hand-made gowns and 
waists made in up-to-date styles 
MRS . DOCI A A. McCLAI N 
119 W . 134th Street New Yor k Cit y 
Shall continue to operate the dressmaking and 
tailoring establishment known us N . Vanghan, 
119 W . 134th Street, New York City, and in a 
position to better satisfy her customers. 
EMBROIDERY 
ID A B. CURTI S 
16-18 W . 136th Street, Apt. A , New Yor k Cit y 
Embroiderin g done to order ; also instruction 
given at reasonable price. Special attention 
to misses. 
FUNERA L DIRECTORS 
Thos. A . Lester , Manage r 
Thomas Mangrum , Assistant 
MAMI E L. ANDERSO N 
LICENSE D EMBALME R 
FUNERA L DIRECTO R 
2293 Seventh Avenue 
AL L MODER N IMPROVEMENT S 
LARG E FUNERA L PARLOR S 
Brooklyn Branc h Tel . 7949 Morn . 
473 Carlton Avenue Open Al l Night 
Tel. 3870-W. Pros. 
Sam. F . Taylor . Funera l Director 
New Yor k Cit y 
$10 
TYPEWRITERS 
TYPEWRITER S $10 
GUARANTEE D FO R ON E YEA R 
W e actually save yo u 25 per cent, on 
all rebuilt typewriters. Goo d as new. 
Al l typewriter accessories. 
TH E TYPEWRITE R SHO P 
2 Vesey Street (Astor House ) New Yor k THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 261 
BOOK S 
KELL Y MILLER' S WORK S 
COMPREHENSIVE , CANDID , STATESMANLIKE . 
RAC E ADJUSTMEN T 
Large , octavo, 300 pages, best book, cloth, gilt edge, gold top. Pric e $2.00. 
"Prof. Mille r shows himself a master of an incisive style and a keen logician. " 
—Clevelan d Plai n Dealer. 
"Admirabl e for calmness and temper, thoroughness and skill."—Ne w YorkEvenin g Post. 
"Controversial, brilliantly so."—New Yor k Sun. 
PAMPHLET S 
Roosevelt and the Negro 10c 
Appea l to Reason 10c 
Fort y Year s of Negro Education 10c 
The TJltimate Race Problem 10c 
The Political Capacity of the Negro 10c 
The Talented Tenth I0c 
Brie f for the Highe r Education of the. Negro 10c 
Primar y Needs of the Negro Race 10c 
Social Equalit y 6c 
Agents wanted. Appl y to author, Howar d University , Washington , D. C. 
" A noteworthy hook of the epoch." 
The Souls of 
Black Folk 
By W. E. BTJRGHARDT DU BOIS 
Eighth Edition 
"I t is one of the noteworthy 
books, not merely of a year, but of 
the epoch. Its every page is filled 
with vigor, spontaneity and spirituality. ''—Boston Transcript. 
" A stripping bare of the moral, 
and mental anatomy of the Africa n 
i n Americ a so as to reveal the naked 
soul i n its primitive simplicity, 
seared and scarred by ages of suffering."—New Yor k Age. 
With Author's Portrait, $1.20 Net 
A t book stores or from the publishers 
A. C. McCLURG & CO. 
CHICAGO 
Publications of the N A. A. C. P. 
Th e N . A . A . C. P. has for sale the following 
pamphlets: 
1. Disfranchisement: A powerful argument by 
the Rev. John Hayne s Holmes. 
2. Education in the South: Facts about the 
discrimination against the Negro. By the Rev. 
Horac e Bumstead, former president of Atlanta 
University. 
3. Th e Real Race Problem: A scientific comparison of the black and the white man by 
America's foremost anthropologist, Prof. Boas, of 
Columbia University. 
4. Social Control. By Jane Addams, of Hul l 
House. 
5. Th e Negro as a Soldier. By BrigadierGeneral Burt, U . S. A . 
FIV E CENT S EACH , THRE E DOLLAR S A HUNDRE D 
MUSIC 
. HELE N ELIS E SMIT H 
CONCER T PIANIS T 
Post-Graduate of the Institute of Musica l Ar t 
Pupi l of Sigismund Stojowski 
Teacher of Piano, Theory , Ear-training , etc. 
224 EAS T 86T H STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
SONGS.—Ther e is money to be made i n longwriting. 
If you write poems or compose music, send ua 
your work for examination. If terms are satisfactory we will publish and pay one-half profits. 
GO Ti l AM-A T TUCK S MUSI C CO . 
136 WES T 37T H STREE T NE W YOR K 
MISS EDIT H W . McKENN Y 
Concert Pianist 
310 W. 119th Street New Yor k City 
Piano lessons given privately or in classes 
at reasonable rates. 
Musi c furnished for private parties. 
SCHOOLS 
YOUN G MAN , HAV E YO U A TRADE ? 
B y our method we teach the Barbe r Trade io 
six weekB. 
We give you a complete set of toolB and 
secure you a position in a Bhop. Call or write 
for particulars. 
NE W YOR K BARBE R SCHOO L 
Costello & Wis e 
Cor . Bowery and Rivlngton St. NE W YOR K 
FURRIER 
Seventeen Years' Experienc e 
WOR K TURNE D OU T PROMPTL Y 
MRS . G. B. NEEDLE S 
Lat e with Broadway houses 
PRACTICA L FURRIE R 
Al l kinds of furs remodelled, repaired and relined. Whit e furs cleaned, equal to new. Coats 
guaranteed to fit. Price s reasonable. 
24 WES T 136T H STREE T NE W YOR K 
Mention T H B CRISIS. 262 THE, CRISIS ADVERTISER 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.00 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
Bom . 2220 Cen 6322 
Van Noy Printing Go, 
100 Line n Finis h Cards by Mall , 50c. 
COMMERCIA L PRINTIN G 
SOCIET Y PRINTIN G 
BOO K AN D JO B PRINTIN G 
2315 MARKE T ST . ST . LOUIS , MO . 
If you are honest, ambitious and determined to succeed in business—a business absolutely your own—w 
can help you. We will teach you bi mail the secrets of 
Real Estate, Brokerage and Insurance business, list properties and propositions with and for you to handle so 
you can make money from the very start. 
We Teach Yon All the Secrets 
of Real Estate, Brokerage 
and Insurance Business 
W e Instruc t Yo u I n 
Salesmanship. 
Advertising. 
Offi-e System. 
Real Estate Titles. 
Conveyancing. 
How to List Properties. 
How to Judge Values. 
How to Option Properties. 
How to Find Prospective Customers. 
How to Close Deals. 
How to Secure Loans. 
How to Get Insurance Business. 
How to Organize and Finance Corporations. In fact, 
all tne essential secrets known to and practiced by the 
successful broker and promoter. 
We" also give you a thorough Commercial Law Course, 
enabling you to meet for yourself and overcome difficulties 
that may arise. In short, westartyouonthe road to JUCC&JJ . 
Success and Independence 
Mr. Gates says: "I started into this business without 
capital and have built up one of the most successful 
agencies in Vermont." Mr. Dunbar of Kansas says: "I 
have cleared up for myself during the year (his first 
year) over $9,000." Mr. Reynaud of Texas says: "I have 
done remarkably well for a beginner, having made over 
$6,500 in commissions since I started, nine months ago."* 
Our 64-page book, sent free, tells you how to 
start—a postal card will bring it—write today. 
INTERNATIONA L REALT Y CORP. , 
519 Manhatta n Bldg. , Chicago , 111. 
REA D TH E CLASSIFIE D 
ADVERTISEMENT S O N 
PAGE S 259 AN D 260. 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
5 Beekman Street (Temple Court) 
New Yor k City 
Tel . 622 2 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
FREDERIC K L. McGHE E 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-L,A W 
Unio n Block, Fourth and Cedar Streets 
St. Paul, Minn . 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
102 0 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
Real Estate and Probate Matters a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
Office: Room 502 , Eberl y Block Columbua, O . 
B. S. SMIT H 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LAW . 
Offices: Suite 610 , Sykes Block 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
ATTOSNEY-AT-LA W 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . O. M . Waller , M.D. , Pres. A . M . Thompson, Tress. B . 0. Waller , M.D. , Sec. 
Sphinx Silver Polish 
The unsurpassed renovator of silver and plated ware. No acids; no scratching; absolutely harmless. Adopted in the largest hotels. Best for family use. Endorsed by silversmiths. Sells readily to the trade. Doubles your income. Agents wanted in every city 
and town. Fifty per cent, commission. Write to-day. 
Manufactured by 
Sphinx Labor-Saving Soap Co., Inc. 
Office and Factory: 117 West Street, New York City 
S. A . KELSEY , Pres. DR . WM . J . CARTER , Chiropodist MM E A . C. KELSEY , Gen'I Instr. 
ZEbe Tkelse? Scboo l of JBeaurg Cultur e anb 1bair Dressin g 
328 Lenox Avenue, New York City. Branch: 75 W. 135th Street 
Persona l instruction given in the Ar t of Manicuring , Shampooing, Hair Dressing, 
Beauty Culture , Chiropody , and the manufacturing of Huma n Hair Goods. Send 
for booklet-directory of the recently graduated students. Courses from $10 to $65. 
ESTABLISHE D 1887 'Phone 4715 Mad . Sq. 
L . A. de TOSCAN O CO . 
OLDES T COLORE D REGALI A ESTABLISHMEN T I N TH E CIT Y 
Mme. B. E . de Toscano, Manager 
Knights of Pythias, Knights Templars and Patriarchs; Equipments. Paraphernali a 
and Supplies for Al l Societies and Churches. Estimates Given. Badges, Jewels, 
Regalia , Banners, Flag s and College Emblems. 
146 WES T 31st STREE T 
Between Sixt h and Seventh Avenue s Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Telephone 3253 Harle m CARPE T CLEANIN G 
CLEANER S AN D RENOVATER S FO R PARTICULA R PEOPL E 
NE W YOR K CAREFU L CLEANIN G BUREA U 
12 WES T 135TH STREE T 
We make a specialty of cleaning and renovating carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered 
furniture, we also vacuum clean in the home. We are not the largest carpet cleaner in the 
world, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOIN G CARPET S AN B RUG S OU R SPECIALT Y 
ORIENTAL 
SACHET 
POWDER 
Fragran t and Lasting . 
Put up in attractive 
glass bottles with aluminum scre w tops. 
Seven odors to choose 
from : Honeysuckle , 
Mignonette, Violet , 
Bouquet, Trefle Incarnat, Lilac , RoBe Sweet. 
Pric e per bottle, 25c , 
mailed postpaid. 
Pric e List of Toile t 
Goods free, 
One-half Actua l Size. Agents Wanted. 
ALEXANDER SPECIALTY CO. 
150 Nassau Street New Yor k Cit y 
PICTURE S 
Most beautiful works of art suitable for parlor 
and bedroom. Should be in every Negro home. 
Pictures 16x20. "Jesus Die d for Both. " 
'
1
 Clinging to the Cross.'' ' 'Beacon Light.' ' 
"Booke r T. Washington. " "Protecting Angel. " 
' 'Heavenward.'' ' 'Onward.' ' ' 'Jack Johnson. " 
"Th e Colored Troop Charging up San Jua n 
Hill.' ' ' 'MoseB.'' "Th e Littl e Shepherd." 
Price , postpaid, 25 cents. 
17 Beautiful Art Postcards, 15 Cents 
Mottoes, Lovers, Comics, Christmas, New 
Year's, Thanksgiving and other holiday cards. 
Seeing New Yor k on a postal card ; 25 in all.,, 
Postpaid, 25 centB. 
AGEN T WANTE D 
Our agents are coining money on these pictures and postcards. One agent made $15 in 
one day. 
JACOB GRIFFITH 
252 WES T 53 d STREE T NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISIS . HAL F A MA N 
The Status of the Negro in New York 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a Foreword by Dr. Franz Boas, of Columbia University 
"M y father has always lived in the 
South," a young colored man once said to 
me, "and has attained success there; but 
when I ceased to be a boy he advised me 
to live in the North, where my manhood 
would be respected. H e himself cannot 
continually endure his position of inferiority, and in the summer he comes North to 
be a man. No, " correcting himself, "to 
be HAL F A MAN . A Negro is wholly a 
man only in Europe."—From the Author's 
"Introduction." 
Miss Ovington's description of the status 
of the Negro in New Yor k City is based on 
a most painstaking inquiry into his social 
and economic conditions, and brings out in 
the most forceful way the difficulties under 
which the race is laboring, even in the large 
cosmopolitan population of New York . It 
is a refutation of the claims that the Negro 
has equal opportunity with the whites, and 
that his failure to advance more rapidly 
than he has, is due to innate inability.— 
From Dr. Boas' "Foreword." 
12mo, cloth. Price $1.00 net. By mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS , GREE N & CO. , Publishers , NE W YOR K 
The above book may be purchased through any bookseller or will be mailed b y 
TH E CRISIS on receipt of the price and postage. 
A limited numbe r of 
free beds maintained 
for the worthy poor. 
Othe r ward patients 
maintained at $7.00 
per week. 
Privat e rooms can 
be secured from 
$12.00 to $30.00 per 
week. 
The training Bchool 
for nurses maintains 
a" two years' course. 
A high school certificate, or an education sufficient to 
be considered an 
equivalent, necessary 
for admission. 
Five thousand 
lars endows a 
bed. 
dolfre e 
Andrew F. Stevens, 
President. 
Nathan F. Mossoll. M.D . 
Medical Director and 
Superintendent. 
Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital and Training School, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 