FIRS T ANNIVERSAR Y NUMBE R 
THE CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACES 
Volume Three NOVEMBER , 191 1 Number One 
The Quadroon 
Daughter of Twilight, 
Mothered of Midnight, 
Fathered of Daylight and Dawn ; 
Shadow of Sunlight, 
Shimmering Starlight, 
Sister of Forest and Fawn ! 
Mai d of a Morrow , 
Mistress of Sorrow, 
Mingle d of Mournin g and Mirt h ; 
Bor n of Worl d Brotherhood, 
Crowned of all Motherhood, 
Beauty of Heaven and Eart h ! 
Photo by SCURLOC K 
ONE DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y Those Xmas Gifts 
CJ O f course it's early, but after all Christmas is but seven little weeks 
away. 
CJ No w we've prepared a Christmas card with one of TH E CRISIS girls 
on it. Yo u know the one—with wistful face and the shadow of songs 
in her eyes. 
CJ This we'll print daintily in delicate brown on fine cardboard, together 
with a sprig of holly, naturally, and that sort of thing. Then we'll add 
some words like these: 
DEA R FRIEND : 
T o wish you MERR Y CHRISTMA S I have 
ordered TH E CRISIS sent to you throughout the 
GLA D NE W YEAR . . 
i| Al l this, of course, in deep old gothic type with initials illuminated— 
CRISIS way. Quite a lovely card in itself. 
CJ Really, now, haven't you several friends of varied color who would 
appreciate this gift? 
A postcard will bring you as many of these cards as you wish. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RAGE S 
Published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 
20 Vesey Street, New York City. 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS . Editor 
M . D . MACLEAN . Managing Editor 
FRAN K M . TURNER . Circulation Manager 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY . Advertising Manager 
(OSWAL D GARRISO N V1LLAR D 
J . MA X BARBE R 
Contributing CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
editors W.S. BRAITHWAIT E 
KELL Y MILLE R 
CONTENT S FO R NOVEMBER , 1911 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 7 
OPINIO N 13 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 18 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 20 
EDITORIA L 21 
ARA B SCHOOL : Photograph 22 
A YEA R O F SEGREGATION : By W. Ashbie Hawkins 27 
SOM E HEADLINE S 31 
WOMEN' S CLUBS : Colored American Women. By Dr. S. M. Stewart 33 
TH E BURDE N 34 
WHA T T O REA D 35 
TH E CHRISTMA S CRISI S 
W e shall be in complete new dress for Christmas, thanks to the hand of Miss 
Louise Latimer. Ou r cover wil l have a reproduction of that fine old masterpiece by 
Albrech t Durer, "Th e Adoratio n of the Magi, " with the black king as a central 
figure. Th e original is in Florence. The n there wil l be a daring Christmas story: 
"Jesus Christ in Georgia. " It wil l be a splendid number. Orde r it early. 
W e have begun our campaign for a circulation of 25,000 , and our subscription 
clerk is pretty busy. 
Agents wanted who can furnish references. 
Entere d as second-class matter i n the post office at New Yor k City . 4 THE CRISIS 
FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SO N OF F T O Wilberforce University 
The only school in the country for 
Negro Yout h which has a Militar y Department equipped by the National 
Government, and commanded by a detailed 
United States Arm y Officer. 
DEPARTMENT S 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L TECHNICA L 
COMMERCIA L THEOLOGICA L 
CLASSICA L MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Bankin g taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank . Twelve 
Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, 
Te n Buildings. Healthful surroundings, 
exceptional community. Maintained In 
par t by the State of Ohio which supplies 
facilities for the thorough training of 
teachers. 
Fal l term began September 19th, 1911. 
Writ e for Catalog. 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH , President 
WM . A . JOINER , Superintendent, C . N . 
I. Department. 
Address all communications to 
BO X 36 WILBER F ORCE , OHI O 
Mention 
ADVERTISER 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
The courses of study include Hig h School, Nor ­
mal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High School, 
Grammar School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fall Term Opened Sept. 27, 1911. 
For information address 
President R. W . McGranahan 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virginia Unio n Universit y 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological 
seminaries. 
A n Academy, with manual training, giving 
a preparation for life or for college. 
The positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of 
class work, its fine new buildings and wellequipped laboratories and library , prepar e a 
faithful student for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORGE RICE HOVEY President 
Shaw University 
This institution of learning, established in 1865, 
has industrial departments for both young men 
and young women, as well as college, normal and 
preparatory departments. Ther e are also Schools 
of Law, Medicine , Pharmac y and Theology. 
The facilities have recently been increased. 
Other improvements are being planned that wil l 
be completed within the next two years. 
Applications should be made several months or 
a year in advance, for it has become impossible 
during the last few years to receive all who 
apply. The present enrollment is over 500. 
The academic year begins on the* Thursda y 
nearest the first day of October and continues for 
thirty-two consecutive weeks. Th e charges are 
moderate. Catalogues furnished upon application. 
Address TH E PRESIDEN T 
Shaw University , Raleigh, N . 0. 
THE CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlanta Baptist College 
ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Established 1867 
A School for Boys and Men 
DEPARTMENTS : 
GRADE S FIN E EQUIPMEN T 
ACADEM Y S TRON G FACULT Y 
COLLEG E DIVINIT Y SCHOO L 
Societies, Debating Clubs and Athletics. 
For further information address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
American Church Institute 
for Negroes 
SI X SCHOOL S 
Th e Bishop Payne Divinit y School, Petersburgh, Va . Warden , the Reverend C. B . Bryan , 
D.D. ; St. Augustine's School, Raleigh, N . 0., for 
normal and collegiate training, the Reverend A . 
B . Hunter , Principal; the St. Pau l Norma l and 
Industria l School, Lawrenceville , Va. , the Reverend Jame s S. Russell, Principal; St. Atha -
nasius' School, Brunswick, G-a., Mr . A . N . Perry , 
Principal; St. Mark's School, Birmingham, Ala. , 
the Reverend C. W . Brooks, Principal; the 
Vicksbur g Industria l School, Vicksburg , MisB., 
the Reverend W . H . Marshall, Principal. Fo r 
information apply to the principa l at any school 
or to the Reverend Samuel H . Bishop, General 
Agent, 416 Lafayett e Street, New Yor k City . 
BOOKS 
Publications of the N. A. A. C. P. 
Th e N . A . A . C . P. has for sale the following 
pamphlets: 
1. Disfranchisement: A powerful argument by 
the Rev. John Hayne s Holmes. 
2. Education in the South: Facts about the 
discrimination against the Negro. By the Rev. 
Horac e Bumstead, former president of Atlanta 
University. 
3. Th e Real Race Problem: A scientific comparison of the black and the white man by 
Americans foremost anthropologist, Prof. Boas, of 
Columbia University. 
4. Social Control. B y Jane Addams, of Hul l 
House . 
5. Th e Negro as a Soldier. By BrigadierGeneral Burt, U . S. A . 
FIV E CENT S EACH , THRE E DOLLAR S A HUNDRE D 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
JAMI S F . MORTON , JR. , A.M. , Author and Publisher 
Forceful, rational, comprehensive. A n arsenal 
of facts and unanswerable arguments. Invaluable 
for propaganda. Rea d the chapter on "Th e Bug ­
bear of Social Equality, " which is a veritable 
eye-opener. Thousands already sold. Agents 
wanted everywhere. 
PRIC E 25 CENT S 
Address the Autho r at 244 West 143d Street, 
New York , N . Y . 
D O YO U REA D BOOKS ? 
THE N REA D PAG E SIX . 
The 
Quest 
of the 
Silver 
Fleece 
A Novel 
by 
W . E . BURGHARD T 
DU BOIS 
Drawings by 
H . S. D E LA Y 
Here is a story of the darker world 
in the South and in Washington, D. C. 
It is dramatic in style and absorbing 
in interest and expresses the feeling 
of colored people about themselves 
and their own problems; at the same 
time it shows how both black folk 
and white are caught in the power of 
Kin g Cotton. 
A T AL L BOOKSTORE S 
PRIC E $1.35 NE T 
A. C. McGLUR G & CO . 
New Yor k Chicago Sao Francisco 
PUBLICATION S 
A . M . E . Book Concern Philadelphia, Pa. 
TH E POEM S O F PHILLI S WHEATLEY . 
Reprint of first edition 1773; a valuable book. 
Price , $1.00. 
TH E NEGR O PROBLEM . A n analysis: Wha t 
It Is Not and Wha t It Is; by R. R. Wright, Jr . 
In pamphlet form, 15 cents. 
TH E COLORE D REGULARS . B y T . 6. 
Steward, Chaplain U . S. A. , retired. Price , $1.50. 
EVOLUTIO N AN D LIFE . B y Algernon B . 
Jackson, Surgeon-in-chief Merc y Hospital. Price , 
TH E NEGR O I N PENNSYLVANIA . A Study 
in Economi c History ; B y R. R. Wright, Jr. , 
Sometime Research Fellow in Sociology in the 
Universit y of Pennsylvania. (Ready Nov. 15th.) 
Price , Paper, $2.00; Cloth, $2.50. 
Address 
A . M . E . BOO K CONCER N 
631 Pine Street, Philadelphia, Pa . 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
15 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A. G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
Mention TH B CRISIS . 6 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
THE 
BOORS 
ARE/YOU INTERESTED 
IliWTHEjlil 
KEGRO PROBLEM 
ORMW 
PARTOPIT 
THE 
HAOAZINE 
STUDENTS OF THE NEGRO PROBLEM 
The Souls of Black Folk, DuBois 
History of the Negro • Washington 
John Brown DuBois 
Up From Slavery • • Washington 
Poems of Paul Laurence 
Dunbar 
Poems of W. S. Braithwaite 
Race Adjustment = Miller 
Negro In the New World, Johnston 
Following the Color Line, Baker 
Works of Charles W. 
Chestnutt 
Atlanta University Studies 
Negro and the Nation = Merriam 
Negro In the South i Washington 
1
 DuBois 
Sinclair 
Ovington 
Aftermath of Slavery • 
Half a Man 
Life of Harriet Beecher 
Stowe • • Stowe 
Mind of Primitive Man, Boaz 
Race Prejudice Finot 
Curse of Race Prejudice, Morton 
Quest of the Silver Fleece, 
a novel • • - DuBois 
Through Afro-America, Archer 
Southern South = Hart 
Inter-Racial Problems, Official Record 
of the Universal Races Congress 
TH E CRISIS 
A RECORD OF THE DARKER RACES 
An d general readers will 
find this list embraces the 
most popular and comprehensive studies of the Negro 
question. They are the 
best books by the best 
writers and thinkers. By 
special arrangements with 
the publishers of the books 
we are in position to make 
combination offers at remarkably low prices. This 
offer is good for a limited 
time only and is made to 
increase the subscription 
list of 
THE CRISIS 
the magazine edited by 
W . E . B. DuBois with the co-operation of Oswal d Garrison 
V.llard , Charles, Edward Russell, Kell y Mille r and 
others. Th e Crisis is the organ of the National Association For the Advancement of Colored People / 
To the 
and is a record of every important happening and 
movement in the world which bears on the great 
problems of inter-racial relations and especially 
those which affect the Negro American. 
OUR OFFER: 
Publishers 
of the CRISIS, 
20 Vesey Street. 
New York City. 
W e have made special combinations Gentlemen
 ; Please send, 
with these books in sets of five, ten, fif-
, without any cost to 
teen and twenty, together with 
. i me, your descriptive 
year's subscription to the Crisis, circular offering these 
and will be glad to have the 
, sets of books on the 
Negro Problem and a 
years subscription to the 
CRISIS. 
Name 
Address 
City 
State 
names and addresses of a! 
who find themselves 
interested in this 
greates t of 
problems. Along the Color Line 
POLITICS . 
In Oklahoma two election inspectors 
have been convicted in the Federa l 
Court of conspiracy to deprive Negroe s 
of the right of suffrage. Th e election 
was a test case to decide the efficacy 
of the "Grandfathe r Clause. " Th e case 
will be appealed. Th e men, wh o are 
liable to a year in prison and $100 fine 
each, have been released on $2,000 
bonds. It is said that the State officials 
are ready to call out the militia to enforce 
the "Grandfathe r Clause. " 
Th e colored people of Kansa s Cit y 
tried to get President Taft to receive a 
special delegation, but were unable to. 
Th e silence of President Taft concerning recent lynchin g outrages has 
aroused considerable protest among colored people. This was voiced at a 
meeting i n Washington , D . C , and also 
at a meeting of the Ne w Englan d 
Suffrage League at Haverhill , Mass. 
<J I n Illinois a colored Independent 
Politica l League has been started. 
<J Al l these movements have caused 
the formation of an administration 
Republican Club in Washington , D . C , 
promoted by the officeholders. 
<J I n Nashville , Tenn., the colored voters registered largely for the fall elections, and elected S. P. Harris to the 
city council. 
q I n Asbur y Park , N . J., E . C. Burgess 
has been named by the Republicans for 
the city council. 
<J I n Baltimore , Md. , C. M . Dorse y is 
the colored member of the grand jur y 
whic h is investigating the fraud at the 
Democrati c primaries. 
<J I n a recent Philadelphi a election the 
Republica n bosses made a desperate appeal to the colored vote, saying : "Unde r 
the dead Durham (peace to his ashes), 
Charles Seger and Charles B. Hall , the 
7th War d has become a garden spot, the 
politica l Ede n of the colored people of 
Philadelphia . Th e politica l recognition 
accorded our people in the 7th Ward , in 
the city, county, State and Unite d States 
Government service, is simply magnificent. It is because Durham, Hal l and 
Seger believed in a square deal for their 
colored politica l friends." 
Q Everett J. Warin g of Philadelphia , 
has been appointed attorney for the department of factory inspector. 
<I Clement G. Morga n of Cambridge , 
Mass., a lawye r and former alderman, 
ran for the Republican nomination for 
the State legislature. H e received nearly 
400 votes, but was defeated. 
<J Th e Republicans of Cincinnati, wh o 
are kept in office by Negroes, are tryin g 
to abolish the office of assistant paymaster held by .a colored man, Mr . 
W . P. Dabney. Th e colored people are 
makin g a vigorous protest. 
<J Th e Democrats of Delawar e are seeking to organize the Negroes of the 
State into Democrati c clubs. 
<J A n echo of the Coatesville lynchin g 
is heard in the politica l affairs of Eastern Pennsylvania . Th e Negroe s are 
threatening to bolt the Republican ticket 
and vote for the Keystone party. Whit e 
people of Coatesville have shown their 
attitude by defeating the son of the 
judge who has been pursuing the lynch ­
ers and renominating the accused chief 
of police. 
*I Th e Negroes of Californi a did their 
part to brin g about the woma n suffrage 
victory. Th e Liberator, an organ of the 
Lo s Angele s colored folk, says: "Th e 
Negr o cannot afford to ally himself 
with the interests that are opposing 
women suffrage. Whil e there are doubtless some conscientious men opposing 
women suffrage, the fact that all the 
evil combinations of to-day are fighting 
woman's suffrage is proof of woman's 
fitness to vote and should brin g to the 
support of the amendment every intelligent man of the State. If the Negr o 
who has the ballot hopes to restore it 
to his millions of disfranchised brethren, 
he cannot ally himself wit h those evil 
combinations whic h seek to confine the 
ballot to the few they can handle, but 
he wil l have to vote for every measure 
lookin g to the extension of the ballot." 
fl Th e Honorabl e Harr y C. Smith, editor of the Cleveland Gazette and former 
member of the Ohi o Legislature, has 
been nominated on the regular ticket 
as candidate for the Ohi o Constitutiona l 
Convention. 
GHETTO . 
Th e theatre at Evanston, Ill., after 
being threatened wit h law suits, is said 
to have ceased discrimination against its 
colored patrons. 
*I In Baltimor e a small race riot was 
caused by a colored family movin g into 
a street occupied largely by whites. A 8 THE CRISIS 
crowd of 300 broke all the windows in 
the house and drove the family out. 
A dozen policemen arrived "too late." 
<J Incited by the success of the above 
mob, another one attacked two colored 
families in Myrtl e Avenu e and stoned 
a white man's house through mistake, 
q In West Bell e Place , a suburb of St. 
Louis, a segregation ordinance is proposed. 
q In Muskogee , Okla. , the Railwa y 
Commissio n has ordered the Electri c 
Tractio n Compan y on one line to provide separate street cars for Negroe s 
and whites. "Th e opinion, " to quote the 
Muskoge e Phoenix , "scores the Negroe s 
of Muskogee , especially the more educated element, such as doctors and lawyers, for attempting to create class 
feeling by encouraging Negroe s to keep 
their seats and not give them up to 
the whites. " 
q Whe n C. L . Covingto n died at the 
Nationa l Militar y Hom e in Indianapolis, 
the fact was disclosed that he was 
"colored " although white. 
q Th e State of Tennessee has recently 
established a board for registering 
nurses. Th e board consisted of white 
women, and when they met they refused to register colored nurses, even 
though these nurses had had more than 
the required training. Th e matter may 
go to the courts. 
q A t Marietta , Ga., G. P. Johnson, the 
twenty-year-old son of a prominent 
white farmer, went to the home of Miss 
Celi a Thomas, a colored woman . His 
companions followed him there. Th e 
Atlant a Journa l reports: "The y found 
Johnson, so it is said, seated on a bed 
in the Negr o woman's house. Th e 
woman stated that she did not want 
Johnson in the house. Th e two youn g 
men attempted to make Johnson leave 
and the woman said that she was goin g 
to shoot Johnson if he did not go at 
once. 
"On e of the friends of Johnso n saw 
that the Negr o woma n held a shotgun 
in her hand and the gun was cocked. 
H e made an attempt to seize the gun 
and the woman fired, the load of shot 
entering one side of Johnson's head and 
blowin g his head practically off. John ­
son's two friends fled." 
Th e woma n has since been indicted 
for murde r i n the first degree. 
q A t Alton , 111.. Bradle y Hayden , 
eighteen years of age, arraigned for 
wife abandonment, told the judge that 
he had abandoned his bride of two 
months because he had discovered that 
her father was colored. 
q A youn g colored man workin g in 
the same office wit h a white girl in 
Washington , D . C , was arrested for 
writin g a note to her. Th e court discharged him for lack of jurisdiction, 
q Notic e is called to the fact that i n 
framin g the accusations against colored 
soldiers every effort is made to brin g 
in the element of race prejudice by statin g that the victim is "white, " and i n 
other ways. 
q Th e King s Count y Woman's Suffrage 
Associatio n has invited the colored 
women's Politica l Equalit y Leagu e to 
unite wit h them. 
q I n Richmond , Va. , a murde r in a 
colored house of ill-fame revealed the 
presence there of two prominent whit e 
men, Dr. A . B. Cosb y and Arthu r L . 
Griffin. 
q A newspaper correspondent has discovered the town of Wybar k in Texas, 
where white men are not allowe d to 
stop over night. 
q A report that W . Stewart Robertson , 
a retired insurance broke r of Montreal , 
had visited Ne w Yor k for the purpose 
of having annulled the marriage of his 
son, W . Stewart, Jr., revealed the fact 
that the youn g man had eloped from 
Montrea l wit h Gertrude Townsend , a 
colored girl, wh o was a membe r of the 
chorus of Col e and Johnson's "Re d 
Moon " company. 
"M y father and sister were here a 
few weeks ago and stopped at the 
Manhattan Hotel, " he said. "The y 
visited us here at our home and appeared to be very well satisfied wit h 
our marriage. " • 
q A colored Oklahoma paper declares 
that the white farmers' convention, 
whic h resolved to keep out Negr o land 
owners, was composed of men wh o 
owned no land themselves. 
q Justice Hughe s wil l be the onl y 
white resident of his block when he 
takes possession of his new Washingto n 
home. 
q C. M . Love , a colored man, passed 
for white at Spartansburg, S. C. The n 
he found out that he wanted to marr y 
a colored girl, but the law woul d not 
let him. H e revealed the fact that he 
himself was colored, when the judge 
fined him $100 because he acknowledged 
the fact that he had eaten wit h white 
folks. 
q A small residential Ghetto is being 
prepared for colored people at Duluth , 
Minn . 
q Th e best citizens of Monroe , La. , 
are very much excited because a colored man addressed a white woma n on 
the street. Th e white woman's small 
brothers proceeded to pumme l him, and 
he slapped the boys over. A mob of 
a thousand people followed him through 
the street after he was arrested. ALONG THE 
q Th e residents of Germantown, Pa., 
are protesting against the opening of a 
school to train colored girls in domestic 
science. 
q Th e white citizens of Pleasant Hil l 
near Birmingham, Ala. , are very much 
excited over the plans for an industrial 
school and masonic home for Negroes. 
q Th e people of Baltimor e do not want 
colored athletic grounds at Herrin g 
Ru n Park. The y also are tryin g to 
have one of the colored industria l 
schools given up to white pupils. Th e 
school board opposes this plan. 
q Th e Negr o Salvation Arm y has been 
ordered away from Chattanooga, Tenn . 
q Th e Chicag o papers have been runnin g scare headlines about the hirin g 
out of white girls from a State institution to the colored proprietor of a 
restaurant. Th e official of the institution called attention to the fact that 
this happened five years ago. 
q Governo r Hok e Smit h took up a page 
in the Ne w Yor k Sunday Time s to 
prove that the Negr o was a burden to 
Georgi a and largely inefficient. Th e 
next Sunday a simila r page was occupied by Professor Boas and others to 
prove the civilization of Africa , the 
large amount of property owned by 
Georgi a Negroes, and the general lack 
of logi c in Mr . Smith's talk. 
ECONOMICS . 
Several strikes are taking place among 
Southern Negr o laborers. 
q Th e strike of the Southern Pacific 
employees involves some thirty-five 
Negr o laborers in Ne w Orleans. 
q Th e colored roustabouts have struck 
in connection wit h the Illinois Centra l 
strike at Memphis. 
q I n reducing the force in the architect's office, the Secretary of the Treasury has been pressed to get rid of the 
colored employees, but refused to do so. 
q Th e Brotherhoo d of Railwa y Train ­
men, in the district between the Missouri Rive r and the Pacific, are tryin g 
to get ri d of Negr o brakemen. 
q Th e longshoremen near Galveston, 
Tex. , refused to permit Negroe s to load 
a Britis h vessel at that port, 
q Th e colored Od d Fellows have purchase d a three-story brick buildin g for 
$36,000 in Ne w Orleans, 
q Th e census returns show that colored 
farm owners are increasing and farm 
laborers decreasing. 
q Mose s Yopp , a colored farmer of 
Dublin , Ga., has raised between twentyfive and thirty bales of cotton on twenty 
acres. 
COLOR LiNE 9 
q A mob of armed colored men held 
up a Georgi a passenger train and 
forced the non-union men to sidetrack 
it. Th e Negr o and white firemen here 
are strikin g together. 
q Th e Gulf division of the Longshore ­
men's Unio n has admitted colored men 
to equal rights in the union. 
q Th e Gadsden (Alabama ) News has 
the followin g choice bit ' "Jim Cai n is 
a one-gallus Negr o farmer livin g in 
East Gadsden, but mighty few citizens 
of Etowa h county, black or white, are 
contributing as much to the prosperity 
of the county as Jim. 
Yesterday he brought in his tenth 
bale of cotton, and of the ten that he 
has produced not a single one weighed 
less than 500 pounds. H e has more 
of the fleecy staple to gather and as 
Ji m lives at home and boards at the 
same place he is apt to finish the season wit h much surplus coin in his jeans. 
Raisin g cotton and little Cains is Jim's 
lon g suit." 
q Th e Negr o stevedores at the Montgomery freight house, Alabama , have 
received an increase from ten to twelve 
and a half cents an hour. 
q Th e Jacksonvill e (Florida ) Metropolis 
says that eight Negr o plasterers are 
goin g to compete against eight white 
plasterers to prove their ability. 
q A labor agent wh o was tryin g to 
hire Negroes to work on a railway has 
been killed in Nort h Carolina . "Particulars of the tragedy have not been 
learned." 
q Th e Census Bureau sends out the 
followin g report: "Th e number of farms 
operated by white farmers was 5,422,892, 
or 85.5 per cent, of all farms, while the 
number operated by Negr o and other 
non-white farmers was 917,465, or 14.5 
per cent, of the whole. Ther e is a 
slight increase in the proportion of 
Negr o and other non-white farmers, the 
proportion of farms operated by them 
ten years ago being 13.4 per cent. 
Whethe r this increase in the proportionate number of Negr o farmers means 
any increase in the relative extent of 
farming conducted by Negroe s cannot 
be determined till further tabulations 
are made showin g the size of farms by 
color of farmer." 
It is interesting to note the curious 
ebulition of race prejudice in the last 
six lines. 
q Th e Bole y (Oklahoma ) Progress declares that Bole y is the largest Negr o 
town in the Unite d States. Ha s a population of 4,000. Ha s its own city government. Ha s an assessed valuation 
of $500,000. One bank wit h bank deposits of $100,000. Ha s ninety business 
houses, seven churches, one high school 10 THE CRISIS 
and two colleges. Bole y has the onl y 
third-class postoffice (Negro ) in the 
Unite d States and the only electriclight plant for commercia l purposes, 
owned and operated by Negroes, in the 
Unite d States. Bole y has a telegraph 
office, sidewalks, city water works, four 
cotton gins, and is surrounded by the 
best farming belt in the world . 
J. H . Torbert, financial agent of the 
Fort Valle y Industria l School, was accidentally killed recently. H e was well 
know n in the South and had accumulated a valuable estate. 
<J Dr. J. R. Francis, Jr., has been appointed dental examiner in the colored 
public schools of Washington , D . C. 
<J Abou t one hundred colored people 
are engaged in pearl fisheries near 
Shreveport, La . Some are makin g as 
much as $30 a day. 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
Th e report on the college-bred Negr o 
recently issued by Atlant a Universit y 
has aroused a great deal of favorable 
comment. 
<I Th e eleventh annual report of the 
Baptist Women's Convention shows that 
they have raised, during the year, 
$13,118 for missionary and uplift purposes. In addition to this, local associations have raised $7,573. 
<I The total cost of the Universa l Races 
Congress, •until July 22, 1911, was 
$17,065. 
<I The Howar d Colore d Orpha n Asy ­
lum has dedicated thirteen buildings 
placed on 572 acres of land at King s 
Park , Lon g Island. 
€J The colored people of Ne w Orleans 
are raising $7,000 to enlarge the colored 
female annex to the Charit y Hospital. 
<J A Negr o aviator is flying at Mem ­
phis, Tenn., and Macon , Ga . 
q The highest stand man in the big 
Frenc h government's school of agritulture this year is Racine Madolmba , 
a Negro, who is the son of the Gov ­
ernor of an Uppe r Nige r State. Th e 
father entered the Frenc h service as a 
telegraph operator, wo n the cross of 
the Legio n of Hono r as a soldier and 
acquired with his governorship a kingly 
title. Also , he is a millionair e cotton 
planter, wh o has the brains to help his 
son become a brilliant agriculturist, 
rather than retain him as a petty prince. 
<I A lady at Hote l Champlain, Ne w 
York , lost a $1,600 diamond ring, which 
was promptly returned to her by a 
colored bellboy. 
<J Mr. Booke r T. Washington , principa l 
of Tuskegee Institute, has made a lecture tour of the State of Texas. 
<I Th e Lincol n Hospita l of Indianapolis 
is a colored institution, accommodatin g 
about fifty patients, and is usually 
crowded. 
<J Th e Democrati c Legislatur e of Ne w 
Yor k passed the bil l establishing a Negr o 
regiment. It went to the Governor, wh o 
returned it for technical revision. Th e 
Legislatur e thereupon adjourned before 
reaching the bill for reconsideration. 
«J Th e Rev. Davi d E . Murff and wife, 
who are conducting a Negr o Baptist 
Missio n in Africa , are visitin g i n this 
country. The y have under their supervision 15,000 native Christians, 110 students, 65 native preachers and 10 day 
schools. 
<I Mrs. Mar y Churc h Terrel l wil l deliver five lectures before the Brookly n 
Institute of Arts and Sciences on the 
Negr o in the Unite d States. 
•J Davis. E . Jones, a graduate of Wesleyan University , Conn. , has been made 
one of the colored national secretaries 
of the Y . M . C. A . work. 
t$ Th e Negr o buildin g at the Appa ­
lachian Expositio n at Knoxville , Tenn. , 
has been opened. Th e exhibits include 
farming products, domestic science and 
needlework and art exhibits. Knoxvill e 
College is especially prominent. 
(J A colored man named Brow n at 
Atlanta , Ga., at considerable risk, saved 
twenty-five horses from being burned to 
death. 
<] I n Buenos Ayre s is a statue to 
Falucho , a Negr o soldier wh o refused 
to haul down the Argentin e flag at the 
bidding of the Spanish soldiery, durin g 
the first Argentin e revolution, and was 
shot down by the Spanish. 
EDUCATION . 
Morga n College , an institution for 
colored people in Baltimore , has raised 
$65,000 in order to secure the gift of 
$50,000 promised by Andre w Carnegie . 
<I Th e Mode l Trainin g Schoo l founded 
by Miss Judi a Jackson near Athens, Ga., 
has induced the colored farmers roundabout to buy 340 acres of land in small 
homesteads, and is doing, in many other 
ways, an unusually effective work. 
<I Ther e is demand for colored teachers 
in the public schools in the South, but 
the low wages paid make it difficult to. 
secure them. 
Q Th e Colore d Pol l Ta x League of 
Ne w Orleans is urgin g the people to 
pay their poll tax, whic h in that State 
goes to the public schools. 
^ Th e turmoil in the colored publi c 
schools of Washingto n continues. Th e 
initial difficulty arises from a double ALONG THE COLOR LINE 11 
school system and a single responsibility. Th e head of the white schools 
is responsible to a board, the majority 
of whose members are white. Th e head 
of the colored schools is, on the other 
hand, responsible to the white superintendent. Al l the colored members of 
the school board have openly repudiated 
R. C. Bruce as unfit for his position 
as head of the colored schools, but the 
white superintendent maintains that as 
Bruc e is responsible to him, he must 
be allowed time to judge him, as he 
himself is a newcomer. Al l have assented to this fair request, but it leaves 
the whole matter unsettled. Most people seem to think that Mr . Bruce wil l 
soon be displaced. 
f$ Th e permanent endowment fund of 
Tuskegee Institute, Ala. , now amounts 
to $1,871,647. Ther e was received durin g the year for operating expenses 
$231,724. 
CRIME . 
Th e month's record of crime and 
lynching , if carefully scanned, furnishes 
a curious commentary on the whole 
question of the commission and punishment of crime among colored people in 
America . 
<I Al l the prisoners arrested for the 
Coatesville lynchin g have been freed. 
C[ Th e killin g of Negroes by white 
men in the South is a very commo n 
occurrence. There is a record of fourteen such cases this month. Usuall y 
the cause is "not learned" or arises 
from a street quarrel, or because the 
Negr o woul d not obey orders. Ther e 
are few records of convictions for such 
murders. 
*I Closely connected wit h this is the 
killin g of white men by Negroes. In 
some cases this is unprovoked; in most 
cases it is apparently the result of a 
quarrel. Ther e are ten such murders 
reported this month. 
<I A great deal of trouble arises from 
the action of policemen. In Jacksonville, Fla. , a Negr o is shot because he 
woul d not obey the command to halt. 
In Pennsylvani a an officer shoots a 
Negr o stealing a ride on a train. In 
Texa s a Negr o wh o refused to stand 
when Ordered is shot. In Georgi a a 
policeman beat a Negr o nearly to death. 
Ther e are perhaps a half dozen other 
cases of this sort during the month. 
<J Th e opposite case, the slaying of 
officers by Negroes, has happened in five 
cases. 
<J Th e record for lynchings and attempt at lynchin g is very depressing 
for the month. 
<I Fifteen Negroe s seem to have been 
lynched. In Arkansa s nearly the whol e 
family of a white man wh o had a 
colored family was killed because the 
sons resisted arrest. Si x persons, in ­
cluding two officers, are dead in this 
case. 
<I In Georgi a there is a very curious 
case of a lynchin g of a Negr o chauffeur. 
Several stories are told as to the reason 
of this, none of which sound probable. 
A t Pineville , La. , two Negroes were 
kille d and four wounded in a race war. 
•I In Greenville, S. C , a seventeenyear-old boy was hanged for alleged 
assault on an unknown girl. 
Cfl In Georgi a a Negr o was hanged for 
an alleged assault on a woman . 
f$ The accusations of assaults upon wo ­
men by colored men have been very 
frequent. Whe n they are carefully 
investigated it is very difficult to draw 
the line between racial insult and real 
crime. 
f} A t Shelbyville , Ky. , for instance, a 
Negr o was nearly killed for asking 
permission to call on a youn g white 
woman. 
A t Harrodsburg , Ky. , a ten-year-old 
boy was accused of assault. H e said 
he and the twelve-year-old white girl 
were playing. 
Q In Baltimor e a colored man put his 
hand on a girl's shoulder "mumbling. " 
H e was arrested and charged wit h 
assault. 
q In Elizabeth, N . J., a colored man, 
in getting off the car, pushed a white 
woman off. This resulted in a smallsized riot. 
<I Al l of the above cases are probably 
matters of race prejudice, pure and simple. There follow cases of deliberate 
crime, as a murder and assault in Flor ­
ida, but here it is not at all certain 
that the perpetrator was a colored man. 
Al l that can be said is that he looked 
black in the night. 
•J Nea r Coatesville, Pa., a girl was attacked by a colored man. Lynchin g 
was threatened, but the girl herself 
pleaded with the mob to let the regular 
course of the law be followed. 
q The crime of white men against colored women is less often reported in 
the paper. Indirectly one sees this in 
the crimes which arise in houses of ill -
fame. Thre e cases of this sort, involving white men, are reported this month. 
<J Fro m Griffin, Ark. , comes a case 
where a colored mother of two children 
was set upon by the wife of the white 
father. The colored woman thrashed 
the white woman and the mob imme ­
diately appeared. Just then the light-12 THE CRISIS 
nin g kille d fifteen of the mob and the 
write r adds "this country is in the worst 
uproar that it has ever been." 
Anothe r case of crime arises from 
the attempt of colored laborers to collect their wages. A white man hired 
two Negr o boys near Charleston, S. C . 
to wor k for him. Th e boys did the work, 
and were refused their pay, and in addition their mother was beaten into insensibility. Th e Negroe s gathered and ran 
the white man out of town. 
<I I n Louisian a a Negr o was severely 
whipped for being insolent to a fireman. 
f$ I n Texa s a Negr o was beaten because he woul d not pay an alleged debt 
to a storekeeper. 
<I A t Lak e Charles, La. , the village 
officers arrested some laborers and their 
employers proceeded to release them. 
f$ Th e papers of Georgi a and other 
places continue to urge the summary 
arrest of vagrants. 
<I Muc h trouble arises between Negroe s 
and conductors on trains and street 
cars. Thre e conducters were killed 
this mont h in such quarrels. 
1$ Ther e are several strikin g cases of 
injustice in the courts: On e Negr o in 
Nort h Carolin a was sentenced to death 
in fifteen minutes and one in Mississipp i 
in seven minutes. "Extreme penalty 
of the law" is continually imposed on 
Negr o criminals. 
<J Th e Broo k Have n (Miss.) Leade r 
says: "Th e Negr o entered a plea of 
guilty and accepted a life sentence in 
order to save himself from the fury of 
the mob. Th e jur y was impaneled and 
everything done secretly that the people 
might be half way (at least) satisfied 
and the lynchin g averted." 
q In Louisian a a Negro , wh o was given 
a life sentence for killin g a relative 
accidentally, has at last been pardoned. 
<| Th e Tuscumbi a (Alabama ) Despatch 
has this report: "Wil l Hollinsworth , a 
Negr o boy wh o drives the beer wagon 
in this city, was arrested Monda y for 
carrying concealed weapons and after a 
trial before Mayo r Tompkins, was fined 
$50 and costs, which amounted to about 
$4, and given sixty days on the street. 
It seems the Negr o engaged in an altercation with a white boy, and after the 
Negr o cursed him, the boy knocked 
him in the head several times. Th e 
Negr o went off and returned wit h a 
pistol, but upon seeing an officer approaching, threw the weapon into a 
barrel nearby. H e was detected in this, 
however, and arrested with the above 
result." 
An d the white boy? 
«I In Fort Worth , Tex., passengers and 
railroad men i n the vicinit y of the 
Texa s and Pacific station threatened to 
lync h a Negr o man arrested in the company of a youn g white woman . Th e 
officers drew their clubs and held the 
crowd off until the arriva l of the police 
patrol. 
Th e prisoners were locked up at the 
Centra l Polic e Station, but were released 
after a short while , because of the 
insufficientcy of the technical charge to 
hol d them. 
MEETINGS . 
Th e forty-second annual meeting of 
the Women's Foreig n Missio n Society 
of the Methodist Episcopa l Churc h was 
held in St. Louis. 
<J A n Alabama-Georgi a Negr o singin g 
convention was held in Annisto n and 
attracted large numbers. 
<J September 22 was largely celebrated 
as Emancipatio n Da y in Indiana and 
Ohio . 
<J Agricultura l fairs are being held in 
nearly every Southern State. Most of 
these fairs are independent organiza ­
tions, but some of them are annexed 
to white fairs. 
^ In Memphis, Tenn., a Tri-Stat e fair 
was held wit h 20,000 visitors or more. 
<J A t Nashville , Tenn., a colored State 
fair had the Governo r to address them. 
The y had a health exhibition, a children's day and many other attractions. 
fll Th e Jackson Count y Negr o fair of 
Tennessee was unusually successful. 
Ther e were also colored fairs at Hum ­
boldt, Tenn., Glasgow, Ky. , Suffolk, Va. , 
and in many other places. Th e Georgi a 
State colored fair wil l be held this 
month. 
<J One of the most interesting meetings 
of the mont h was the first meeting of 
the America n Indian Associatio n at 
Ohi o State University . 
CHURCH . 
Th e Methodist Episcopa l Churc h is 
commemoratin g the wor k of Joh n 
Stewart, a colored man, and one of the 
first Methodist missionaries to the 
Indians. 
<I A t the Methodist Fourt h Ecumenica l 
Conference at Toront o all of the Negr o 
Methodist organizations were represented and several addresses were made 
by colored men. 
<I Cardina l Gibbons was entertained by 
the colored girls of St. Francis Asylu m 
on the occasion of his double jubilee. OPINIO N 
TH E COATESVILL E FIASCO . 
Th e failure of the Coatesville jury to 
find a verdict against any one of the 
indicted members of the mob that burned 
the Negr o Walke r leads the Ne w 
Yor k Time s to say: "It is, of course, a 
fundamental principle of our legal system that the man accused of crime shall 
be tried not far from the place where 
it was committed and by a jury of the 
vicinage. Tha t is—or was—an admirable 
device to prevent injustice to an innocent 
man and to insure the punishment of a 
guilty man whose guilt offends his own 
community, but the . proceedings at 
Coatesville -illustrate how it work s when 
his guilt is so widely shared that only 
accomplices are available for jurymen. 
Th e prosecution in these cases was futile 
because it did not have, as the defense 
woul d have had if conditions as to prejudice were reversed, the right to demand a change of venue. 
Th e Ne w Yor k Worl d says: "The 
effect of Pennsylvania's virtua l condonation of lync h law is directly visible in 
the second attempt at lynchin g in Coatesvill e and indirectly in the lynchings of 
Negroe s reported from all sections of the 
country. Is it to be said that it has 
remained for a Norther n State to cap 
the ignomin y of mob murde r by cloaking 
it wit h the pretense of prosecution and 
investing it with a hypocrisy from whic h 
it is free elsewhere?" 
Some of the Pennsylvani a papers, as 
the failure of the prosecution became 
apparent, spoke strongly. "Evidently, " 
says the Pittsburgh Gazette-Times, "somebody is obstructing the course of justice. 
Is it possible that the worst elements in 
Chester County are influential enough to 
accomplish that? Hardly. Is it not more 
probable that the mysterious powe r 
whic h is shielding the offenders and nullifyin g the law is identical with certain 
of the supposedly good people of the 
community ? It wil l be recalled that 
promptl y upon a realization of the 
enormity of the outrage of that Sunday 
night in August there was a systematic 
attempt through the press in that part 
of the State, by means of communica ­
tions and statements, to palliate the 
crime and gloss it over as something 
which , given like circumstances, might 
have happened anywhere. . This was 
dictated in part by a shame that was 
natural and commendable, but in larger 
degree by business considerations, by 
a desire that nothing should be done 
whic h might Effect commercia l and 
social relations between Coatesville and 
the outside world. Everythin g was 
subordinated to dollars and cents—and 
anyway the victim of the lynchin g was 
a particularly no-account black man! " 
The Yor k (Pa.) Daily thinks the spirit 
of depravity revealed by the cheers 
which greeted the acquitted men is 
amazing to decent people. Th e Phila ­
delphia Time s says: "This, then, puts 
the responsibility on the State authorities to proceed in a different way to 
punish the offense, which is a blot on 
the commonwealth itself." 
Th e Louisvill e Courier-Journa l says: 
"Th e degree of civilization that exists 
in a community is determined by the 
vigor of prosecutions followin g lynch ­
ings rather than by the crime itself; that 
may be committed by the riffraff, but the 
administration of the law is, theoretically at least, in the hands of the most 
'representative' element." 
The Washington (D. C.) Star thinks 
Gov. Tene r ought to appoint a commission of medical men, experts in mental 
disorders, to investigate the state of 
the public min d of Pennsylvania . "Some ­
thing is wron g there." 
TH E AFRICA N SITUATION . 
Th e situation between the races in 
Afric a is becoming rapidly more serious, 
and the newspapers here and in Eng ­
land make extended comment. Th e Lon ­
don Dail y News gives a resume of recent events which is well worth reading: 
"The deportation of. a Mr . Galbraith 
Col e from Britis h East Afric a on the 
ground of exciting racial enmity i n the 
colony wil l probably provoke newspaper 
comment and Parliamentary questioning. It comes as the latest of a long 
series of episodes whic h should enforce 
upon rational Englishme n some serious 
Imperia l thinking. Mr . Col e shot a 
native who had stolen a sheep, and when 
he was charged with murder a white jury 
acquitted him offhand. W e are informed 
by cable from Mombass a that the British Africa n public are 'astounded' and 
'highly indignant' that Mr . Col e should 
be deported, for he 'is allowed to be one 
of the most peaceful men in the colony' 
and he has never said anything 'which 
could in any way be construed into an 
expression of disloyalty or as likely to 
disaffect the natives.' In short, Mr . 
Col e is a mode l Britis h East African, 
who has never done anything worse than 
kil l a native. 14 THE CRISIS 
"Th e Britis h East Africa n ideal of 
citizenship seems very like the Rho -
desian. Last month a white man named 
Sam. Lewis was tried for the murde r of 
a native. It was alleged that the native 
had indecently solicited Lewis's daughters, and Lewis wit h the greatest deliberation and in cold blood shot the native. 
Lewis was acquitted by a white jury 
amid the enthusiasm of the white population. Neithe r the Col e case nor the 
Lewis case is exceptional. Th e public 
flogging of a native in Nairob i by white 
men wil l be fresh in the memory, and 
in Rhodesi a it is practically impossible 
to get a jury to convict a white man of 
an offence against a native. 
"No r is this spirit confined to these 
two colonies. Quite recently in Nata l a 
Boe r farmer charged wit h rape on a 
native girl was acquitted, although the 
evidence was so clear that the judge told 
the accused that he was a disgrace to 
his race and his color. T o the honor of 
South Africa , a distinction should be 
drawn between the Col e and the Lewis 
cases. Th e South Africa n press, almost 
without exception, condemned the Lewis 
verdict as an outrage on justice; there 
is no evidence of any such sensitiveness 
in East Africa . 
"Fro m South Afric a comes another 
illustration of injustice toward the 
native. One result of the Unio n has 
been a movement to unite the various 
provincia l bars into a South Africa n Ad ­
vocates' Society. Wit h the exception of 
the Capetown bar, all the groups of 
lawyers were determined to exclude colored lawyers from the society. The 
Capetown bar resisted the proposal, and 
in the end the society has been formed 
without the Capetown bar, on the basis 
of the exclusion of colored men. Such 
a society apparently woul d not have the 
power to exclude colored men from practicing, but it woul d put upon them the 
stamp of inferiority and exert a steady 
pressure to secure ultimately the closing 
of the legal profession to men of color. 
"If the policy to which South Africa n 
lawyers have deliberately committed 
themselves be carried out, the white man 
wil l not merely remove from competition a rival—he wil l enslave the race. 
Lawyers are presumed to be educated 
men, and it is not surprising that a storekeeper in Rhodesi a or Nata l should let 
himself be carried away by passion when 
his natural leaders go so badly astray. 
It is clear that in those Africa n colonies 
where the white population is very small 
and the colored population large, a white 
jury cannot be trusted to do justice between white and black. If that were the 
substance of the problem a remedy 
could be easily found by abolishing trial 
by jury in such cases. Tha t has recently 
been done in Natal, and several South 
Africa n papers recommend it for Rho ­
desia, whil e it is plainl y necessary i n 
East Africa . Bu t a single mechanica l 
change of that kin d wil l not cure the 
radical vice whic h consists i n the attitude of white towar d black. A s the 
South Africa n New s puts it, there is 
north of the Vaa l an 'absolute apathy' 
of white people where native life Is concerned: the native is thought of as 'a 
machine expected to perform so muc h 
labor i n a given time, not as a being of 
flesh and blood, wit h likes and dislikes, 
passions, it may be vices.' Ther e can 
be no approach to a solution of the colo r 
question in Afric a until whit e men recognize that Afric a is not and can never 
be a white man's country, but must be 
a country in whic h the colored man has 
a share, and a human share. In South 
Africa , where the Cape provides an enlightened nucleus, there is some hope of 
wisdom, but in East Afric a the Colonia l 
Office and its representatives must make 
good what the colonials themselves cannot furnish. " 
Th e Ne w Yor k Evenin g Sun says that 
the Londo n Time s publishes "conspicuously and without comment " an article 
accusing the Colonia l Secretary of gross 
injustice. It appears from this that the 
wron g committed by Mr . Col e was 
merely negative—he unfortunately failed 
to report what he had done. "Ever y 
other circumstance, " we are told, "was 
conspicuously in his favor." I n conclusion it is very hard, the Time s correspondent points out, that "a man wh o 
has done splendid wor k as a settler" 
should be sent home "wit h a stigma on 
his name," when "the worst that can 
be said of his action is that in a moment 
of great provocation he fired at and 
kille d a native." These exalted sentiments in the most influential of the Eng ­
lish newspapers are instructive in their 
way. The y wil l not be forgotten when 
the time comes to moraliz e on the next 
America n lynching . 
In fact, the Londo n Time s is takin g 
a curiously familiar attitude. "If there 
is one thing quite certain, " it remarks, 
"it is that all attempts to legislate for 
the natives of South Afric a in advance 
of loca l white opinion wil l end in defeating their own objects and i n further 
estranging the two races. Th e plain 
truth is that a final solution of the color 
problem is at present altogether beyond 
the powers of human statesmanship, and 
that the only wise course wil l be gradually and patiently to marsha l moderate 
opinion in all sections on the broadest 
commo n ground attainable without driving the more circumspect and reasonable upholders of either view into open 
and definite antagonism. Th e question 
is essentially one for the South Africa n 
people themselves." 
Th e Louisvill e Post, quoting this editorial, says it reads like "the comment OPINION 15 
of a sensible Norther n newspaper upon 
some action in the South, whic h does 
not accord with the preconceived North ­
ern ideas of the race question, but whic h 
commands support because of its strong 
commo n sense. W e commend this comment to those American s wh o fail to 
appreciate the difficulties which confront 
the Southern States i n this problem. " 
Th e Bosto n Transcrip t sees some encouragement. It thinks the Britis h authorities have done what they could. 
Col e is "the son of an earl, but he had 
to go just the same." However, it continues: "Th e subject majority in the 
South Africa n Unio n 'is as 4,780,474 
is to the governing minorit y of 1,278,025. 
Th e race disparity is greater there than 
in our 'black belt.' A n analogy between 
our color problem and that confronting 
Great Britai n is asserted by the Londo n 
papers, but the contrast is infinitely to 
the Britis h disadvantage. Ou r Negroes 
even in the most benighted localities 
have enough of civilization to lift them 
high above the savagery of the black 
masses of the 'Union ' and the 'protectorates.' Th e analogy is therefore faulty, 
but its presentation to Britis h readers 
has had the effect of reminding them 
that what they have deemed a mote in 
their eyes is bigger than what they have 
considered the beam in the eyes of their 
neighbors. " 
TH E SOCIALIST S AGAIN . 
Th e Socialists are again deeply stirred 
over the race question. In the South 
the party stands right in some places 
and wron g in others. In the North , 
where, of course, the vastly greater 
number of Socialists are found, the attitude is very good so far, and whenever 
prejudice crops up a score of friends 
come to the Negro's defense. There 
has recently been a great deal said in 
the Socialist press on the subject, because they understand in the Nort h that 
the solidarity of workers is essential 
to their movement. Th e Southern 
Socialists do not all appear to see this 
and party organizers have reported in 
Norther n papers, wit h great indignation, 
the attitude they found among many 
"comrades " below Maso n and Dixon's 
line. In the Comin g Nation , a Socialist paper of Girard , Kan. , Charles Ed ­
war d Russell speaks his mind . 
Mr . Russell, who is a very prominent 
Socialist, is one of the executive committee of the Nationa l Association for 
the Advancement of Colore d People 
and a contributing editor of TH E CRISIS . 
H e says: "Severa l gentlemen have been 
good enough to write to me in dissent 
from some recent remarks in these colums wherein I ventured to suggest that it 
might be well to treat colored men wit h 
at least a degree of justice. One of 
my correspondents assures me that he 
has cancelled his subscription to the 
Comin g Natio n because of those remarks, and another, more in sorrow 
than in anger, foretells the speedy ruin 
of the magazine and its editors if they 
persist in uttering such sentiments. 
"Tha t being the case perhaps it would 
be well now to have a few kind words 
together and see if we can come to a 
clear understanding about all these 
things. T o obtain sympathy under false 
pretenses is at least as bad as in a like 
manner to obtain money. W e may as 
well understand one another and then 
there wil l be no chance for any suspicion of intellectual bunco. 
"These columns were established for 
the purpose of uttering a weekly protest 
against such cases of injustice as came 
currently within the notice of this magazine. It wil l not stop to bother with 
any consideration of the so-called race 
of the victim. It wil l pay just as little 
attention to whether he be black, white, 
yellow, brown, red or cream color. 
The y all look alike to us. 
" I hope that is sufficiently explicit. 
The y all look alike to us. 
"An d now for a calm survey of facts 
about all this. Race prejudice is the big ­
gest nonsense in the world , the most 
venerable of fakes and the most foolish, 
harmful and preposterous. 
"In Pennsylvania , the other day, the 
smokin g car of a local train was about 
half full of native gentlemen, when at 
a certain station four Italians were seen 
to be mounting the platform and about 
to enter. Instantly the native gentlemen seized each two seats, turned them 
so that they faced each other, spread 
abroad their elegant bodies and their 
ample feet until there was left unoccupied not a corner of any seat, and when 
the Italians got in they were obliged 
to stand all the way to their destination. 
"Afte r that a man, not native to these 
scenes, asked one possessed of this advantage what might be the meaning of 
the singular spectacle. 
" 'Why, ' said the native gentleman, 
'didn't you see them? The y was all 
dam dagoes.' 
"'Well? ' said his questioner. 
"'Why , yo u don't suppose I'd sit next 
to a dam dago, do you? ' 
" 'Don't you ever think that this country of yours was discovered by an 
Italian?' 
"'Aw , go awn. Watche r givin ' us? 
S'pose yo u can make me believe George 
Washingto n was any dago?' 
"'Well , omitting discussion of that 
question, would yo u min d telling me 
wh y yo u objected to allowin g one of 
those Italians to have a seat in this 
car?' 
"'Sur e I'll tell you. This is a white 
man's country. Ther e ain't no room 
here for dam dagoes. If they don't 
like what they get here, let 'em stay 16 THE CRISIS 
at home. This country's a place for 
white men ; it ain't no place for dam 
dagoes'—a sentiment that instantly 
awoke responsive applause from all the 
other native gentlemen i n the car. 
* * * 
"This reminds me of some other 
scenes and observations i n my experience. Al l these persons hated the 
Italians because there were many Italians in their neighborhood, and Italians 
were not white men ; but it appeared 
upon examination that they professed 
their willingness to preserve amicable 
relations wit h other foreigners, all unknow n to them, that they believed to be 
white men. The y thought that the Germans, for instance, were probably all 
right; and Swedes, they had heard, made 
admirable citizens; they were white 
men. But these dam dagoes were the 
limit; no white men could be expected 
to endure them; they were not white 
men. 
"Bu t it happened that I was brought 
up in a community, one-half of whic h 
was German, and I remember that the 
native gentlemen in that communit y 
held exactly the same opinions about 
the Germans. Othe r people might be 
well enough, Norwegians, Scotchmen 
or Welshmen ; but these Germans were 
the limit. I even recall that the terms 
used about them were identical wit h 
those used in Pennsylvani a about the 
Italians, the y were not white men, and 
a real native gentleman could not be 
expected to get along wit h anybody 
that was not a white man. 
"Just over the river in Molin e was a 
large colony of Swedes, and when. I 
went to visit in Molin e I never failed 
to be regaled with the enormities of the 
Swedes. It appeared that they were 
likewise 'dam foreigners' and possessed 
of traits that made even the Germans 
seem almost attractive. 
"I went to school in a town in North ­
ern Ne w Englan d where there was a 
large settlement of Frenc h Canadians 
and where the native gentlemen used to 
sit around the grocery store every night, 
chewing tobacco and expatiating upon 
the shortcomings of all Frenc h Cana ­
dians. It seemed that they also lacked 
lamentably of the white man's essentials 
and were very extremely undesirable 
persons in a white man's country, and 
ought to be made stay at home. Subsequently I spent some time in Ceda r 
Rapids and learned there of the enormities of the Bohemians, wh o formed 
a large part of the city's population. 
In Honesdale , Pa., I was impressed (by 
the native gentlemen) wit h the evil 
qualities of the Hungarians: and in 
Cleveland, O., gathered that the Lithu ­
anians were rank intruders in a white 
man's country. In Wilkes-Barr e the 
afflictions of a Russian colony were 
pointed out to me and i n Housto n 
Street I heard muc h eloquence about 
the unattractive nature of the Jew. 
Fro m Englis h sources I learned that the 
Iris h were the lowest people that 
crawled and the Scotch were utterly detestable; whil e I had at all times vivi d 
recollections of the ol d pioneer of m y 
boyhoo d days and the picturesque language in whic h he could convinc e any 
listener that the Indian was so vil e that 
he ought to be shot on sight. 
"An d yet all the time the fact remained, and was easily susceptible of 
proof, that the Germa n was exactly 
like the Swede and the Hungaria n was 
exactly like the German , and the Nor ­
wegian differed in no essential from the 
Italian, and that all were like the 
American , so that i n the second generation yo u could by no means tell one 
from the other. 
"Wha t then was the gratuitous hatred 
toward their own kind? 
"Why , the origin was twofold. In 
the first place it was an echo of old 
jungle days, wherein every skin-clad 
forefather of ours snarled at every other 
skin-clad fellow because he feared that 
there was not enough raw meat for 
both of them. 
"I n the second place, and a far 
stronger impulse, it was snobbery pure 
and simple. Th e essence of snobbery is 
that I elevate myself by depressing 
somebody else; that the extent of my 
own elevation is the depth to whic h I, 
can pull another man down ; that if I 
can successfully feign somebody else 
to be so muc h worse than I am that 
he must be hated, then I have established myself upon a lofty pinnacle 
indeed. Ther e comes to my town a 
group of foreigners, strangers, il l at 
ease in a country new to them, and 
therefore without adequate defense. 
Th e old jungle instinct bids me snarl 
at them; the thirst for self-esteem induces 
me to treat them as my inferiors. Wit h 
the ready assistance of others i n my 
town that are like minde d I have no 
difficulty in getting up a sentiment of 
hatred against these 'dam dagoes;' after 
that the very food that they eat and the 
language of their motherland become 
handy materials for my scorn and fertile soil in whic h to grow mor e hatred. 
Th e more foreigners the mor e hatred; 
the more hatred the more I delude myself into the belief that I am showin g 
my superiority. 
"Al l of whic h is mere snobbery run 
mad. 
"Ad d to this the terrible results of 
a terrible war, the awful crop of lingering passions that such wa r always has. 
and the inevitable position of the Ne ­
groes, as the visible cause of that war, 
and this is the exact situation in the 
South, and the reason wh y so many 
white people there are poisoning their OPINION 17 
own lives by hatred of their colored 
neighbors. 
"I admit that it is a situation easily 
explained and not unnatural, under the 
circumstances. Bu t I don't see wh y I 
should be expected to help it along. " 
COMMO N SENSE . 
Th e Readin g (Pa.) Heral d traces the 
Coatesville horror to Ji m Crowism. It 
does not believe that even swift and 
severe.punishment of the lynchers woul d 
do much good. Educatio n and commo n 
sense are needed a good deal more than 
punishment. 
"Ther e is something heathenish in the 
fancied superiority of the whites over 
the blacks, " it says. "It is quite as bad 
i n its way as the distinctions of caste in 
India. ' A man's a man for a' that,' 
whether his color be white or black. A 
child's a chil d for all that, too. Educa ­
tion alon g these lines ought to begin in 
our schools and on our playgrounds. Th e 
separation of black and white in the 
schools tends to promote a feeling of 
superiority on the part of the white 
child. H e unconsciously imbibes the notion that he is better than the children 
of darker hue in another schoolroom. 
Th e caste idea grows up; and from this 
gradually the mob spirit and the lynch ­
ing fever are generated. 
"Mor e than once have we dwelt upon 
the peaceable situation in Reading, 
where whites and blacks dwell together 
in unity, and where man y of the Negroe s 
are of a highl y intelligent and enterprisin g type. T o separate whites and blacks 
here, in school or other public places, 
woul d be simpl y to breed discontent and 
a false pride, to erect a barrier and to 
provoke hostility. 
"If there were real mora l and intellectual superiority on the part of the white 
man ; if the whites had a monopol y of 
virtue and intelligence ; if the blacks were 
all degraded, villainous, dangerous, a barrier might well be drawn for the protection of the whites and the humblin g of 
the blacks. But such an assumption is 
preposterous. Ther e are many colored 
people superior in many ways to recent 
Europea n immigrants, and even to whites 
wh o have dwelt in this land for many 
years. A man's color no mor e proclaims 
his respectability than does his wealth. 
This truth, we believe, ought to be impressed upon children from their earliest 
childhood. " 
<i Th e Ne w Yor k Evenin g Post says:. 
"Dr . Booke r T. Washingto n is able to 
get around the Ji m Cro w law in Texa s 
by chartering a special Pullma n car to 
take him the 200 miles from Austi n to 
Temple . He is about to tour the State 
with a party of men of both races, as 
he has recently made trips in other 
Southern States—Mississippi, Tennessee, 
Virginia , etc.—in which he has rendered 
service of very great value in interpreting the races to each other. But, 
whil e Dr. Washingto n can thus escape 
the humiliation of the Ji m Cro w car, 
there are thousands of others of his 
race of equal refinement and culture 
who have no such way out. The y must 
go in the rura l South into unsanitary, 
and dirty cars that look as though they 
had never been cleaned; that in ninetynine cases out of a hundred are far 
inferior to the average white coach, and 
this is true despite railroad assertions 
to the contrary. Whethe r those traveling in these cars are ailin g or well, 
strong or delicate, their plight is the 
same; it is part of the price they pay 
for their America n birthright! A s yet 
Dr. Washingto n has never felt called to 
speak out very clearly about this gross 
discrimination against his race, in accordance with his fixed policy of bearing 
down upon all the favorable signs of the 
times and touching but lightly on the 
evils. Bu t if he woul d speak out, we 
believe that he could impress the country deeply by telling what he knows 
about the feelings of the colored people 
in regard to the Ji m Cro w stigma daily 
placed upon them. " 
<J Th e assertion is made that in Texas, 
where the chief interest was in the Statewide prohibition contest, 85 per cent, of 
the Negroes voted against prohibition. 
"Tha t is an easy assertion to make, but 
we woul d like to know how the poll 
was taken," says the Independent. 
"W e doubt the figures. Th e Nash ­
ville Tennesseean says that in its State 
an equal 85 per cent, of the Negroe s are 
against prohibition. Agai n we doubt it, 
and we remember that there were other 
reasons wh y Tennessee Negroes voted 
for a Democrati c Governor. W e have 
information that in Atlant a there is a 
large Negr o vote against the saloon. 
Le t this be understood, that if the saloon 
politicians cultivate the Negr o vote and 
the anti-saloon men hold themselves too 
high to do it, they wil l have no right to 
complain if they are beaten by the Negr o 
vote." 
<J B. F . Riley , a white man writin g in 
the Nationa l Baptist Unio n Review 
(colored), says, in the course of a warm 
attack on race prejudice: "Th e Negr o 
must cease to crouch and to crawl. H e 
must quietly and without show vindicate 
his right to live and to prosper, and the 
friends wil l come from the best whites 
wh o wil l come into control of this 
country. " 
Senator Vardaman , in his personal 
organ, Th e Issue, remarks: "The 
way to control the Nigge r is to whip 
him when he does not obey without it, 
and another is never to pay him more 
wages than is actually necessary to buy 
food and clothing. " Men of the Month 
TW O MUSICIANS . 
Tha t Heave n has given colored people 
the gift of music is one of the virtues generally allowed the race. This 
talent wo n a somewhat sweeping vic -
MIS S JESSI E ESTELL E MUS E 
tory at the Yal e Musi c School at Ne w 
Have n this year, when of the three 
scholarship winners two were colored. I n 
instrumental music this prize fell to Miss 
Hele n Eugeni a Hagan ; in voca l music 
Miss Jessie Mus e shares honors with 
one of the white students, the two divid ­
ing the Lockwoo d scholarship equally. 
Th e Yal e Musi c School is connected 
wit h the university, and its purpose, as 
defined by the catalogue, is to furnish 
"adequate instruction for those intendin g to become professional musicians, 
either teachers or composers." Ther e 
were only three colored students in the 
school, the third being the sister of Miss 
Jessie Muse , so it was particularly 
gratifying that two of them should wi n 
the Lockwoo d scholarships awarded to 
the person or persons wh o had main ­
tained the highest standard throughout 
the year. A t the annual concert given 
by the students of the school Miss Mus e 
sang most creditably the mad scene from 
"Lucia. " 
Bot h youn g ladies wil l continue their 
studies. Miss Mus e is already a teacher 
in the public schools. Miss Haga n has 
the record of being the onl y student, 
white or colored, wh o ever took the 
course i n the music school i n connection wit h school wor k elsewhere. She 
has been goin g through the hig h school 
at the same time that she followed the 
very exacting course in instrumenta l 
music at the Yal e school. Th e teachers 
of both youn g wome n predict a splendid 
future for them. 
DR. ALGERNO N B. JACKSON . 
A recent discovery made by Dr. Algernon B. Jackson of Philadelphi a has attracted a great deal of attention in the 
medica l press of this country and Eng ­
land. N o ailment is less understood 
than rheumatism, whic h Dr. Jackson has 
studied for many years and for whic h 
he now suggests a new treatment. H e 
is careful not to claim magica l qualities 
for his discovery and points out that it 
MIS S HELE N E . HAGA N 
is only a preliminar y report. Late r he 
hopes to be able to give to the medica l 
profession a mor e extensive analysis of 
the results he has obtained. His treat-MEN OF THE MONTH 19 
ment consists of hypodermic administrations of magnesium sulphate, and Dr. 
Jackson has found that patients suffering from acute articular rheumatism 
have responded to it in a gratifying way. 
Th e Ne w Yor k Medica l Journa l expresses the hope that this discovery, if 
it does not prove a specific, "wil l at least 
be sufficiently analgetic and eliminant to 
give comfort to thousands." 
Dr. Jackson, wh o has long been known 
as a write r on medica l topics, is at present surgeon-in-chief to Merc y Hospital, 
Philadelphia . Fo r ten years he was 
assistant surgeon to the Polyclini c Hospital and the Post Graduate School, but 
is now devoting his entire time to Merc y 
Hospita l as surgeon and research 
worker. H e was graduated from Jefferson Medica l College in 1900. Dr. Jackson is a native of Indiana. 
CHARLE S H . TURPIN . 
T o wi n elective office in Missouri is 
not, for a colored man, an easy matter. 
Tha t Mr . Charles H . Turpi n of St. Louis 
should be elected one of the State constables is evidence of an unusual personality. Mr . Turpi n is, in fact, the first 
colored man to hold elective office in the 
State. H e was nominated in the direct 
primary, over three white competitors, 
CHARLE S H . TURPI N 
DK . A . B . JACKSO N 
by a plurality of 157, and was elected by 
a plurality of 615. 
Mr . Turpi n has long been identified 
with the life of St. Louis, but he was 
born in Georgi a thirty years or so ago. 
His parents moved to Missouri when he 
was a baby. H e was educated in the 
public schools and in a business college. 
Before his election to the office of constable he held the position of deputy 
assessor and clerk in the recorder's 
office. 
TH E LAT E BISHO P HANDY . 
Rt. Rev. James Anderso n Handy , 
D . D., a retired bishop of the Africa n 
Methodist Episcopa l Church, died at 
Baltimore . James Anderso n Hand y was 
born December 22, 1826, and was the 
first son of Ishmael and Nanc y Handy . 
In the winter of 1833 youn g Hand y 
went to school for three months, and 
with the exception of the Sunday school, 
that was all the schooling he ever had. 
In the course of life he occupied every 
position in the Sunday school from pupil 
to superintendent and in the church 
every position from layman to bishop. 
In 1892 the General Conference, which 
met in Philadelphia , elected him bishop, 
along with Benjamin F . Lee and Mose s 
B. Salter. Th e General Conferenc e 
which met in Norfolk, Va. , May , 1908. 
placed him on the retired list. 
Bishop Handy's death increases the 
number of vacancies on the Episcopa l 
bench of the Africa n Methodist Church , 
and makes much speculation as to the 
action of the General Conference next 
May . Probabl v four or five new bishops 
wil l be elected to rule over the 750,000 
members of that church. TH E N . A . A . C. P 
Durin g the past few weeks the Nationa l 
Associatio n for the Advancemen t of Col ­
ored Peopl e has sent out a thousand 
letters to representative colored men and 
wome n in all sections of the country, 
appealing to them to support the wor k 
financially by becoming members of the 
association. Replies to these letters continue to come in, but the association must 
receive the contributions of many more 
new members if it is to carry on successfully the difficult wor k whic h it has 
undertaken. 
In its fight against the disastrous results of race prejudice the association 
has taken up, among other cases, a very 
important civil-rights suit in Ne w Jersey, 
whic h it is now pushing as effectively 
as is possible wit h so little money at 
its disposal. Th e association is eager to 
take up the fight against disfranchisement in Oklahoma and has made a beginnin g in that direction, but it is sadly 
hampered by lack of funds. It realizes 
to its chagrin that there are many ways 
in which the lack of money hinders it 
from accomplishing the results it wishes. 
Wil l not the colored people of the Unite d 
States rally to the support of this association which is tryin g to wi n for them 
a second emancipation? 
<J Th e Nationa l Associatio n interested 
itself some time ago in the case of Ear l 
Gilchrist, a colored boy in Arkansas, 
who killed another boy in a street fight. 
H e was sentenced to be hanged, although 
he is only seventeen years old. Th e case 
was appealed to the Supreme Court, and 
the sentence of the lower court has been 
sustained. W e have been workin g in 
connection wit h persons interested in 
the child-labor situation to arouse some 
feeling against the execution of this 
child. It wil l be remembered that in a 
somewhat simila r case in Delawar e we 
were successful in securing the commu ­
tation of the death sentence to imprison ­
ment for life. W e are doing all we can 
in Arkansas, and we ask readers of TH E 
CRISI S to write to the Governor and 
protest against sending to the gallows 
a boy of seventeen. 
<J Th e Prosecutor of the Pleas i n Bergen County, N . J., writes in regard to 
the delayed Boli n case that the Gran d 
Jur y wil l be in session until the latter 
part of November, and that the case 
wil l "receive attention in the near 
future." 
q Th e Director of Publicit y last month 
lectured in Washingto n before three 
large audiences, addressed the Teach ­
ers' Associatio n of Gloucester, Mass., 
spoke at a Socialist meeting and at St. 
Mark's and Bethe l Churches, i n Ne w 
York , and also at the Whit e Ros e 
Mission . A t the Labo r Templ e he is 
scheduled to speak on "Th e Negr o and 
Organize d Labor, " on Octobe r 31, and 
he wil l address a large meeting of 
Socialists on a simila r subject on 
Novembe r 24. 
<J Th e Savannah Tribune , a colored 
paper, says: "Th e opening of the public 
schools last Monda y presented the same 
pitiable sight for Negr o children as has 
been the case for years. Hundred s of 
them wh o were clamorin g for cards of 
admittance on last Saturday, but were 
turned down on account of lack of accommodations, besieged the schools on 
Monda y morning , early, hopin g by some 
mere turn of fortune to be squeezed i n 
on opening day. But the few seats that 
were to be filled by the incomin g children were given out on the day of the 
issuance of entrance cards and they 
were sent away, the most of them to 
idly roam the streets and fall prey to 
the evil influences of the city. Ho w sad 
it is that year after year passes and still 
no greater school facilities are provided 
for the little black boys and girls. The y 
increase numerically at about the same 
rate as do the whit e children and the 
latter are provided wit h a new schoo l 
every five or six years, but the former, 
those wh o are fortunate enough to get 
accommodations, must be packed into 
the lowe r grades like so many sardines 
in a box ; in fact, in some rooms as 
many as four to the ordinar y two-seat 
bench." 
•J Th e above clippin g illustrates the con ­
dition of some of the public-school systems in the South for colored people. 
Th e association, in conjunction wit h the 
trustees of the Joh n F . Slater Fun d and 
Atlant a University , is studying this subject and hopes to have a printed report 
ready in a few months. 
•<I Mr . Thoma s Quinc y Ewing , the chairman of the Nationa l Association's lega l 
aid committee, has taken up the Okla ­
homa disfranchisement case, whic h is 
being fought by the people of that State. 
Th e case was lost in the lowe r courts, 
but is now being appealed to the Su ­
preme Court. Mr . Willia m Harrison , the 
lawye r of Oklahoma City , is at the head 
of the fight there. EDITORIA L 
TH E FIRS T EDITORIA L IN TH E 
FIRS T CRISIS, NOVEMBER , 1910. 
THE object of this publication is 
to set forth those facts and 
arguments which show the danger of race prejudice, particularly as 
manifested to-day toward colored people. It takes its name from the fact 
that the editors believe that this is a 
critical time in the history of the advancement of men. Catholicity and 
tolerance, reason and forbearance can 
to-day make the world-old dream of 
human brotherhood approach realization ; while bigotry and prejudice, emphasized race consciousness and force 
can repeat the awful history of the 
contact of nations and groups in the 
past. W e strive for this higher and 
broader vision of Peace and Good 
Will . 
The policy of TH E CRISI S wil l be 
simple and well defined. 
It will , first and foremost, be a 
newspaper: it wil l record important 
happenings and movements in the 
worl d which bear on the great problem of interracial relations, and especially those which affect the Negro 
American. 
Secondly, it wil l be a review of 
opinion and literature, recording 
briefly books, articles and important 
expressions of opinions in the white 
and colored press on the race problem. 
Thirdly, it wil l publish a few short 
articles. 
Finally, its editorial page will stand 
for the rights of men, irrespective of 
color or race, for the highest ideals 
of American democracy, and for reasonable but earnest and persistent attempt to gain these rights and realize 
these ideals. The magazine will be 
the organ of no clique or party and 
will avoid personal rancor of all sorts. 
In the absence of proof to the contrary it wil l assume honesty of purpose on the part of all men, Nort h 
and South, white and black. 
THANKSGIVING . 
WHEREAS , it is an old and 
goodly custom to give 
.thanks to Go d in the light 
of the harvest moon for His mercy 
and forbearance toward the Sons of 
Men ; therefore in the furtherance of 
this ancient rite, We , 
TH E CRISIS , 
By the Grace of God, Guardian of 
the liberties of ten dark millions in 
this land and of the countless millions 
over seas, Defender of the faith of the 
Fathers of this Recreant Realm, do 
herewith establish and acclaim a day 
of Rest and Thanksgiving in every 
Negro Home and Church and School 
on the last and thirtieth day of this 
month, and in the year of the freedom 
of the American slave the fortyseventh. 
O n this high Hol y day Let us thank 
God that we do not profess a religion 
of human brotherhood which we have 
not the moral courage to practice. 
Let us thank God that we are a 
poor people, toiling in the sweat of 
our faces for daily bread and heeding the thunder of Sinai: "Tho u shalt 
not steal" from the widow and orphan 
and laborer that we may flaunt in 
Jewels and Moto r Cars. 
Let us thank God that we are not 
soldiers or murderers, but have shown 
mercy to bird and beast and little children, to our fellow women and fellow 
men, and that on our dark hands 
lies no stain of blood outcrying for 
vengeance. 
Let us thank God that we have set 
no foot in the Seat of the Scornful, 
but joy to bow with the Persecuted 
of the earth, beneath the hand of Hi m 
who' will not always chide, neither 
wil l H e keep his anger forever. 
And , finally, Let us thank God that 
amid the ruin of our hopes and the 
shattering of our ideals, beneath the 
red hand of the lyncher, and with the 22 THE CRISIS AN ARAB SCHOOL IN NORTH AFRICA: 
Studying and Reciting the Mohammedan Koran. 
NOVEMBER, 1911 23 2 4 THE CRISIS 
laughter of our enemies without, chiming to the surrender of cowardice 
within, we yet can listen to the song 
of birds and see the sunlight on the 
hills and know that within lies a Soul 
unconquered and unconquerable. 
Thus in that day shall we thank 
Almighty God, and, having thanked 
Him , we shall further say: 
"Lord, what wilt Thou have us 
to do?" 
Speak, that the dark and serried 
hosts wil d with weird waiting at the 
armposts of Thine awful throne may 
know Th y will . Th y will be done, 
be it Wa r or Peace, Death, or, heaviest of all, the long and ever longer 
silence in which we bow to crucifixion 
and burning, to lying and insult, to 
the spoiling of our sons and ruin of 
our daughters—even this, O God : 
Thou art the Lord! 
Given under our hand and seal 
on the first anniversary of our 
founding. 
TH E CRISIS . 
TH E CENSUS . 
IT will be interesting to hear the 
American chorus when the population figures of the census of 
1910 are published. They wil l show 
naturally a large increase of whites 
and a small increase of colored people. 
Then we wil l have a long howl of glee 
from the Negro baiters, a sigh of delicious content from the Nort h and a 
puzzled silence from black folk. An d 
why ? 
The South wil l say: 
The decreased rate of increase of 
Negroes during the last decade was 
lower than ever before. It grows progressively lower. Therefore the Negro 
is dying out. 
The Nort h will say: 
It is providential—the physique of 
inferior races, etc., etc. 
Ye t what are the facts? They are 
as plain as day: 
The Negro population is increasing 
as fast as any normal modern folk. 
The increase of the whites in the 
United States is not normal. Their 
birth rate in every normal white country is decreasing far more rapidly 
than that of the Negro. The white 
America n situation is abnormal 
through an immense immigration. 
Eve n the so-called "native whites of 
native parents" are largely those whose 
grandparents migrated and those who 
forgot about the nativity of their 
parents. The mass of Southern native 
whites show all the marks of carelessness due to sudden economic affluence. 
Fro m an economic position below 
slaves they have in a single generation been raised almost to the modern wage level. The result is big 
families. 
Now , to compare this temporary 
abnormal increase of whites in America with the more normal increase of 
colored people is silly. The facts concerning colored folk are well known : 
They have practically no immigra ­
tion. 
They are under severe economic 
repression. 
They are under a mental and moral 
strain such as no group outside the 
Jews and Finns in Russia are to-day 
suffering. 
Despite this they are increasing 
as fast as the English, nearly as fast 
as the Germans and far faster than 
the French. They are without reasonable doubt increasing much faster 
than the original Ne w England stock 
or the Quaker stock or any of the 
earlier settlers of America . 
Wit h this large increase is going 
an economic betterment which is astounding when we remember the handicap, and is clearly shown in the 
agricultural and property statistics. 
And , finally, when all is said, remember that to-day there are ON E MIL ­
LIO N more colored people in Americ a 
than there were in 1900. 
Remember that, allowing for every 
probable decrease in birth rate in the 
future, Americans wil l live to see 
15,000,000 of colored people by 1950, 
and if the present tendencies persist 
these millions, because of their wealth 
and intelligence, will be less easily in ­
sulted, less easily scared into silence, 
less easily imposed upon by their own 
demagogues and, as Mr . Dooley has 
it, less "aisily lynched." EDITORIAL 25 
"SOCIA L EQUALITY. " 
WE are with great assiduity 
collecting practical definitions of "social equality." 
W e say "practical" because the theoretical argument has gone quite insane. 
Here comes this month, The Missionary Voice , a well-disposed organ of 
the Southern white Methodists. In 
reviewing a pamphlet published by 
Atlant a University the Voic e remarks 
concerning the editor that he is "well 
known as the leader of those Negroes 
who desire social equality for their 
race—a desire which crops out, here 
and there, through this pamphlet. The 
fact that no Southern white nor the 
wisest Southern blacks would sanction this desire for one moment does 
not lessen the impressiveness of this 
study of Negro effort to uplift the 
Negro race." 
Her e we have a faint clue as to 
what the South means by "social 
equality" with black folk. The pamphlet in question is entitled "Efforts 
for Social Betterment Amon g Negro 
Americans. " It treats of the charity 
of church and school, of women's 
clubs, homes, orphanages and hospitals, nurseries, settlements, etc. This 
does not look dangerous. Just where 
social equality "crops out" here it is 
hard to say, unless the South means 
by this phrase every effort of black 
men to be treated like other men. 
An d this is what the South does 
mean. Because it means this it 
plunges into either contradiction or 
helplessness when Southern religion 
strikes the color line. In this same 
magazine, for instance, there occurs 
the following passage: 
"The Methodist Episcopal Church, 
South, is doing very little directly for 
the Southern Negro socially, educationally or religiously. The Board of 
Education appropriates $14,000 annually to the schools of the colored 
Methodist Episcopal Church, but the 
only Southern white Methodists that 
have any personal relation to any of 
these schools are three teachers in 
Paine College. Educationally the 
Negro needs the personal touch of the 
Christian white man. If we want to 
do 'social service,' no better place to 
begin can be found than among the 
Negroes in our towns and cities." 
Does not the Missionary Voic e recognize that there can be no true "social service" or "personal touch" 
without "social equality?" Wa s it 
not the fact that Jesus Christ became 
the social equal of publicans, sinners 
and prostitutes that made Hi m the 
Great Teacher? Ho w much more is 
social equality with honest laborers 
who are striving upward absolutely 
necessary for those who would really 
uplift? This is the whole movement 
of the age, and the South is whirling 
in a back eddy, damming progress and 
trying at once to avoid hypocrisy andyet teach the black at arm's length 
with a club in one hand and a Bible 
in the other. 
This Missionary Voice is the voice 
of earnest, honest people. They are 
striving toward the light, but they 
have not reached it, and they are consequently illogical. The only logical 
folk in the South to-day are the Vardamans and Tillmans. They hold no 
illusions and know that you cannot 
treat a man as a man and as a beast 
at the same time. Therefore, they 
argue, treat Negroes as beasts. Whe n 
will logic come to the better South 
and enable it to arise and say: " I 
dare despise nothing human. I am not 
better than my black neighbor." 
CHRISTIANIT Y RAMPANT . 
HOW long is practical Christianity going to be able to survive its own hypocrisy? Ho w 
long is the world going to be able to 
profess a system of unselfish ethics, 
of lofty ideal, which it does not pretend to practice? If the augurs of 
Rome laughed at each other as they 
passed, how long at the present rate 
will Christian ministers be able to 
keep straight faces? 
A t least we trust for the good of 
the world that the Christian missionaries who, go to the Mohammedan 
lands in the future will go to learn 
rather than to teach. Wha t will they 
say to the latest exhibition of pure 
Christian brigandage on a weaker people? Wh y is Europe in general and 
Italy in particular falling afoul of 2 6 THE CRISIS 
Turkey ? Is it because of Turkis h 
misrule? No , Europe has been able 
to stand that a thousand years. No , 
but as soon as the revolution and uplift came—as soon as the young Turk s 
and the whole Mohammedan world 
showed signs of regeneration—then it 
was that the professed followers of 
the meek and lowly Jesus became 
shameless highwaymen. Austri a seized 
one juicy bit; Montenegro put her 
hand on another, but found it too hot. 
Whereupon her ruler's son-in-law, 
Kin g of Italy, saw a divine mission. 
He saw a chance to distract Italians 
from their own parlous condition by 
•a debauch of conquest. The Jingo 
yelled, the soldier burnished his tinsel, 
and the Church, which no Italian 
blandishments of peace had been able 
to subdue, hastened to put its divine 
blessing on murder. There have been 
some pretty shameless wars in modern 
history, but Italy's conquest of Tripoli 
tops them all. Civilization will yet 
pay for this murderous debauch, and 
Christianity hang her head in shame. 
"EZEKIELISM. " 
WE offer no apology for coining a new long needed Eng ­
lish word. W e simply pause 
to acknowledge our indebtedness to 
Miss Pratt and Miss Ovington and 
to recommend our readers to know 
the former's stories and to commit to 
memory the last chapter of "Half-a -
Man. " 
"Ezekielism" is the assumption that 
the faults of any particular individual 
are the innate faults of his group and 
that any virtues he may possess are 
peculiar to him and quite exceptional 
so far as his group are concerned. 
"Racial " faults and "exceptional" 
virtues are the rock foundation of 
"Ezekielism. " The person who proposes to "Ezekielize " begins invariably 
with a phrase: "No w / have no prejudice." By this phrase ye shall know 
them—"I have no prejudice—BUT. " 
That is the main statement and the 
ending is immaterial. It may be any 
one of these or a dozen others: 
I know a Negro who steals. 
I know a Jew who cheats. 
I know an Italian "black hander." 
I know a woman who is frivolous. 
I know a white man who led a mob. 
Afte r that persons afflicted with this 
form of hysteria proceed to "Ezekielize" and, lo ! we learn that: 
Negroes steal. 
Jews cheat. 
Italians murder. 
Irishmen drink. 
Wome n are silly. 
Whit e folk lynch. 
Yo u may expostulate : "Bu t J know 
one Negro—•—•" 
"Exception, " whispers your friend 
and the "Ezekielism" is complete. 
Now , such travesty on logic cannot 
be used on all races with impunity, 
because some races have sense enough 
to fight back. Whe n a Ne w Yor k 
chief of police ventured to charge Jews 
with a large share of the crime of 
the city he lost his job. Whe n Louisiana took to lynching Italians the 
United States Government paid a tidy 
sum; Boston and New Yor k used to 
find no words too contemptuous for 
Irishmen, but the Lor d or somebody 
else has touched their hearts recently; 
and so forth. 
To-day it is only the Negro who is 
the unquestionable victim of "Ezekielism. " I approach a school principal 
with my child, along with a dozen 
other races. To the Italian, the Jew, 
the Irishman, the Yankee, he says: 
"Ho w is Mabel ? Wha t of Bridget's 
arithmetic? Is Miria m strong? Can 
Assunta spell?" But, looking my child 
over, he says, reflectively: "Negroes 
have never done well in this school." 
I do not remind him that the school 
has had but two solitary little black 
waifs in twenty years. I do not lose my 
temper, for victims of "Ezekielism" 
are not responsible and one must allow 
for them. So I sigh and remark: 
"Indeed!" 
O r I present to a philanthropist the 
case of a decent woman who is refused food at Shanley's or Childs' or 
some other restaurant. H e looks at 
me disapprovingly and says, shaking 
a fat finger: 
"I've been trying to get a cook " 
Then I know that he has a case of 
"Ezekielism" and I go. A Year of Segregation in Baltimore 
B y W . ASHB1E HAWKIN S 
Fo r many years the great majority of 
the Negroes of Baltimor e had their 
homes, their churches and what busiW . ASHBI E HAWKIN S 
Wh o conducted the first law case 
ness places they possessed in the central, southern and eastern sections of 
the city. Her e and there in other sections—the western, northern-and northwestern—there were a few colored residents, of course, but their homes, wit h 
few exceptions, were on the narrow 
alleys or streets. 
Beginnin g in the early eighties a quiet 
movement to the more favored sections 
of the city, notably the northwestern, 
was begun and has continued until the 
present. It was greatly accelerated 
about 1898, when Sharp Street Memoria l 
Methodist Episcopa l Church , one of the 
oldest, if not the oldest, and most prominent of our city churches, began the 
erection at Dolphi n and Ettin g Streets 
of its handsome house of worship ; and 
a few years later when the colored high 
school was removed from the business 
section of the city to Dolphi n Street and 
Pennsylvani a Avenue , and when Unio n 
Baptist Church , one of the strongest 
religious forces in the community, dedicated its new home on Drui d Hil l Ave ­
nue, but a short distance from the other 
institutions just mentioned. 
Condemnatio n of large blocks of property in South Baltimor e for the use of 
the Baltimor e & Ohi o Railroa d Compan y 
compelled a great number of our people 
to seek homes elsewhere, and the most 
natural course was to follow this migra ­
tion to the northwest. Th e "invasion" 
of Russians and other foreigners in East 
Baltimor e in like -manner forced many 
of our people there to seek other quarters, and to the northwest they went 
also. Persons comin g to the city in 
search of business, educational or professional opportunities naturally sought 
the section occupied by the prosperous, 
and where the best houses were to be 
obtained. In East Baltimore , or Ol d 
Town , as it is popularly known , and 
the other older parts of the city the 
houses for the most part which were 
open to rent or purchase by our people 
were not always modern in their construction and appointment, and so when 
the great northwest wit h its splendid 
houses on wide streets, amid sanitary 
surroundings, were opened for rent and' 
purchase the opportunity was eagerly 
grasped. 
Anothe r cause for which the black man 
is in no way responsible lies in the 
opening and development of large suburban tracts for residential purposes by 
the middle class of whites. Their 
migration to the suburbs threw great 
olocks of handsome houses on the market, and they had to be disposed of to 
anybody, and often on any terms. Baltimore was for years without any great 
suburbs, but wit h the comin g and development of her cable and electric cars 
reaching out in every direction, these 
have grown with great rapidity and 
often at the expense of city market 
values. 
Drui d Hil l Avenue on the east, Dol ­
phin Street on the south, Gilmor e Street 
on the west and Nort h Avenue on the 
north, a territory covering approximately ten blocks square and comprisin g some of the city's chief residential 
streets, is the section mostly affected by 
this Negr o "invasion. " Mor e or less 
friction had been caused whenever a 
block was invaded—in several instances 
harsh measures were taken, such as 
breaking the window lights, putting tar 
on the white marble steps, and in other 
ways mutilating the property. In one 
or two cases the families movin g in were 
frightened away, but the great majority 
stuck, and after a short time the excitement wore off, the whites either movin g 
themselves or resigning gracefully to 
their fate. 2 8 THE CRISIS 
TH E OL D TYP E O F NEGR O ALLE Y 
It may be remarked in passing that 
no whites in business in this territory 
have moved on account of this "inva ­
sion " except where Negr o competition 
in the same line has made their business 
unprofitable. To-da y by far the greater 
number of grocery and notion stores, 
the saloons and the tailorin g and cleaning establishments are in the hands of 
white men, and they give no indication 
whatever of surrendering their opportunities to make money by these same 
people whose presence in a neighborhood seems so objectionable to many 
of their race. 
Drui d Hil l Avenue was, as I have just 
said, the eastern boundary line of this 
territory. Occasionally on streets withi n 
this section differences woul d arise when 
Negroe s would move into a block where 
only whites lived, but for the most part 
there seemed a tacit understanding that 
this section belonged to the Negr o and 
that he was not to be further disturbed 
in his possession of the same, provided 
he was content therewith, and woul d not 
further "encroach" on the whites. 
One fine morning , however, in the 
month of June, 1910, the residents of 
the 1800 block of McCullo h Street, east 
of Drui d Hil l Avenue , woke up to the 
knowledge that a house therein had been 
purchased by a colored man, and pretty 
soon after they witnessed the disquieting spectacle of a colored family mov ­
ing in. It made no difference that the 
head of this family was a lawye r in 
good standing at the bar of this city, 
that he is. a graduate of Yal e University , 
that the wife is an educated woman , a 
high school graduate, and before her 
marriage a teacher of ability in the State 
of Indiana ; that, i n short, this was a 
cultured and educated family strivin g to 
live decently and to rear their children 
in as good environments as they could 
secure. 
Immediately a call was issued for a 
meeting of the greatly offended citizens, 
most of who m didn't own the property 
they occupied, nor any other, and wit h 
this start for weeks and months these 
hitherto obscure personages managed to 
keep themselves in the limelight by their 
appeals to race prejudice, their indigna ­
tion meetings and newspaper interviews, 
by connivin g at the conduct of hordes of 
half-grown and badly raised youn g men, 
wh o sought all means of harassing or 
embarrassing this family and their visitors. Tha t actual harm to life and limb 
was not sustained by some, if not all the 
members of his family, is due largely to 
the patient care of the police officers on 
this beat, wh o knew the conditions of 
the neighborhood well, and who, because 
of this knowledge , were enabled to subdue a number of youn g ruffians who had 
the nerve to do rash acts, but hadn't 
the courage to answer for them afterward. 
Inspired by this agitation and the 
opportunity it gave for achieving a little 
popularity, a briefless lawye r named 
Milto n Dashiell and George W . West, 
a membe r of the Cit y Council, conceived A YEAR OF SEGREGATION IN BALTIMORE 2 9 
TH E NE W TYP E O F NEGR O HOM E 
the West Segregation Law , meant to 
prevent any further invasions of this 
character. This law, briefly stated, provided a penalty for any black man who 
woul d move into, or attempt to occupy, 
a house in a block where 51 per cent, 
or mor e of the houses therein were 
occupied by whites, and vice versa. It 
undertook also to punish the owner or 
agent of the property renting it. Excep ­
tion was made in the case of servants. N o 
attempt was made to restrain the sale 
or purchase of property anywhere or to 
anybody. Afte r a lon g and tedious 
course through the Cit y Council, attended by dramatic hearings of those favorin g and those opposing the measure, 
it was finally adopted and signed by 
Mayo r Mahoo l on Decembe r 10, 1910. 
In a very short time the first "arrest" 
was made for violation thereof. I use 
the wor d arrest, but in a strictly legal 
sense there was no arrest. Th e police 
officers with a caution, inspired by fear 
of future suits for false arrest, satisfied 
themselves, if not the law, by simply 
notifying the accused to appear at a 
stated time at the station house. In less 
than a mont h there were just twenty-six 
of these cases sent to court, and in no 
instance was there the slightest effort 
to treat those people as criminals. T o 
emphasize possibly the difference between the races in the matter, one justice of the peace, under my observation, 
finding that the white agent had no 
property, released him on his own recognizance, and then took him as bondsman for his colored tenant. 
Ther e were some humorous incidents 
connected with the execution of the law 
which, as afterward proved, was most 
unskilfully drawn. A white person who 
had temporarily removed from his home 
while needed repairs were being made 
to the same found, upon attempting to 
return, that this wonderful law had 
placed his house in a block 51 per cent, 
colored, and that to return to his own 
home woul d make him a criminal, subject to fine and imprisonment. 
I n a short time, less than a month, 
the first case under the law was heard 
on demurrer before Judges Harlan d and 
Duffy of the Supreme Bench of this city, 
and without going into the merits of 
such legislation this law was declared 
ineffective and void because it was in ­
accurately drawn. "Stets" were entered 
by the State's Attorne y in all the other 
"cases" on the docket in the Crimina l 
Court, and .thus ended the first chapter 
in the attempt to segregate the Negroes 
of Baltimore . 
Th e partizans of this wron g were not, 
however, to be outdone by such a thing 
as an adverse court decision; it seemed 
to inspire them with a new determination to push further their wa r into 
Africa . Indeed, they affected to see in 
the court's decision a method of procedure, and forthwith the legislative 30 THE CRISIS 
A WHIT E CHURC H 
Bought by Negroes 
father of the bill dropped the author of 
the first measure to seek the aid and 
assistance of more eminent counsel, and 
the Hon . Willia m L . Marbur y was retained to draw another law. Milto n 
Dashiell, however, saw too much of 
glory and a possible clientage for himself in the matter to allow West or anybody else to drop him thus unceremoniously, and so in due time he appeared 
at the door of the Cit y Council armed 
with another measure and seeking its 
introduction therein. H e was not successful in this, but he called the attention of West and his followers to the 
possibility of a break in the ranks of the 
"segregationists," and of all things, not 
desiring this, differences were soon 
patched up and the public duly informed 
that the Hon . Milto n Dashiell and the 
Hon . Willia m L . Marbur y were collaborating in their efforts to evolve a law 
that woul d stand the tests of the courts. 
Afte r some considerable delay, evidencing the trouble these distinguished 
draughtsmen had in getting together a 
measure satisfactory to themselves, the 
new ordinance was presented to the Cit y 
Council and was duly enacted Apri l 7, 
1911. It differs from the other in that 
the title more aptly conforms to the constitutional requirements; the meanin g of 
the term "block " is defined wit h greater 
exactness, and there is a large number 
of legal phrases thrown in to give it 
professional color and distinction, but 
it is the opinion of both lawyers and 
laymen that it is as illega l as the former, 
and whil e skilfully drawn it is meaningless and ineffective. Its author is a 
rampant Negr o hater, and like so many 
others of his kin d he has often allowed 
his prejudices against us to blind him to 
the force and effect of a legal term. 
Shortl y after the passage of the second ordinance it was discovered that 
one of the rules of the Cit y Counci l had 
been overlooked or violated, and to make 
assurance doubly sure it was reintroduced in the Council, passed again by a 
strict party vote—all the Democrats voting for it and all the Republicans against 
it, and on Ma y IS, as one of the last acts 
of his administration of the city's affairs, 
Mayo r Mahoo l affixed his signature to 
it, and for the third time this infamous 
measure took its place amon g our loca l 
statutes. 
T o date two "arrests" have been made 
under the law, one of the victims dismissed and the other awaits tria l at the 
present term of the Crimina l Court. 
Twelv e Negr o families, instead of one, 
are livin g in the 1800 block of McCul -
loh Street, the center of the disturbance. 
Te n idle houses in the same block and 
hundreds in other "mixed " blocks are 
eating up their values in taxes, groun d 
rent, insurance, etc., waitin g for white 
tenants wh o won't come, and colored 
tenants wh o are doubtful about any attempt on their part to test the merits of 
the new Segregation Law . On e small 
religious organization has been forced 
by the police to cease holdin g their services in a "white " block, and a civil suit 
involvin g their rights in this matter is 
likel y to be called for tria l any day. Th e 
city is full of so-called "mixe d blocks, " 
where whites and blacks can both live, 
or move at random, to the end of time, 
and nobody be any the better or worse. 
U p to this time the West Segregation 
La w has caused little hardship to any 
Negro, is givin g him trifling concern and 
no worry , but on the contrary is causing 
loss to many white property owners wh o 
can't sell or rent their property for want 
of white buyers or tenants, and by the 
refusal of responsible Negroe s to take 
up the burden of testing the validit y of 
the law, leaving that expensive luxur y 
to those wh o either caused its passage 
or indifferently sat by whil e the enemies of both whites and blacks were 
pushing it through the Cit y Council. SOM E HEADLINE S 
[The Crow n is a paper published in 
Newark , N . J., "i n the interests of practical religion. " Its editor interprets this 
mission to include attacking race prejudice on every occasion, and we have before this quoted his burnin g and witty 
editorials. H e recently published an extremely clever and suggestive essay on 
the psychology of newspaper headlines, 
whic h we reproduce almost in full.] 
Th e daily papers always call attention 
to the fact that a crime was committed 
by a Negro . This is quite right. It is a 
matter of social interest to know how 
crime is distributed between whites and 
blacks, as also between native born and 
foreign born. It is in the way of calling 
attention to the color of the crime that 
the wron g lies. 
Th e newspaper method of indicating 
this is to say that the crimina l is a 
Negro , if he is, but if he is a white man 
to say nothing about his color, leaving 
that to be inferred. This course is 
adopted because there are so many more 
whites than Negroes, and hence it is necessary to print the wor d "Negro " or "colored" much less often than it woul d 
the wor d "white. " Th e rule would be a 
good one. if people woul d only apply it 
rightly. Bu t they do not, and they cannot be taught to do it. 
Her e is how it work s out: Th e reader 
sees after the name of a lawbreaker the 
wor d "Negro " or "colored. " H e sees this 
wor d day after day, and almost always 
associated with crime. H e never sees 
the wor d "white " in this relation. An d 
thus little by little, without his being 
aware of it, the impression is made on 
his min d that the Negr o is a great criminal. Th e white murderer is merged with 
the crimina l class, whereas the Negro 
murdere r is identified, not with the nondescript crimina l class, but with the 
Negr o race. Thu s the Negr o race is 
made to bear the odium of its crime, 
whic h is just; but the white race is relieved of the odium of its crime, which 
is unjust. 
Th e disadvantage of the Negr o is that 
in apportioning crime between whites 
and blacks only an act of the senses, 
namely, of the sight, is required by the 
reader of the newspaper to connect the 
Negr o wit h crime ; whereas in the case 
of the white a mental act is needed. Ad ­
vertisers well understand the value of a 
repeated appeal to the eye, and that is 
why, month after month, they repeat the 
catchy phrase or picture. Th e min d insensibly becomes habituated to it. So, 
too, when newspapers day after day repeat Negr o and crime, Negr o and burglar, Negr o and murder, Negr o and 
assault, the min d of the reader automatically comes to regard the Negr o as 
spending his time in committin g crime. 
Take it in another field. Suppose that 
the newspapers, thought it important to 
indicate the division of crime between 
Protestants and Catholic s (never min d 
the Jews just now). An d suppose that 
because the Catholics are so much fewer 
the papers should do as they do with 
the Negro, that is, indicate the wor d 
Catholic , but leave the wor d Protestant 
to be inferred. Woul d any papers dare 
do this? An d wh y not? Because the 
Catholic s woul d not stand it; and they 
woul d be right. N o matter what the 
facts, people woul d come to think of 
Catholics as crimina l above others. "Th e 
papers," they would say, "are full of 
crimes by Catholics. " If they were reminded that their own Catholi c friends 
and acquaintances were not criminals—• 
why, those are exceptions—the rule still 
holds that Catholic s are criminals. 
No w what is the remedy? Fo r one 
thing, it can be assumed that newspapers 
wil l continue to apportion crime between 
white and black people. But let it be 
done fairly. Le t us see how this suggestion woul d wor k out. I take this 
morning's paper, and scan the items of 
crimes. A s it happens, on this Jul y 5, 
there is not a single offence imputed to 
a Negro. Evidentl y they spent Independence Da y becomingly. Ever y crime 
reported on that day was committed by 
a white man. Ye t the reader woul d never 
think of this significant fact, simply because his attention is not called to it. 
But suppose it were. Suppose that after 
the name of each person accused of 
wrongdoin g in the newspaper this morn ­
ing the word "white " should follow, as 
the wor d "Negro " or "colored" would. 
Her e is how the record would look: 
JANITO R (WHITE ) TAKE S LIF E 
O F TENANT . 
YOUT H (WHITE ) WANTONL Y 
SLAY S BOY . 
MA N (WHITE ) PUT S FATA L BUL ­
LE T INT O RIVA L WH O DE ­
FENDE D GIRL' S NAME . 
SI X O N STOO P SHO T B Y MA N 
(WHITE ) ACROS S STREET . 
TW O BURGLAR S (WHITE ) HI T I N 
FURIOU S BATTL E WIT H 
POLICE . 32 
CROW D ALMOS T KILL S THU G 
(WHITE ) AFTE R ATTACK . 
ATTACKE D B Y ROUGH S (WHITE ) 
A VISITO R (WHITE ) FRO M OU T 
O F TOW N MORTALL Y WOUND S 
ONLOOKER . 
GOVERNMEN T AFTE R SMUG ­
GLER S (WHITE) . 
OFFER S T O EXPOS E BAN D O F 
ROBBER S (WHITE ) I F 
RELEASED . 
HIG H JINK S B Y HUSBAN D 
(WHITE ) ALLEGE D B Y 
WIFE . 
KILLE D FRIEN D WH O SPLASHE D 
HI M (WHITE) . 
FIN D TRAI L O F TW O O F WEI -
GEL S MURDERER S (WHITE) . 
YEGG S (WHITE ) BLO W SAF E I N 
BALDWIN . 
SHOOT S DETECTIV E FOU R TIME S 
AN D IS SHO T TWIC E HIM - . 
SEL F (WHITE) . 
TW O BURGLAR S (WHITE ) AR E 
SHO T I N BATTL E WIT H 
POLICEMAN . 
No w the comment of the .reader on 
these news items, so set forth, woul d be: 
"Ho w good the colored people were yesterday. Th e whites seem to have been 
makin g all the trouble." Th e Negroes 
woul d receive credit for their clean record, as they should. A s it is, nobody 
gives them a thought; and nobody gives 
them a thought except when they go 
wrong ; and then all are blamed for the 
sin of a few. 
The Nex t Day.—This morning's paper, 
has no Negr o crime reported either! 
This is interesting. Now . as for yesterday's crimina l chronicle, so for to-day's 
let us put it in plain words that these 
supposed criminals were white, as it 
would be plainly set forth that they were 
black: 
SWINDL E CHARGE D AGAINS T 
TW O ME N (WHITE ) O F GOO D 
FAMILY . 
ECHOE S O F GRAF T (B Y WHIT E 
MEN ) FOLLO W DISCHARG E 
O F CIT Y FIREWORKS . 
BURGLA R (WHITE ) SO N O F BANK ­
E R ADMIT S LOOTIN G EIGHT ­
EE N HOMES . 
FASHIONABL E DAKOT A SCEN E 
O F FIERC E FIGH T (B Y 
WHITES) . 
SEE S SO N (WHITE ) JAILE D FO R 
LIFE . 
REICHMAN N (WHITE ) IS OU T O N 
BAIL . 
WOMA N LAND S THIE F (WHITE ) 
AFTE R A HAR D FIGHT . 
EX-POLICEMA N (WHITE ) CAUGH T 
PASSIN G "PHONY " CHECK . 
THE CRISIS 
PLO T (B Y WHITES ) T O KIDNA P 
MRS . JENKIN S A SA D FAILURE . 
BLACK-HAN D LETTE R SEN T T O 
OI L MAGNAT E B Y DETEC ­
TIV E (WHITE) . 
HI S PICTUR E HE R WEAPO N 
(BOT H WHITE) . 
Nex t Day.—Agai n the paper has no 
item of crime by a Negro . Wha t is the 
matter? Hav e they struck? Not, at 
least, to hurt anybody. 
Her e is the polic e record for the day: 
MILLIONAIR E HOTE L PROPRIE ­
TO R AN D TH E TW O WOME N 
• CONFRON T EAC H OTHE R 
. (AL L WHITE) . 
MA N (WHITE ) FINE D FO R KISS ­
IN G GIRL . 
ROBBER S (WHITE ) BIN D AN D 
GA G A WOMAN . 
GRAF T I N STAT E PRISON S (B Y 
WHITES) . 
MEA T PACKER S (WHITE ) AR ­
RAIGNED . 
POLIC E CAPTAI N (WHITE ) LIE S 
AN D IS DEGRADED . 
HIGH-BOR N THIE F (WHITE ) HA S 
TRUN K FUL L O F LOV E 
LETTERS . 
HUSBAND S (WHITE ) DOIN G TIM E 
APPEA L T O SPOUSES . 
WIL L TAK E BAC K RUNAWA Y 
WIF E (WHITE) . 
Th e Nex t Day.—An d still no Negr o 
wrongdoin g in the paper! This virtue is 
becoming monotonous. If it were not 
for the whites, the papers woul d not be 
wort h reading. Her e is yesterday's white 
list: 
GE M SMUGGLIN G (WHITE) . 
MURDE R AN D SUICID E I N A BAL ­
LOO N (BOT H WHITE) . 
SUE S FO R DIVORC E (BOT H 
WHITE) . 
BOARDE R (WHITE ) ARRESTE D A S 
THIEF . 
WITNES S ABDUCTE D AN D MAD E 
DRUN K (AL L CONCERNE D 
WHITE) . 
POLIC E CLUBBE R (WHITE ) T O 
PRISON . 
BURGLAR' S (WHITE ) CLEA N 
SWEEP . 
INVESTMEN T FAKER S (WHITE) . 
AUTOIS T (WHITE ) BREAK S A 
MAN' S LEG . 
POLICEMA N (WHITE ) ACCUSE D 
O F EXTORTION . 
NE W DIVORC E COMPLAIN T 
(BOT H PARTIE S WHITE) . 
FATHE R (WHITE ) DESERT S 
MOTHERLES S CHILDREN . 
TO O FON D O F "NIECES " (AL L 
CONCERNE D WHITE) . WOMEN' S CLUB S 
COLORED AMERICAN WOMEN By Dr. SUSAN M. STEWARD 
[Fro m a paper read before the Races Congress.] 
Th e Afro-America n wome n have distinguished themselves along so many 
lines that there is not time for me to 
tell yo u in detail what they have accomplished. Onl y a very few of the wome n 
DR . S. M . STEWAR D 
can be named as the "beacon lights " 
of the groups they represent. 
In literature our first known write r of 
a book was Phyllis Wheatley, a native 
Africa n woman, brought to Americ a in 
1761. Bein g a poet by nature, placed 
under conditions for the best physical, 
mental and mora l development, a few 
years later she astonished the literary 
people of Americ a and Europ e with her 
wonderful intellectual ability. He r book, 
"Poems on Variou s Subjects, Religious 
and Moral, " was published in Londo n in 
1773, and was dedicated to the Countess 
of Huntingdon . 
A lon g period intervened between the 
givin g of this volume to the worl d by 
Phyllis Wheatle y and the appearance of 
another. Th e next distinguished write r 
was Mrs. France s Elle n Watkin s Harper, 
wh o published a book of poems of high 
order in 1868. She was a great temperance lecturer and an enthusiastic suffragist. Durin g this lon g interval, however, the wor k of many of our women 
writers found ready acceptance at the 
hands of the publishers of the Atlanti c 
Monthl y and of Mr. Garrison's paper, 
The Liberator. 
A book recently published by one of 
our women is entitled "Th e Wor k of 
the Afro-America n Women. " "It is 
worth y of note, as well as of congratulation, that colored women are makinggreat advancement in literary ventures. 
Whe n the women of any race become 
intelligent and active in literary pursuits 
that race has acquired the greatest guarantee of success." Thu s writes Benjami n F . Lee , D . D., bishop of the A . M . E . 
Church , in appreciation of this book 
written by Mrs. N.- F . Mossell of Phila ­
delphia. 
Man y women have made their mark 
in journalism. Some have edited paupers 
of their own, in the interest of the race, 
and others have been employed in the 
editorial departments of papers belonging entirely to the white race, as the 
Philadelphi a Press, Golden Day s and the 
Bosto n Herald . 
Th e most widely known of these 
journalists is Mrs. Ida B. Wells Barnett. 
Because of her bold defence of the men 
of the race and her denunciations of 
lynchin g as carried on in the Southern 
States, her paper, Fre e Speech, was destroyed, and she was banished from her 
home in Memphis, Tenn . Throug h her 
lectures in the Nort h and in Europe she 
aroused a sympathy and a sentiment that 
brought into existence the followin g societies: Th e Society for the Recognition 
of the Brotherhood of Ma n in Scotland, 
the Anti-Lynchin g Committe e in Eng ­
land and in Americ a the Centra l Execu ­
tive Council of America . Th e members 
of these societies were among the most 
distinguished men and women in Europe 
and America . 
A s lecturers we have had, and now 
have, women of strong character and intellectual ability. Ou r brightest lights 
in this field, known in Europe as well 
as America , are Miss Halli e Q. Brown , 
a graduate of Wilberforc e University , 
Ohio ; Mrs. Amand a Smith, and Mrs. 
Mar y Churc h Terrell, a graduate of 
Oberli n College, Ohio . 
Ther e are said to be 25,000 colored 
teachers in the Unite d States, and of 
this number the women are largely in the 
majority. In many cities of the Nort h 
are "mixe d schools," where the teachers 
and pupils both are white and colored. 3 4 THE CRISIS 
Th e agitation that brought about the 
mixe d schools in the city of Ne w Yor k 
was the demand on the part of the colored teachers for equal rights for teachers as well as for pupils. Mrs. S. J . 
Garnet, the principa l of No . 81, was the 
prime move r in this cause. 
Ou r women are represented in the 
trades and professions. Th e first colored 
youn g woma n in the Unite d States to 
graduate in medicine was Miss Susan M . 
Smith , of Brooklyn , N . Y. , wh o graduated in 1870, as valedictorian of her class. 
No w we can number nearly one hundred 
wome n physicians. Ther e are many hundred trained nurses, some pharmacists 
and dentists, a few lawyers, and even 
some ministers. 
Ther e are man y wome n wh o rank as 
stars in the musica l world , both vocalists 
and instrumentalists. Tw o of these are 
said to have reached the "top round " of 
the ladder—Madame Selik a and Ma ­
dame Hackley , both know n in Europ e 
as well as America . 
I have tried to hastily tell yo u of the 
progress of our women , not yet fifty 
years away from slavery. Th e club spirit 
prevails amon g them, as well as amon g 
the wome n of the Caucasian race, and 
they are workin g for the intellectual and 
mora l uplifting of the race, having taken 
as their motto : "Liftin g as we climb. " 
Wha t may they not accomplish wit h 
the infusion and enthusiasm of such a 
spirit. 
TH E BURDE N 
COLORE D ME N LYNCHE D WITH ­
OU T TRIAL . 
1885.. 
1886.. 
1887.. 
1888,. 
1889.. 
1890.. 
1891.. 
1892.. 
1893.. 
1894.. 
1895.. 
1896.. 
1897.. 
78 
71 
80 
95 
95 
90 
121 
155 
154 
134 
112 
80 
122 
1898. 
1899. 
1900. 
1901. 
1902. 
1903. 
1904. 
1905. 
1906. 
1907. 
1908. 
1909. 
1910. 
102 
84 
107 
107 
86 
86 
83 
61 
64 
oO 
93 
73 
05 
Tota l 2.458 
TH E GROWT H O F PREJUDICE . 
A few weeks ago Mr . Joseph Braxton , 
a youn g colored man of Harrisburg , 
Pa., applied for admission to Worceste r 
Academy, in Massachusetts, of which Mr. 
D . W . Abercrombi e is president, in order 
to prepare for Brow n University . Afte r 
the usual correspondence the youn g man 
presented himself. H e was sent away 
with the followin g letter (the italics are 
ours): 
" I regret very much the unfortunate 
circumstance whic h makes it necessary 
to write this letter to you. You r son 
arrived here last night, and, as yo u must 
know, we were very much surprised to 
find that he is a colored boy. In all 
our correspondence wit h you, and wit h 
Mr . Greene, no mention has ever been 
made of this fact. If you had told us 
that the boy is a Negr o we should have 
explained our necessary conditions, and 
this woul d have prevented the boy's trip 
to Worcester, A t several times in the 
history of the Worcester Academy Negroes have been admitted to the school, 
and a number of them have done well, 
and been an honor to themselves, their 
race and this school, but the personnel 
of the student body has changed, 
especially in the last few years, and it 
would be unwise at the present time to 
admit Negroes. This is not at all on 
account of prejudice against the race, or 
against any one Negr o personally. It 
is the wisest course for us to pursue, 
and it is a polic y whic h must be strictly 
adhered to. A s I said in the beginning, 
1 am exceedingly sorry that you r son 
took the trip to Worcester, but under 
the circumstances I think we are blameless. H e seems to think that the in ­
formation that he was a Negr o failed 
to reach us through a misunderstanding 
on the part of yo u and Mr . Greene. I 
like the boy's appearance and spirit, as 
well as his courage, and I wis h for him 
only the greatest success." 
TH E CONTRACTO R AN D TH E 
BELLBOY . 
A most interesting tale comes from 
Cincinnati. One of the city's great newspapers printed a story wit h these headlines : 
AWOK E 
To Find Negro in Bed. 
Beside Her and Husband—Thrilling 
Experience of Contractor's Wife 
at the Imperial Hotel. 
Th e tale went on to tell how a policeman, "answering calls for help, " ran to 
the hotel and saved a certain Mrs. 
McCormic k from "one of the boldest 
attempts to assault ever brought to the 
attention of the police. " Durin g this 
adventure, the newspaper said, Mr . Mc ­
Cormic k "continued to sleep," but his THE BURDEN 35 
indignation when finally aroused "knew 
no bounds, and he at once started out 
to hunt for the colored man to kil l 
him. " 
Th e Negr o in question, oddly enough, 
was not lynched—is the white race becomin g spiritless?—but was brought into 
court the next morning . It appears that 
Mr . McCormic k had been very drunk 
and the colored man had brought him 
to his room. H e went on an errand 
for the man and returned wit h a message. H e did not even enter the room. 
Ther e were no screams for help—the 
woma n accused him of tryin g to enter 
the room and he showed his innocence 
so clearly that he was at once freed 
of the charge. But the headlines, no 
doubt, did their share in the wor k of 
arousing the lynchin g spirit. 
•J A white woman, a nurse in a good 
family in Cincinnati, was arrested in company with a colored man, a butler, for 
"loitering. " The y said that the woman, 
wh o was a stranger in the city, had 
lost her way and that the colored man, to 
whom she had appealed for information, 
was taking her to the car. N o evidence 
was brought forward to show that they 
were anything but perfectly respectable. 
WHA T T O REA D 
BOOKS . 
Demarest,Virginia—"Nobody's. " Harper. 
Drummond , Ma y Harvey—"Th e Story 
of Quamin. " Putnam. 
This is a sketch of the life of a 
Negr o boy from infancy to maturity 
as he is found in Jamaic a and other 
West Indian islands. 
D u Bois, W . E . B.—"Th e Quest of the 
Silve r Fleece. " McClurg . 
Fite , Emerso n David—"Th e Presidentia l 
Campaig n of 1860." Macmillan . 
Morton , E.—"Lincoln , Love r of Man ­
kind. " Moffat. 
Roby , M.—"M y Adventure s in the 
Congo. " Longmans. 
Semple, Elle n Churchill—"Th e Influence of Geographi c Environment. " 
Holt . 
Swift, Lindsay—"Willia m Lloy d Garrison." Jacobs. 
Washington , Booke r T.—"M y Large r 
Education. " Doubleday, Page. 
Williams, A . D.—"Prais e of Lincoln. " 
Bobbs-Merrill . 
Wilson , Davi d Alec—"East and West. " 
Methuen . 
"East and West " is a collection of 
notes made by the write r during 
twenty-five years of service in the 
Indian Civi l Service in Burma . Mr . 
Wilso n suggests that social intercourse between the races should be 
restricted to the intelligent people of 
both sides. 
PERIODICALS . 
"Alcoho l in Africa. " Sir Harr y H . John ­
ston. Th e Nineteenth Century and 
After, September. 
" A Paw n in the Struggle for Freedom. " 
Ra y Stannard Baker. American , September. 
"Concernin g Prejudice. " Scott Nearing. 
Everybody's, September. 
"Fou r Giants in Brobdingnag. " Mar k 
F . Wilcox . Century, September. 
"Frenchma n and German in Africa. " 
Edga r Alle n Forbes. Review of Re ­
views, September. 
"Genera l Grant's Letters to General 
Beale. " Scribner's, October. 
"Genera l Sherman on His Ow n Record : 
Some Unpublished Comments. " Ed ­
ited by Jared W . Young . Atlantic , 
September. 
"Note s on Some Tribe s of Britis h Cen ­
tral Africa. " H . S. Stannus. Journa l 
of the Roya l Anthropologica l Institute 
of Great Britai n and Ireland, July to 
December, 1910. 
"Race and Colou r Prejudice in India. " 
W . B. Oldham. Th e Imperia l and 
Asiati c Quarterly Review, July. 
"Some Rights of College Students." 
Thaddeus P. Thomas. Independent, 
September 28. 
"The Dre d Scott Decision in the Ligh t 
of Contemporar y Lega l Doctrines. " 
Edwar d S. Corwin . Th e America n 
Historica l Review, October. 
"The Fate of the Lincol n Conspirators. " 
John A . Gray. McClure's, October. 
"Th e Fifteenth Amendment. " Independent, September 21. 
"Th e Littl e Hoppin g Frog. " Luc y 
Pratt. Atlantic , September. 
"Th e Myster y of Zimbabwe. " Frederick 
A . Edwards, F . R. G. S. Asiati c Quarterly Review, July. 
"Th e Story of the Civi l Wa r Tol d by 
Photographs. " Gen. Horati o C. King . 
Review of Reviews, October. 
"Th e Trick-Doctor. " Thoma s Nelson 
Page. Scribner's, September. 
"Tryin g to Solve the World's Problems 
of Race. " Saint Niha l Singh. Review 
of Reviews, September. 
"Th e Universa l Races Congress. " Ar ­
thur Ransom. Westminste r Review, 
September. 
"Unde r the Yoke. " H . W . Nevinson . 
Nort h America n Review, August. 
"Whe n Mammy's Away. " Ada m Breede. 
McClure's, October. 36 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Tw o Negro men came up to the outskirts 
of a crowd where Senator Bailey was 
making a campaign speech. Afte r listening 
to the speech for about ten minutes, one 
of them turned to his companion and 
asked: 
"Wh o am dat man, Sambo?" 
"A h don't know what his name am," 
Sambo replied, "but he certainly do recommen' hisself mos' highly."—Success. 
A n Imposte r ! 
This man, Eugene 
Howard, is swindling persons in Okla -
homa, Kansas and 
Texas by fraudulently representing 
ORIENTA L 
SACHE T 
POWDE R 
Fragrant and Lasting . 
Pu t u p i n attractiv e 
glass bottle s wit h alu ­
minu m scre w tops. 
Seve n odors to choos e 
from : Honeysuckle , 
Mignonette , Violet , 
Bouquet , Trefl e Incarnat , Lilac , Ros e Sweet . 
Pric e pe r bottle , 25c , 
maile d postpaid . 
Pric e Lis t of Toile t 
Good s free . 
Agents Wanted. 
ALEXANDE R SPECIALT Y CO . 
150 Nassau Street New Yor k Cit y 
Bom. 2220 Cen. 6322 
Van Noy Printing Go. 
100 Line n Finis h Cards by Mail , 50c. 
COMMERCIA L PRINTIN G 
SOCIET Y PRINTIN G 
BOO K AN D JO B PRINTIN G 
2315 MARKE T ST . ST . LOUIS , MO . 
If you are honest, ambitious and determined to succeed in business—a business absolutely your own—we 
can help you. We will teach you by mail the secrets of 
Real Estate, Brokerage and Insurance business, list pro- • 
perties and propositions with and for you to handle so' 
you can make money from the very start. 
We Teach You All the Secrets 
of Real Estate, Brokerage 
and Insurance Business 
We Instruct You In 
Salesmanship. 
Advertising:. 
Office System. 
Real Estate-Titles. 
Conveyancing. 
How to List Properties. 
How to Judge Values. 
How to Option Properties. 
How to Find Prospective Customers. 
How to Close Deals. 
How to Secure Loans. 
How to Get Insurance Business. 
How to Organize and Finance Corporations. In factt 
all tne essential secrets known to and practiced by the 
successful broker and promoter. 
We also give you a thorough Commercial Law Course, 
enabling you to meet for yourself and overcome difficulties 
that may arise. In short, we start you on the road to success. 
Success and Independence 
Mr. Gates says: "I started into this business without 
capital and have built up one of the most successful 
agencies in Vermont." Mr. Dunbar of Kansas says: "I 
have cleared up for myself during the year (his first 
year) over $9,000." Mr. Reynaud of Texas says: "I have 
done remarkably well for a beginner, having made over 
$6,500 in commissions since I started, nine months ago." 
Our 64-page book, sent free, tells you how to 
start—a postal card will bring it—write today, 
INTERNATIONA L REALT Y CORP. , 
619 Manhatta n Bldg Chicago , III. 
REA D TH E CLASSIFIE D 
ADVERTISEMENT S O N 
PAGE S 39, 40 AN D 41. 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.00 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
Mention TH B CRISIS . 
TH E CRISI S and collecting subscnptions. Information leading to 
bis arrest will be rewarded. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 3 7 
WHER E T O STO P 
Cj[ Ou r readers are urged to use these hotels and stopping places. 
The y are modern in every sense, and the traveling public is assured 
comfort and efficient service. 
<J Fo r detailed information concerning resorts and hotels write 
The Trave l Editor of The Crisis, 20 Vesey St., Ne w Yor k 
NEW YORK CITY 
Marshall's Hotel 127-129 West 53d Street 
NEW YOR K CITY 
COMFORT— Large , airy rooms, .offering genuine home comforts plus the 
conveniences and privileges of a modern hotel. 
SERVICE— I n the hotel and dinin g room the "Marshall " service is an exceptional feature, whic h assures comfort and pleasure for our patrons. 
Restaurant open all night. Cuisine to satisfy the most discriminating 
VOCA L AN D INSTRUMENTA L MUSI C EVER Y EVENIN G 
Breakfast, 7:30 to 12:30, 30c. Luncheon , 12:30 to 3, 30c. Dinner, 6 to 8, 35c. 
Special Cours e Dinne r Ever y Sunday and Holidays, 50c. 
Telephones 4693 - 4694 Columbus J . L . MARSHALL , Proprietor 
TH E CLIF F HOUS E 
253 WES T 134T H STREE T 
NEWL Y OPENE D 
Ideal home for gentlemen. Laundry , darning 
and tailoring done on premises, and included in 
rent for room. 
Ever y modern convenience. 
MRS . W . E . PERKINS , Prop. 
'Phone Chelsea 2957 
TH E TE N EYC K HOUS E 
232 WES T 20T H STREE T 
Between 7th and 8th Avenue s NE W YOR K 
Neatly Furnishe d Rooms for Permanent 
or Transient Guests by Da y or Week 
MBS . THOMA S L . TE N EYCK , Proprietress 
" A quiet place for quiet people to dine " 
"TH E BRADFORD " 
73 WES T 134T H STREE T 
Between Fift h and Leno x Avenues NE W YOR K 
Oysters, Ohops, Steaks, Rarebits, Salads, Olub 
Sandwiches, Etc . Regular Dinner , 25c , from 
2 p. m. to 9 p. m. Meals Served at Al l Hours. 
Privat e Dinin g Room. Furnishe d Rooms To 
Let. Permanent or Transient. 
JOH N E . BRADFORD , Proprieto r 
HARLE M PRIVAT E HOUS E 
Furnishe d rooms to let for gentlemen only. 
Ho t and cold water in every room. 
MBS . BEER Y L . HICKS , Proprietress 
268 WES T 133D STREE T NE W YOR K 
Fou r doors from Eight h Avenue 
TH E SOUTHER N RESTAURAN T 
(Unde r New Management) 
2229 FIFT H AVENU E 
Between 135th and 136th Streets NE W YOR K 
Real home cooking. Gome and be convinced. 
Our motto is to please you. Meals at all hours, 
MRS . M . J . FERDINAND , Proprietress 
Telephone 5395 Chelsea 
TH E LAW S HOUS E 
FURNISHE D ROOM S 
B Y DAY , WEE K O R MONT H 
Convenient to the Pennsylvani a 
Depot and Al l Ca r Line s 
245 WES T 20T H STREE T NE W YOR E 
MRS . L . D . LAWS , Proprietress 
'Phone 2877 Lenox 
WHIT E ROS E WORKIN G GIRLS ' 
HOM E 
217 East 86th Street 
Bet. Second and Thir d Avenues 
Pleasant temporary lodgings for working girls, 
with privileges, at reasonable rates. The Home 
solicits orders for working dresses, aprons, etc. 
Address: 
MRS . FRANCE S E . KEYSER , Supt. 
IS YOUR HOTEL LISTED HERE? 
IF NOT , WRIT E US . 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 38 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
NORTH CAROLINA 
SANDERS ' HOTE L 
301 S. Caldwell Street, Charlotte, N . C. 
Ideal location for transient and permanent 
boarders. Al l modern conveniences and comforts 
of home life. 
J. T. SANDER S 
Proprieto r 
'Phon e 68 1 Ho t an d Col d Bath s 
WARRE N HOTE L 
MIS S BETTI E DUNCAN , Proprietress 
First-class accommodations. Meal s at al l hours 
RATE S REASONABL E 
COR . RAMSE Y AN D PROCTO R STREET S 
Thre e Block s fro m Unio n Statio n 
DURHAM , N . C . 
KELL Y MILLER' S WORK S 
COMPREHENSIVE , CANDID , STATESMANLIKE . 
RACE ADJUSTMENT 
Large , octavo, 300 pages, best book, cloth, gilt edge, gold top. Pric e $2.00. 
, "Prof. Mille r shows himself a master of an incisive style and a keen logician. " 
—Clevelan d Plai n Dealer. 
"Admirabl e for calmness and temper, thoroughness and skill."—Ne w Yor k 
Evenin g Post. 
"Controversial, brilliantly so."—New Yor k Sun. 
PAMPHLET S 
Roosevelt and the Negro 10c 
Appea l to Reason 10c 
Fort y Year s of Negro Education 10c 
The Ultimat e Race Problem 10c 
The Politica l Capacity of the Negro 10c 
The Talented Tent h 10c 
Brie f for the Highe r Educatio n of the Negro 10c 
Primar y Needs of the Negro Rac e 10c 
Social Equalit y 6c 
Agents wanted. Appl y to author, Howar d University , Washington , D . C. 
Do You Want to Make Money? 
CANVASSERS TO SELL SPHINX HANSOPE 
Used in garage, machine shop, factory and home. Twenty-five boxes 
for $1.25; yo u sell for $2.50. Whitens the skin, softens the hands, prevents 
chapping, heals cracks and sores. The first aid in burns. Strictl y antiseptic. 
SPHINX LABOR-SAVING SOAP CO., Inc. 
117 West Street, Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 
HOO T SUPREM E 
OFFICERS O F TH E 
A A 
O O O 
Home Nest Tree 
110K West Colfax Ave. 
South Bend, Ind. 
Hoo HOO ! Ho o Hoo ! Hoo Hoo ! 
SOMETHIN G NE W 
The Afro-American 
Order of Owls 
With a Graduated Scale of Endowment 
WANTED—Organizer s in every city in the United. 
States. For particulars write G . W . Bland, H . S P., 
110 1/2 Colfax Avenue, South Bend, Indiana. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 39 
CLASSIFIED ADVERTISING 
Q Through our Classified Advertising Service you have the opportunity 
to tell your little wants to 40.000 SELEC T readers. 
Q If you want HELP , you can find, among TH E CRISIS readers, 
graduates of Industrial Schools and thousands of young people who are 
trained for efficient, dependable service. 
Q If you want a POSITION . TH E CRISIS can help you find highclass places for teachers, managers, clerks, stenographers, hotel men, etc., etc. 
<J Yo u will find our readers very responsive to this department for 
Business Opportunities, Investments, Correspondence Schools, Agents 
Wanted, etc -
Q Advertisers may have replies sent in care of TH E CRISIS and forwarded. 
Q Classified advertising rates made known on application. 
REA L ESTATE 
Valuable Texas Lands 
For Sale 
Larg e tracts of farm land in the best localities of the State for sale at very flattering 
prices. Small tracts for good lands suitable for 
farming, truck, fruits and any domestic product. 
We have for sale a number of large farms already in cultivation, good houses and barns, 
wells, and nice pasture lands, which can be 
obtained at reasonable rates. City property a 
specialty. Business lots in the best part of 
the city, improved and unimproved. Larg e lots 
suitable for factory property with switch 
facilities. 
No investment can be more valuable than an 
investment in Texas real estate. Lands are becoming so valuable that they are doubling 
themselves in value in lesB than a year's time. 
Fo r any investment in Texas property, write 
T . B . Madiso n Rea l Estat e Company, 2415 El m 
Street, Dallas, Texas. 
To Colored People 
For SALE — W e have houses from $1,000 to 
$30,000. Ou r city is the capital of Ohio 
and a great manufacturing center—plenty of 
work, a good place to locate for business. Can 
sell you a house for $50, $100 to $500 down, 
balance like rent. Fo r investment and speculating houses or business places, $1,000 to 
$5,000 down, balance on long time payment. 
Far m land prices from $1 000 to $10,000 up. 
An y of these are in good locations. Writ e for 
further information. 
THI S IS A COLORE D ENTERPRISE . 
EDWARD A. SHANKLIN 
Rea l Estat e 
1218 1/2 Mt. Vernon Ave. Columbus, Ohio 
The Opportunity of a 
Lifetime 
Te n thousand acres at $10 per acre are now 
offered to thousands of progressive and industrious colored people throughout the United 
States of Americ a to substantially improve their 
condition, regardless as to whether they are in 
moderate circumstances or wealthy, by the 
Southern Lan d Development Co . 
whose capital stock is $2,500,000, incorporated 
under the laws of Arizona , with general office 
at 124 1/2 South Union Avenue, PUEBLO , COLO. , 
has a holding of 167,402 acres of some of the 
best land to be found anywhere in the world, 
which they are now selling at $10 per acre; 
$1.25 per acre down as first payment, the balance in one, two or three years, at 6% interest. 
This land is located in the State of Campeche, 
Mex., and is known as L a Montana Tract. It 
i s noted for its dyewood. It is just nine miles 
from the Gulf on the Champoton River , four 
hundred and fifty miles southeast of Mexico City. 
QUALITY—Thes e lands have eighteen kinds 
of hardwood distributed throughout the property. 
They are producing oranges, limes, cocoanuts, 
pears, corn, cotton, sugar cane, bananas, tobacco, 
rice, and every other kin d of tropical product; 
also henequen, the greatest product of the 
country, which yields a net profit of $70 to $80 
per acre. 
Th e climate is excellent, plenty of rainfall 
and no drought, cheap labor ; the best chance 
on earth for the colored man to become wealthy 
and independent. Hundreds are going there to 
live, others are buying because it is a safe 
and profitable investment. 
We want good, reliable agents throughout the 
country. If you are interested write at once 
to the 
Southern Lan d Development Co . 
PUEBLO , COLO . 
P . O. Bo x No 6. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 4 0 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
REA L ESTATE 
A n investment in New Yor k Cit y and its 
suburban Real Estat e offers the surest road to 
success and wealth. Lots, far m lands and houses 
for sale. Out-of-town correspondence invited. 
S. AUGUSTU S DUNCA N 
REA L ESTAT E AN D INSURANC E BROKE R 
2229 Fift h Avenue New Yor k 
SCHOOLS 
YOUN G MAN , HAV E YO U A TRADE ? 
B y our method we teach the Barbe r Trade in 
six weeks. 
We giv e you a complete set of tools and 
secure you a position in a shop. Call or write 
for particulars. 
NE W YOR K BARBE R SCHOO L 
Costello & Wis e 
Cor . Bower y and Rivington St. NE W YOR K 
HELP WANTE D 
LOCA L REPRESENTATIVE S for TH E CRISI S 
wanted in each locality. 
Some agents sell over 800 copies monthly. 
Writ e for particulars. 
Address: 
FRAN K M . TURNE R 
CIRCULATIO N MANAGE R 
Suite 311 
20 Vesey Street, New Yor k 
WANTED—Competen t business man to act as 
Secretar y an d Assistan t Manage r of Bric k 
Company . Mus t invest at least $500 . Onl y 
correspondents furnishin g reference s wil l be 
answered . This is a rar e opportunity an d 
shoul d be investigate d at once . 
Address, Bo x 226 , Moun d Bayou , Miss. 
EMPLOYMEN T AGENCIES 
RELIABL E HEL P at all timeB for the most 
discriminating -mployers. 
Out-of-town correspondence invited. 
References thoroughly investigated 
AddresB: 
MIS S I. L . MOORMA N 
463 Leno x Avenne New Yor k 
Ar e you in need of ) nT1T7 , T»««»™»**™« 
Is your friend i n need of } HEL P o r POSITION ? 
If so, 'phone, call or write the 
MIDDLESE X EMPLOYMEN T AGENC Y 
2229 Fift h Ave. , near 136th St. 
OHAS . A . XNOWLES , Mgr . 
References Carefully Investigated 
'Phone 6870 Harle m 
CRISIS AGEN T 
TH E CRISIS 
CHARLE S D. LEV Y 
Agent, New Orleans, La . 
JEWELR Y 
$1.00 A BEAUTIFU L 
Gold-Fille d Rin g 
Suitable as a present or Christmas gift. 
Writ e for particulars. 
DODSO N COMPAN Y 
Importing Jewelers 
127 W . VIN E ST. , KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
DRESSMAKING 
MRS . L . FROS T 
139 West 135th Street New York City 
FASHIONABL E DRESSMAKE R 
Machine or hand-made gowns and 
waists made i n up-to-date styles 
MRS . DOCI A A . McCLAI N 
119 W . 134th Street New Yor k Cit y 
Wil l continu e to operate the dressmaking and 
tailoring establishment known as N . Vaughan, 
119 W . 134th Street, Ne w Yor k City , and is i n a 
position to better satisfy her customers. 
EMBROIDERY 
ID A B. CURTI S 
1G-18 W . 136th Street, Apt. A , New Yor k Cit y 
Embroiderin g don e to order ; also instruction 
give n at reasonabl e price . Specia l attentio n 
to misses. 
FUNERA L DIRECTORS 
Thos. A . Lester , Manage r 
Thomas Mangrum , Assistan t 
MAMI E L . ANDERSO N 
LICENSE D E M B AlME R 
FUNERA L DIRECTO R 
2293 Seventh Avenue New Yor k Cit y 
AL L MODER N IMPROVEMENT S 
LARG E FUNERA L PARLOR S 
Brookly n Branc h Tel . 7949 Morn . 
473 Carlton Avenue Open Al l Night 
Tel . 3870-W. Pros. 
Sam. P. Taylor , Funera l Director 
ENTERTAINER 
'Phone 4876-W Harle m 
The Quaint Entertainer , Autho r and Banj o 
Comedian 
AL . BROW N 
Presents His 
DUO , TRI O AN D QUARTETT E 
Fo r Al l Privat e Occasions 
References: Th e Publi c for 12 Year s 
Studio: 16-18 W . 136th St. New Yor k Cit y 
Hours: 10 A . M . to 7 P . M . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 41 
MUSIC BOOKS 
HELE N ELIS E SMIT H 
CONCER T PIANIS T 
Post-Graduat e of the Institute of Musica l Ar t 
Pupi l of Sigismund Stojowaki 
Teache r of Piano, Theory , Ear-training , etc. 
224 EAS T 86T H STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
SONGS.—Ther e is money to be made in songwriting. 
If yon write poems or compose music, send us 
your work for examination. If terms are satisfactory we will publish and pay one-half profits. 
GOTHAM-ATTUCK S MTTSIC CO . 
136 WES T 37T H STREE T NE W YOR K 
MISS EDIT H W . McKENN Y 
Concert Pianist 
310 W . 119th Street New Yor k City 
Piano lessons given privately or in classes 
at reasonable rate6. 
Mnsi c furnished for privat e parties. 
FURRIER 
Seventeen Years' Experienc e 
WOR K TURNE D OU T PROMPTL Y 
MRS . G. B. NEEDLE S 
Lat e with Broadwa y houses 
PRACTICA L FURRIE R 
Al l kinds of furs remodelled, repaired and relined. Whit e furs cleaned, equal to new. Coats 
guaranteed to fit. Price s reasonable. 
24 WES T 135T H STREE T NE W YOR K 
Read the classified advertisements on pages 39, 40 and 41. 
JOINING TH E NAVY ; OB, 
ABROA D WITH UNOLE 8A M 
B y JOH N H . PAYNTER , A.M . 
First Race Contribution to Navy 
Literature 
Ordered by the Government for Librarie s of 
Wa r Vessels 
"It is a perfect picture of life on board ' 
ship when I first went to sea. Th e story is 
told so simply and in such good style, and 
holds its interest so, that I read it through 
at one sitting."—Richardso n Clover, Rear 
Admiral , U . S . N. , Retired. 
Cloth Bound . 300 Pages. Full y Illustrated. 
SECON D EDITIO N 
Sent Postage Pai d on Receipt of One Dollar 
Address care of 
SUDWART H PRINTIN G 00 . 
WASHINGTON . D . O. 
PICTURE S 
Mos t beautifu l work s of art suitabl e fo r parlo r 
an d bedroom . Shoul d be in ever y Negr o home. 
Picture s 16x20 . ' 'Jesu s Die d fo r Both.* ' 
' 'Clingin g to the Cross. " ' 'Beaco n Light. " 
"Booke r T . Washington. " "Protectin g Angel. " 
* 'Heavenward.' ' ' 'Onward.' ' ' 'Jac k Johnson.' ' 
' 'Th e Colore d Troo p Chargin g u p Sa n Jua n 
Hill. " "Moses. " "Th e Littl e Shepherd. " 
Price , postpaid , 2 5 cents. 
17 Beautiful Art Postcards, 15 Cents 
Mottoes, Lovers, Comics, Christmas, Ne w 
Year's , Thanksgivin g an d othe r holida y cards. 
Seein g Ne w Yor k o n a posta l card ; 2 5 i n all . 
Postpaid , 2 5 cents. 
AGEN T WANTE D 
Ou r agents ar e coinin g mone y o n thes e pic ­
ture s an d postcards. On e agen t mad e $1 5 i n 
one day . 
JACO B GRIFFITH 
252 WES T 53 d STREE T NE W YOR K 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
J . DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSEXOB-AT-LA W 
5 Beekman Street (Temple Court) 
New Yor k City 
Tel . 6222 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
FREDERIC K L. McGHE E 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
Unio n Block, Fourth and Cedar Streets 
S t Paul, Minn . 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
1020 Metropolitan lif e Building 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
Real Estate and Probate Matters a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
Office : Room 502, Eberly Block Columbus, O 
B. S. SMIT H 
ATTOBNE Y AN D COUNSELOB-AT-LAW . 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W. MITCHEL L 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 42 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
A limited numbe r of 
free beds maintained 
for the worthy poor. 
Othe r war d patients 
maintained at $7.00 
pe r week. 
Privat e rooms can 
be secured from 
$12.00 to $30.00 per 
week. 
The training school 
for nurses maintains 
a two years' course. 
A high school certificate, or an education sufficient to 
be considered an 
equivalent, necessary 
for admission. 
Fiv e thousand dollars endows a free 
bed. 
Andrew F . Stevens, 
President. 
Nathan F . MOSSELL, M.D . 
Medical Director and 
Superintendent 
Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital and Training School, Philadelphia, Pa. 
3. A . KELSEY , Pres. DR . WM . J . CARTER , Chiropodist MM E A . C . KELSEY , Gen' l Instr. 
The Kelsey School of Beauty Culture and Hair Dressing 
328 Lenox Avenue, New York City. Branch: 75 W . 135th Street 
Persona l instruction given in the Ar t of Manicuring , Shampooing , Hai r Dressing, 
Beauty Culture , Chiropody , and the manufacturing of Huma n Hai r Goods. Send 
for booklet-directory of the recently graduated students. Courses from $10 to $65. 
Telephone 3263 Harle m CARPE T CLEANIN G 
CLEANER S AN D RENOVATER S FO R PARTICULA R PEOPL E 
NE W YOR K CAREFU L CLEANIN G BUREA U 
12 WES T 135TH STREE T 
We make a specialty of cleaning and renovating carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered 
furniture, we also vacuum clean in the home. W e are not the largest carpet cleaner in the 
world, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOIN G CARPET S AN D RUG S OU R SPECIALT Y 
ESTABLISHE D 1887 'Phone 4715 Mad . Sq. 
L. A. d e TOSCAN O CO. 
OLDES T COLORE D REGALI A ESTABLISHMEN T I N TH E CIT Y 
Knights of Pythias BADGE S Paraphernalia 
Knights Templars 
And Patriarchs JEWEL S and Supplies 
for All Societies 
Equipments REGALI A Estimates Given 
Mme. B. E . de Toscano, Manager 
146 WEST 31S t STREET Bet. Sixth and Seventh Avenue . NEW YORK CITY 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N for the 
ADVANCEMEN T of COLORE D PEOPL E 
(Incorporated Ma y 25, 1911) 
OBJECT.—Th e National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People 
is an organization composed of men and 
women of all races and classes who believe that the present widespread increase 
of prejudice against colored races and 
particularly the denial of rights and 
opportunities to ten million Americans of 
Negro descent is not only unjust and a 
menace to our free institutions, but also 
is a direct hindrance to Worl d Peace 
and the realization of Human Brotherhood. 
METHODS.—Th e encouragement of 
education and efforts for social uplift; the 
dissemination of literature; the holding of 
mass meetings; the maintenance of a lecture bureau; the encouragement of vigilance committees ; the investigation of complaints; the maintenance of a Bureau of 
Information; the publication of TH E 
CRISIS; the collection of facts and publication of the truth. 
ORGANIZATION.—Al l interested 
persons are urged to join our organization 
—associate membership costs $ 1, and 
contributing and sustaining members pay 
from $2 to $25 a year. 
FUNDS.—W e need $10,000 a year 
for running expenses of this work and particularly urge the necessity of gifts to help 
on our objects. 
OFFICERS.—Th e officers of the 
organization are: 
National President — Mr . Moorfield 
Storey, Boston, Mass. 
Chairman of the Executive Committee— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard , New 
York . 
Treasurer—Mr. Walter E . Sachs, New 
York . 
Director of Publicity and Research—Dr. 
W . Ε. B . DuBois, New York. 
Secretary—Miss Mar y W . Ovington, 
Ne w York , 
COMMITTEE.—Ou r work is carried on under the auspices of the following General Committee, in addition to the 
officers named: 
Miss Gertrude Barnum, New York . 
Miss Frances Blascoer. New York . 
'Rev. W . H . Brooks, New York . 
Prof. John Dewey, New York . 
•Dr . John Lovejoy Elliott, New York . 
"Mr . Thos. Ewing , Jr., New York . 
*Reν. John Haynes Holmes, New York . 
Mr . Hamilto n Holt , New York . 
Miss Mau d It. Ingersoll, New York . 
*Mrs. Florence Kelley , New York . 
*Mr . Pau l Kennaday , New York . 
*Mrs. F . R, Keyser, New York . 
Dr. Chas. Lenz , New York . 
Mr . Jacob W. Mack , New York . 
•Mrs. M . D . Maclean , New York . 
•Mr . Joh n E. Mllholland , New York . 
Rev, Horace G. Miller. New York . 
Mrs. Ma x Morgenthau, Jr., New York . 
Mr , James F . Morton. Jr., New York . 
Mr . Henr y Moskowitz , New York . 
Miss Leonora O'Reilly , New York . 
•Rev . A . Clayto n Powell , New York . 
•Mr . Charle s Edwar d Russell, New York . 
Mr . Jacob H . Schiff, New York . 
Prof. E . R. A . Seligman, New York . 
•Dr . Joseph Silverman, New York . 
Mrs. Ann a Garli n Spencer, New York . 
•Prof. J. E . Spingarn, New York . 
Mrs. Henry Villard . New York . 
•Miss Lillia n D . Wald , New York . 
*Mr. Wm . Englis h Walling , New York . 
•Bisho p Alexande r Walters, New York . 
Dr. Stephen S. Wise , New York . 
Miss M . R. Lyons, Brooklyn , Ν. Y . 
•Dr . Ο. M . Waller, Brooklyn , Ν. Y . 
Mr . D . Maco n Webster, Brooklyn , Ν Y . 
Mr . Geo. Ε. Wlbecan, Jr., Brooklyn , Ν. Y . 
Mrs. W . H . Talbert, Buffalo, Ν. Y . 
Hon . Thos. M . Osborne, Auburn , Ν. Y . 
•Mr . W . L . Bulkley , Ridgefleld Park , N . J. 
Mr . George W . Crawford, New Haven, Conn . 
Miss Mari a Baldwin , Boston, Mass. 
Mr . Francis J. Garrison, Boston, Mass. 
Mr . Archibal d H . Grimke , Boston, Mass. 
Miss Adelene Moffat, Boston, Mass. 
•Mr . Albert E . Pillsbury , Boston. Mass. 
Mr . Wm . Munro e Trotter, Boston. Mass. 
Dr. Horac e Bumstead, Brookllne , Mass. 
Miss Elizabet h C. Carter, New Bedford, Mass, 
Rev. Harvey Johnston, Baltimore , Md , 
Rev. Garnett R. Walter. Baltimore , Md . 
Prest. Chas. T. Thwing , Cleveland, O. 
Mr . Chas. W . Chesnutt, Cleveland, O. 
Hon . Harr y C. Smith , Cleveland, O. 
Prest. H . C. King , Oberlin. O. 
Prest. W . S. Scarborough, Wilberforce, 0. 
•Miss Jane Addams, Chicago, Ill. 
•Mrs. Ida B . Wells Barnett, Chicago, Ill. 
•Dr . C. E . Bentley, Chicago, HI. 
Miss Sophronisba Breckenridge, Chicago. Ill. 
Mr . Clarence Darrow, Chicago, Ill. 
Mr , Juliu s Rosenwald, Chicago, Ill. 
Mrs. Celi a Parke r Woolley, Chicago, III. 
Mr . F . L . McGhee , St. Paul , Minn . 
Miss Frances Bartholomew, Philadelphia , Pa. 
•Dr . N . F . Mossell, Philadelphia , Pa . 
•Dr . Wm . A . Sinclair, Philadelphia , Pa . 
Miss Susan Wharton , Philadelphia , Pa . 
Mr . R. R. Wright, Jr., Philadelphia , Pa. 
Mr . W . Justin Carter, Harrisburg, Pa . 
Rev. Harvey Johnson, D.D. , Baltimore , Md . 
Hon . Wm . S. Bennet, Washington, D. C. 
Mrs. Carri e W . Clifford, Washington, D. C. 
Mr . L . M . Hershaw, Washington, D. C. 
Prof. Kell y Miller, Washington, D. C. 
Prof. L . B . Moore, Washington, D. C. 
Justice W . P . Stafford, Washington, D. C. 
•Mrs. Mar y Churc h Terrell, Washington, D. C. 
•Rev. J. Milto n Waldron , Washington, D. C. 
Prest. John Hope, Atlanta , Ga . 
Mr . Lesli e P . Hill , Manassas, Va . 
Mr . Willia m Pickens, Talladega , Ala . 
•Executive Committee. 
OFFICES : 
Suite 311, 20 Vesey Street, New York. HAL F A MA N 
The Status of the Negro in New York 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a Foreword by Dr. Franz Boas, of Columbia University 
"M y father has always lived in the 
South," a young colored man once said to 
me, "an d has attained success there ; but 
when I ceased to be a boy he advised me 
to live in the North , where my manhood 
would be respected. H e himself cannot 
continually endur e his position of inferior ­
ity, an d i n the summe r he comes Nort h to 
be a man. No, " correcting himself, "to 
be HAL, F A MAN . A Negr o is wholly a 
man only i n Europe."— Fro m the Author's 
"Introduction." 
Miss Ovington's description of the status 
of the Negr o in Ne w Yor k Cit y is based on 
a most painstaking inquir y into his social 
and economic conditions, and brings out in 
the most forceful way the difficulties unde r 
which the race is laboring, even in the large 
cosmopolitan population of Ne w York . It 
is a refutation of the claims that the Negr o 
has equal opportunity with the whites, and 
that his failur e to advanc e more rapidly 
than he has, is due to innate inability.— 
From Dr. Boas' "Foreword," 
12mo, cloth. Price $1.00 net. By mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
The above book may be purchased through any bookseller or will be mailed by 
TH E CRISIS on receipt of the price and postage. 
TH E DIFFERENC E 
Between "GOOD ENOUGH " and the "BEST " is the 
difference between ordinary print-shop work and ours. 
Ou r facilities and long years of experience give 
our work that INDIVIDUALIT Y which you appreciate in 
your printed things. 
W e refer you to Mr . Condé Nast of Vogue and 
Dr. W . Ε. B . D u Bois of TH E CRISIS. 
B y the way, we print TH E CRISIS. D O you like 
it? If so, let us make an estimate on your work. 
ROBERT N. WOOD 202 East 99th St., New York 
'Phone Lenox 6667 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 