TH E CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Volume One DECEMBER , 1910 Number Tw o 
Edited by W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS , with the co-operation of Oswald Garrison Villard , 
J . Ma x Barber, Charles Edward Russell, Kelly Miller , VV. S. Braithwaite and M . D . Maclean. 
CONTENT S 
Along the Color Line 5 
Opinion . . . 11 
Editorial .. . 16 
Cartoon ... . 18 
By JOHN HENRY ADAMS 
Editorial ... . 20 
The Real Race Problem 22 
By Profeaor FRAN Z BOAS 
The Burden .. . 26 
Talks About Women 28 
By Mn. J. E. MILHOLLAND 
Letters 28 
Wha t to Read . . 30 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y B Y TH E 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
A T TWENT Y VESE Y STREE T NE W YOR K CIT Y 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
ON E O F TH E SURES T WAY S 
T O SUCCEE D IN LIF E IS T O 
TAKE A COURSE AT 
The Touissant Conservatory of 
253 West 134th Street 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
The most up-to-date and thoroughly equipped conservatory in 
the city. Conducted under the supervision of 
MME . E . TOUISSAN T WELCOM E 
The Foremost Female Artist of the Race 
Courses in Ar t 
Drawing, Pen and Ink Sketching, Crayon, Pastel, Water Color, 
Oi l Painting, Designing, Cartooning, Fashion Designing, Sign Painting, 
Portrait Painting and Photo Enlarging in Crayon, Water Color, Pastel 
and Oil . Artistic Painting of Parasols, Fans, Book Marks, Pi n 
Cushions, Lamp Shades, Curtains, Screens, Piano and Mantel Covers, 
Sofa Pillows, etc. 
Music 
Piano, Violin , Mandolin, Voice Culture and all Brass and Reed 
Instruments. 
TERM S REASONABL E THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
TH E NATIONAL ASSOCIATION for the 
ADVANCEMEN T of COLORED PEOPLE 
OBJECT.—Th e National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People 
is an organization composed of men and 
women of all races and classes who believe that the present widespread increase 
of prejudice against colored races and 
particularly the denial of rights and 
opportunities to ten million Americans of 
Negro descent is not only unjust and a 
menace to our free institutions, but also 
is a direct hindrance to World Peace 
and the realization of Human Brotherhood. 
METHODS.—Th e encouragement of 
education and efforts for social uplift; the 
dissemination of literature; the holding of 
mass meetings; the maintenance of a lecture bureau; the encouragement of vigilance committees; the investigation of complaints; the maintenance of a Bureau of 
Information; the publication of TH E 
CRISIS ; the collection of facts and publication of the truth. 
ORGANIZATION.—Al l interested 
persons are urged to join our organization 
—associate membership costs $ 1, and 
contributing and sustaining members pay 
from $2 to $25 a year. 
FUNDS.—W e need $10,000 a year 
for running expenses of this work and particularly urge the necessity of gifts to help 
on our objects. 
OFFICERS.—Th e officers of the 
organization are: 
National President — Mr . Moorfield 
Storey, Boston, Mass. 
Chairman of the Executive Committee— 
Mr . Wm . English Walling, New 
York. 
Treasurer—Mr. John E . Milholland, 
New York. 
Disbursing Treasurer—Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard, New York. 
Director of Publicity and Research—Dr. 
W . E . B. DuBois, New York. 
Executive Secretary—Miss Frances Blascoer. New York. 
COMMITTEE.—Ou r work is carried on under the auspices of the following General Committee, in addition to the 
officers named: 
•Miss Gertrude Barnum, New York. 
"Rev. W . H . Brooks, New York. 
Prof. John Dewey, New York . 
Miss Mau d R. IngersoM, New York . 
Mrs. Florence Kefiey, New York . 
"Mr . Paul Kennaday, New York. 
•Mrs. F. R. Keyser, New York. 
Dr . Chas. Lenz , New York. 
Mr . Jacob W . Mack, New York. 
•Mrs. M . D . MacLean , New York. 
Rev. Horac e G. Miller , New York . 
Mrs. Ma x Morgenthau, Jr. , New York . 
Mr . James F . Morton, Jr. , New York. 
Mr . Henr y Moskowitz, New York. 
Miss Leonor a O'Reilly, New York. 
•Rev . A . Clayton Powell, New York. 
•Mr . Charles Edwar d Russell, New York . 
Mr . Jacob H . Schiff, New York. 
Prof. E . R . A . Seligraan, New York . 
•Rev . Joseph Silverman, New York. 
Mrs. Ann a Garlin Spencer, New York. 
Mrs. Henr y Villard , New York. 
Miss Lillian D. Wald , New York. 
•Bishop Alexande r Walters, New York. 
Dr . Stephen S. Wise , New York . 
Rev. Jas. E . Haynes. D.D. , Brooklyn, N . Y . 
•Rev . John Hayne s Holmes, Brooklyn, N . Y . 
Miss M . R. Lyons, Brooklyn, N . Y . 
•Miss M . W . Ovington, Brooklyn, N . Y . 
•Dr . O . M . Waller , Brooklyn, N . Y . 
Mrs. M . H . Talbert, Buffalo, N . Y . 
Hon . Thos. M . Osborne, Auburn , N . Y . 
•Mr . W . L Bulkley, Ridgewood, N . J . 
Mr . George W . Crawford, New Haven, Conn. 
Miss Mari a Baldwin, Boston, Mass. 
Mr . Francis J . Garrison, Boston, Mass. 
Mr . Archibald H . Grimke , Boston, Mass. 
•Mr . Albert E . Pillsbury, Boston, Mass. 
Mr . Wm . Munro e Trotter, Boston, Mass. 
Dr . Horac e Bumstead, Brookline, Mass. 
Miss Elizabeth C. Carter, New Bedford, Mass. 
Prest. Chas. T . Thwing , Cleveland, O . 
Mr . Chas. W . Chesnutt, Cleveland, 0. 
Prest. H . C . King , Oberlin, O . 
Prest. W . S. Scarborough, Wilberforce, O . 
•Miss Jane Addams, Chicago, 111. 
•Mrs. Ida B. Wells Barnett, Chicago, 111. 
•Dr . C. E . Bentley, Chicago, 111. 
Miss Sophronisba Breckenndge, Chicago, 111. 
Mr . Clarence Darrow, Chicago,- 111. 
•Mrs. Celia Parke r Woolley, Chicago, 111. 
•Dr . N . F . Mossell, Philadelphia, Pa. 
•Dr . Wm . A . Sinclair, Philadelphia, Pa . 
Miss Susan Wharton, Philadelphia. Pa . 
Mr . R. R. Wright, Jr. , Philadelphia, Pa . _ 
Mr . W . Justin Carter, Harrisburg, Pa . 
Rev. Harve y Johnson. D.D. , Baltimore, Md . 
Hon . Wm . S. Bennett, Washington, D . C. 
Mr . L . M . Hershaw, Washington, D . C . 
Prof. Kell y Miller , Washington, D. C . 
Prof. L . B: Moore . Washington, D . C . 
Justice W . P. Stafford, Washington, D. C . 
•Mrs. Mar y Church Terrell, Washington, D . C . 
•Rev . J . Milton Waldron, Washington, D . C 
Prest. John Hope, Atlanta, Ga. 
Mr . Leslie P. Hill , Manassas, Va . 
• Executive Committee. 
OFFICES : 
Suite 610, 20 Vesey Street, New York. 4 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
127-129 West 53d Street 
Telephones 4693-469 4 Columbus 
Th e Leading Colored Restaurant in Americ a 
Cuisine Unsurpassed. Everything U p to date 
Shell Fish a Specialty Restaurant Ope n Al l Night 
We Print TH E CRISIS 
W e Print for the Vogue Magazine 
and refer by permission to Mr. Conde 
Nash, Publisher of 
VOGU E MAGAZIN E 
Wedding Invitations Printed and 
Engraved. Society and Commercial Printing a Specialty. A postal 
or the telephone (Lenox 6667) brings 
us to your door. 
ROBER T N . WOO D 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T NE W YOR K 
'Phone 2877 Lenox. 
White Rose Working Girls' Home 
217 EAS T 86T H STREE T 
Bet. Second and Thir d Avenues 
Pleasant temporary lodgings for working girls, 
with privileges, at reasonable rates. The Home 
solicits orders for working dresses, aprons, etc. 
Address: 
MRS . FRANCE S R. KEYSER , Supt. 
Hello, Central! Give me Harle m 3253. 
NEW YOR K CAREFU L CLEAN -
ING BUREAU ? 
Yes, Madam ! We clean from a ru g to privat e 
house. An y time—by the hour, the day or the 
J?,
 0 • yes : w e
 guarantee satisfaction. W e are 
Cleaners and Renovator s for Particula r People. 
Le t us give you our estimate 
12 WES T 135th STREE T Along the Color Line 
JI M CROW . 
By what dread logic, by what grand neglect, 
Wid e as our nation, doth this relic last— 
This relic of old sterile customs past 
Lon g since into deep shame without respect? 
Even I whom this contrivance fain would 
teach 
A low submission, pray within my soul 
That these my masters may not reap the 
dole 
O f finding remedy beyond their reach. 
In lofty mood I mount the reeking box, 
An d travel through the land. So Terence 
once 
Move d i n old Rome. So—wondrous 
paradox—• 
Moved Esop in old Greece, the dwarf and 
dunce. 
Then I reflect how their immortal wit 
Makes the world laugh with mockery of 
it. 
—Leslie Pinckney Hil l in The Public. 
POLITICAL . 
There was much excitement among 
Negroes during the election in Oklahoma. 
The attempt was made to shut out all of 
the Negro voters. There was some rioting, 
Negroes at Guthrie seizing the voting booth 
and ousting election officers at other places. 
The last news is that the Democrats propose to throw out the votes of all precincts 
where Negroes voted. Such wholesale disfranchisement would save the Democrats 
the legislature and perhaps the governorship. There has been some conflict between 
State and Federal authorities on the subject. Resolutions charging the Republican 
leaders of Oklahoma with delinquency in 
supporting the Negro race and calling upon 
the Negroes of the State to support the entire Socialist ticket were adopted by an 
association of amalgamated Negro organizations of the State, which was organized 
there. The resolutions placed the association 
on record as favoring the proposed women 
suffrage amendment to the constitution, and 
memorialized Congress to reduce the representation in Oklahoma in proportion to the 
number of black citizens disfranchised by 
the grandfather amendment to the constitution, in case that amendment is not declared 
unconstitutional by the courts. A law was 
demanded relieving the disfranchised Negro 
of the poll tax obligation. 
Just before the election the administration at Washington showed signs of alarm 
over the Negro vote. Various prospective 
appointments of Negroes were unofficially 
announced, including that of W . H . Lewis 
as Assistant United States Attorney. 
Franklin MacVeagh, Secretary of the 
Treasury, made public a long letter that he 
has written to a Negro organization in 
Chicago, explaining why a colored man was 
not appointed as chief of a division in the 
office of the Auditor for the Post-office Department, the vacancy having been created 
by the death of a Negro. The Secretary 
explains that the division chiefs in the 
Treasury Department are in the classified 
Civi l Service, and are selected on merit. 
"There is no disposition," says the Secretary, "on the part of the present administration of the Treasury Department to discriminate against the colored race. 
"O n the contrary, every care has been 
taken to avoid discrimination and to see to 
it that exact justice is done to all. Fo r 
instance, out of 66 colored employees in 
the office of the Auditor for the Post-office 
Department who are eligible under civil 
service rules for promotion, 26, or 39.3 per 
cent, have been promoted since February, 
1908. 
"Also , on September 2, 1910, Mr. Theodore H . Green, a colored man, was appointed by me as acting disbursing officer 
for the office of the Auditor of the Postoffice Department, one of the most responsible positions in the office. Mr . Green 
disburses salaries amounting to $760,000 
annually, paying a force of 711 officers and 
employees twice each month." 
In Clinton, La., the total registered votes 
for the parish of East Feliciana is 609. 
Six hundred and seven are white and two 
colored. Eight registered as Republicans 
and four declined to declare their party 
affiliation. 
The Lowe r House of the Texas Legislature, by a vote of 51 to 34, instructed 
Senators and Congressmen to work for 
the repeal of the Fourteenth Amendment 
to the Federal Constitution conferring 
franchise upon Negroes. 
The fact that no colored student has ever 
been admitted to Princeton was brought 
against Governor-elect Wilson in the last 
campaign. 
There is some rumor of a colored man 
being appointed as Sub-Treasurer in the 
Min t at Philadelphia. 
Harr y W . Bass, who was elected to the 
Assembly from the Sixth District, compris-6 THE CRISIS 
ing the Seventh War d of Philadelphia, 
Perm., will be the first Negro to sit in 
the Pennsylvania Legislature. Bass's vote 
exceeded that of Tener, due to the large 
Negro registration in the ward. Bass was 
born in Chester County, and is 44 years old. 
H e lives at 1428 Lombard street. 
The Democrats of West Virgini a had the 
following plank in their platform of 1908: 
"Believing that the extension of the elective 
franchise to a race inferior in intelligence 
and without preparation for the wise and 
prudent exercise of the privilege so vital 
to the maintenance of good government was 
a mistake, if not a crime, committed by 
the Republican party during the reign of 
passion and prejudice following the Civi l 
War, for political ends and purposes, we 
declare that the Democratic party is in 
favor of so amending the Constitution as 
to preserve the purity of the ballot and the 
electorate of the State from the evils resulting from conferring power and privilege 
upon those who are unfitted to appreciate 
its importance as it affects the stability and 
preservation of good government." The 
question is now whether they will seek to 
carry out the declaration. 
In the Seventh Congressional District of 
Indiana, 7,000 Negro votes held the balance 
of power in the last election. 
In Cairo, 111., there was a fierce campaign 
over the present sheriff, Nellis, who on the 
evening of February 17 of the present year 
repulsed, with the aid of Negro deputies, an 
assault upon the county jail in Cairo. The 
mob had gathered in the saloons on the 
levee, and, inflamed with liquor, marched 
upon the jail with the purpose of taking 
from the sheriff's custody and stringing up 
to a convenient post a Negro purse snatcher, 
John Pratt, who had been arrested the day 
before. One of the mob was killed. Nellis 
was defeated. 
The Fairmount, W . Va. , Times, says: 
"Stick to the Negro till after the election, 
then organize a white Republican party if 
you want to," is the injunction said to have 
emanated from the Whit e House yesterday, 
when John G. Capers, former Commissioner 
of Internal Revenue, was summoned there 
for a conversation with the President. 
Capers has since formed a lily-white Republican party in South Carolina. 
In Ohio, Secretary of State Thompson, 
after a telephone conversation with Clerk 
Adolph Haas, granted the Cuyahoga County 
Board of Elections a hearing on the question as to whether registration officers may 
ask a man whether he is white or colored. 
One candidate for office in Oklahoma 
made enemies by declaring that the best 
blood of the white South ran in the veins 
of 90 per cent, of the Negroes of the State. 
The Independent Politica l League carried 
on a vigorous and widespread campaign 
among the colored voters in Northern and 
Western States. They had a large number 
of campaign speakers and organizers at 
work in New York , New Jersey, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Michigan, 
Ohio, Illinois, Indiana and Missouri, and 
are co-operating with independent Republican and Democratic organizations in Maine , 
Nort h Carolina and Tennessee, and with 
similar bodies in the other States mentioned 
above. 
JUDICIA L DECISIONS . 
In the United States Circuit Court of the 
District of Maryland, Judge Morris made 
a decision, October 28th, declaring that the 
attempt of the Annapolis registrars to disfranchise Negroes was illegal and that they 
are liable to damages. The decision says 
among other things that "the common sense 
of the situation would seem to be that the 
law forbidding the deprivation or abridgment of the right to vote on account of 
race or color being the supreme law, any 
State law commanding such deprivation or 
abridgment is nugatory and not to be 
obeyed by any one; and any one who does 
enforce it does so at his known peril, and is 
made liable to an action for damages by 
the simple act of enforcing a void law to 
the injury of the plaintiff i n the suit, and 
no allegations of malice need be alleged or 
proved." 
Charles J. Bonaparte was the leading attorney for the plaintiffs, and the case may 
yet go to the Supreme Court. 
Negro minstrels traveling in private cars 
are entitled to the same treatment as white 
occupants of such cars, according to a decision of the Interstate Commerce Commission, in the case of Pat Chappelle against 
the Louisville and Nashville Railroad. 
In Mississippi the Legislature passed a 
law to levy taxes on whites and Negroes 
for agricultural schools for whites. One 
Negro brought the matter to court and the 
Chancery Court declared the legislation unconstitutional. Eventually this went to the 
Supreme Court of Mississinni, and the 
lower court was upheld. 
On complaint of Mar y Beausola, colored, 
Patrick Sullivan, head waiter of Riordan 
Brothers' liquor store and cafe, Boston, was 
charged with unlawful discrimination 
against a Negro. Sullivan pleaded not 
guilty, but Judge Wentworth fined him $100, 
from which sentence he appealed. Mar y 
Beausola is light in color. She accompanied 
a Mr . and Mrs. Samuel Sutherland to the 
cafe, where food and liquor were ordered 
for all. The waiter insisted that the rule 
of the house was against serving colored 
and white persons together. ALONC THE COLOR LINE 1 
In Oklahoma judicial decision upholds 
the grandfather clause, but broadens its application so as to except Indians and 
certain Negroes from the educational 
qualification and to include some foreigners. 
The District Court of Appeals in the District of Columbia is wrestling with the 
problem of what constitutes Negro" under 
the law. Arguments were heard in connection with the case of Stephen Wall , an 
employee of the Government Printing Office, 
whose 8-year-old daughter Isabel was dismissed from the Brookland Public School 
on the allegation that the child had onesixteenth Negro blood in her veins. Wal l 
filed a petition for a writ of mandamus in 
the District Supreme Court, after which 
Justice Wrigh t asked the Board of Educa ­
tion to fix the racial status of the girl. By 
a vote of 5 to 8 she was declared a Negro, 
"for school purposes." Justice Wrigh t sustained the Board, and the case then went to 
the Court of Appeals. 
Several Southern laws, which have reduced Negro farm hands to virtual peonage, 
are to be tested before the United States 
Supreme Court. The case is the appeal of 
an Alabama Negro convicted of violating 
the contract law, upheld by the State Supreme Court, under which he was sentenced 
to a fine equivalent to 126 days' hard labor 
for the county. The Federal Department 
of Justice believes that the law imposes 
compulsory service in satisfaction of debt, 
reducing the Negroes to actual slavery. 
The law provides that in contracts of 
service entered into by a laborer, where 
money was advanced, and the contract 
broken without just cause, and the money 
not refunded, the laborer is guilty, and may 
be sentenced to hard labor until the fine is 
worked out. The Federal Department contends that the purpose and effect of the law 
is not to stop fraudulent practices so much 
as to impose compulsory service upon the 
Negroes who constitute the bulk of the 
farm labor of the State. The point that 
will be attacked most vigorously is the 
Alabama rule of evidence in such cases, 
which, in practice, assumes that the Negro 
accused was guilty of intent to defraud, 
"contrary to the axiomatic and elementary 
principle of presumption of innocence in a 
criminal procedure." 
The reports of the abuses existing under 
this contract system in the South have 
aroused widespread indignation as they have 
appeared from time to time when some exceptionally flagrant case was forced into 
publicity. No w that the Department of Justice has become interested, and the issue 
is to be placed before the supreme tribunal, 
a definite pronouncement may be expected. 
The Mississippi Courts have refused to 
enjoin the Negro Knights of Pythias. 
The judge in giving his decision made the 
following remarkable statements: 
"M y political ooinions and preferences 
are well known. M y position on the race 
question is equally well understood, but 
this is a court of justice, where all men 
stand, and should stand, upon an absolute 
equality before the law. The Negroes in 
Mississippi do not vote, and should not; 
they do not sit upon our juries, and they 
should not; but they do come into this 
court asking for the white man's justice, 
which has been the boast and pride of our 
race, and they are entitled to it. The 
saddest day for this State, and the one that 
'wil l put the blackest smircn upon the escutcheon of our race, will be the day when 
the white man's courts in the administration of the white man's law shall deny justice to the Negro, who is striving, as 
these defendants are striving, to elevate and 
build up the helpless of their race under a 
white man's government." 
EDUCATION . 
The field agent of the Slater Fun d reports that in southwest Georgia within a 
certain radius of fifty miles there are 200,-
000 Negroes. The public school facilities 
for the Negroes of Houston County, and 
five adjacent counties are, to say the least, 
inadequate. The State School Commissioner's report for 1907, and there has been 
no material change in the colored schools 
since, shows the following: Enrollment of 
Negro children for the six counties, 11,256; 
attendance only 5,811, or 51 per cent. Fo r 
the colored children there were 159 schools, 
or one for every 70 children of those enrolled. 
In five of these counties there was not a 
single schoolhouse owned by the County 
Board of Education. One county owned 
19 out of 27 of its colored schoolhouses. 
The valuation of these 19 is given as $2,500. 
The average monthly cost for the education 
of colored pupils in these six counties is 
reported as $0.39 per pupil. The average 
monthly cost for white pupils, by the way, 
is $1.34 per pupil. Fo r them there are 149 
schools for an enrollment of 6,529, or one 
school for every 43 pupils. Their attendance is 61 per cent, of the enrollment. O f 
the 149 white schools 84 have schoolhouses 
valued at $24,840, and owned by the County 
Boards of Education. 
In order to induce the city of Savannah 
to relieve the wretchedly crowded Negro 
schools by a new building, the colored people are raising money to buy a site if the 
city will put up the building. 
A n application has been received by the 
Yal e Bureau of Appointments and SelfHelp from John Morrison, a Negro, who 
is deaf and dumb and blind in one eye, 
for assistance in getting through the Yal e 
Law School, where he has passed into the 
Senior Class. H e has the degree of Bachelor of La w from Shaw University. 
Edmund J. James, president of the Uni ­
versity of Illinois, in a speech at St. Paul, 8 THE CRISIS 
Minn.,• said: "The condition of American 
education to-day is in many respects a 
national reproach. In no other nation 
claiming to be civilized is there at the 
present time so large a population in such 
educational degradation as the American 
Negro. 
"If there is any situation in our present 
society for which the nation as a whole is 
responsible, surely the condition of the 
American Negro is such. The establishment of slavery was brought about by the 
co-operation of Nort h and South alike. 
The continuance of slavery was recognized 
and supported by the Constitution and the 
law, and upon the abolition of slavery the 
American Negro was in reality, and should 
have been in fact, a national ward." 
The buildings of the colored Berea are 
finally in course of erection in Shelby 
County, Ky . They will cost $100,000 and 
be placed upon a five-hundred acre farm. 
The school will be known as Lincol n 
Institute. 
Mason A . Hawkins, principal of the Baltimore Colored Hig h School, was granted 
the degree of Master of Arts at Columbia 
University in October. Mr. Hawkins is a 
graduate of Harvard. 
In the New Mexico Constitutional Convention the question of separate schools for 
whites and Negroes was threshed out before the Committee on Education. The 
view finally prevailed that this matter need 
not be covered by the Constitution, and 
should be left to each school district for 
decision, with this proviso, however, that 
the Constitution provide that no separate 
schools should be maintained for reasons 
of language, nationality or religion. 
The colored people of New Orleans are 
trying to get the city to provide them with 
a night school. 
The whites of Baltimore are protesting 
against the location of a new Negro school. 
Virgini a gives $20,000 a year to support 
the Colored Norma l and Industrial Institute at Petersburg. The students add 
$24,000 to this. There are nearly 600 students in attendance this year. 
The trustees of the Peabody Fund are 
still trying to wind up its affairs and divide the money. Some of the capital has 
been lost through the repudiation of Southern State bonds. Negro institutions 
ought to be the beneficiaries, as they have 
received comparatively little from the 
Fund. 
A protest has been sent to the Southern 
Educational Board on the attitude of the 
Board toward Negro education. 
The Alabama Educational Association 
(white) has come out against compulsory 
education. 
TH E CHURCH . 
St. Thomas Church, Philadelphia, celebrated its 164th anniversary November 8th. 
The American Missionary Association 
reports the following schools in the South: 
EDUCATIONA L WOR K I N TH E SOUT H 
SCHOOL S 
Negro. White . Total. 
Theological 3 1 4 
Colleges 3 1 4 
Secondary Institutions 25 3 28 
Elementary Institutions 9 3 12 
Affiliated Institutions 6 . . 6 
Ungraded Schools 23 . . 23 
Officers and Instructors 507 84 591 
Pupils 13,449 1,777 15,226 
Boarding Students 2,107 427 2,534 
PUPIL S 
Theological 133 81 214 
Collegiate 155 21 176 
Secondary Grades 1,974 259 2,233 
Elementary Grades 11,038 1,397 12,435 
Specials 463 71 534 
Pupils 15,592 
Counted twice 366 
Tota l 15,226 
The opening of the Negro Catholic 
Church in Kansas is the beginning of a 
$30,000 institution and school. 
Through Bishop Paret's decision, Miss 
Catherine Philpot, of Baltimore, has won 
her fight for the burial in the churchyard 
of St. James' Episcopal Church, at M y 
Lady's Manor, in Baltimore County, of 
Charles Ridout, an aged Negro, for forty 
years a servant in her family. A s a result 
of the peculiar contest the congregation of 
the church is divided. 
In the Episcopal convention, Rev. Joseph 
Dunn, of Southern Virginia , declared that 
the emancipation of the Negroes was a dire 
disaster, and that the Church, by this act, 
has 45 years of misguidance to undo. 
A t the late Episcopal convention Mr . James 
H . Dillard , agent of the Jeanes Fund , declared it was dangerous to generalize on 
any subject connected with Negro life. 
The race contained many devout and able 
men who are fully qualified, he believed, to 
be the spiritual leaders of their people in 
the episcopate. He frankly admitted in effect that the proposed plan, of racial bishops, would result i n the ecclesiastical segregation of Negro churchmen, but he justified 
this by pointing to the strong tendency to 
segregation now taking place in everyday 
life. In some States whole counties are 
becoming exclusively Negro counties. 
Segregation is not necessarily un-Christian. 
It may be accompanied by abundant good 
will . Not only is the racial episcopate in 
line with the tendency to segregate, but it 
seems the only way out and the Negro 
wants it, therefore he would give it. ALONG THE COLOR LINE 9 
ECONOMIC . 
In Kansas City the tine $5,000 new residence of Mathew Anderson, colored, which 
was nearing completion, was wrecked by 
dynamite a few nights ago. The whites of 
the community seem to have been jealous 
of this colored man's being able to build a 
good home and caused it to be blown up. 
In St. Louis Samuel Gompers, president 
of the American Federation of Labor, 
made a speech variously reported, but certainly discouraging the taking of Negroes 
into labor unions. In a telegram to TH E 
C RISI S Mr . Gompers denies saying anything 
"derogatory to the race." 
The right to segregate Negroes in Baltimore is still under consideration in the 
City Council. The proposed measure does 
not apply to servants. 
In St. Paul. Minn., a colored man, Dr. 
Hector J. Bell, Sixth street, dentist, has 
just turned over four pieces of city property, valued at $24,100, as part payment on 
$40,000 worth of Montana farm lands. Dr. 
Bell disposed in this trade of his duplex 
house on Lincoln avenue, at $12,000. This 
is in the heart of the white aristocracy district, and last year when he put colored 
tenants in it there was almost a race war 
caused. 
In the New Yor k custom service there 
are 234 colored employees, drawing $35,000 
a year. In the Internal Revenue Service 
in New Yor k there are the following 
colored men: One Collector of Internal 
Revenue, $4,500 a year; one Examine r of 
Corporations, $3,500 per year; one United 
States Internal Revenue Gauger, $1,400 per 
year; one Division Deputy Collector, $1,400 
per year; one Office Deputy, $1,200 per 
year; one Stamp Deputy, $1,200 per year; 
one Stenographer, $1,200 per year; one 
Corporation Deputy, $900 per year; one 
Messenger Clerk, $900 per year. 
Fift y white Atlanta real estate men 
have entered into an agreement not to rent 
or sell property to Negroes within the limits 
prescribed by the Fourth War d Progressive 
Club. There has been a meeting between 
the Mayor and several representative colored citizens on the subject. 
The colored True Reformers' Bank of 
Richmond, Va. , has failed, with $350,000 
liabilities, and the Galilean Bank of Hampton Va. , is said to be insolvent. It is hoped 
that the insurance department of the True 
Reformers may be saved from the wreck. 
A n interesting incident occurred a few 
days ago at the opening of The Hampton, 
the City and Suburban Homes Company's 
new model tenements for colored people at 
No . 210 West Sixty-third Street, New 
Yor k City. These buildings contain 127 
apartments, and when they were opened to 
receive tenants on Monday, October 24. 90 
families were waiting to move in, and in 
four days more every apartment was rented 
with the exception of two. This shows the 
great opportunity there is at the present 
time for building model tenements for 
colored people in this city. 
The City and Suburban Homes Company 
has already had an experience of ten years 
with colored families as tenants in its West 
Sixty-second street property, and as manager of the Phipps houses for colored people in West Sixty-third street. Both of 
these investments have furnished a most 
satisfactory record. The colored tenants 
in both buildings have shown themselves 
to be excellent tenants, quite as orderly, 
cleanly and prompt in the payment of rent 
as the company's white tenants. During 
one year there has not been a single dispossession for disorderly conduct. 
The assessors of Richmond, Va. , report 
property to the value of $2,500,000 owned 
in the city by colored people. 
The Governor of Kansas is investigating 
the case of George X . Williams, a colored 
man. Williams charges that the citizens of 
Pratt refuse to permit him to move into 
a residence he has bought; that they warned 
him not to move in and that when they 
thought he was moving in they shot his 
house full of rifle slugs. It is countercharged by Pratt people that Williams and 
another man went into a deal to make a 
thousand dollars on the price of the property because of the prejudice against 
Negroes in that particular locality. 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
A good deal is being done in the Wash ­
ington colored schools to encourage athletics. Spaulding has issued a handbook 
on the subject, giving the reports of the 
performers in these and allied schools. 
Mr. Tom Bass, a Missouri colored man, 
has an international reputation as a horse 
trainer. Amon g his prized possessions is 
a personal letter from Queen Victori a inviting Mr. Bass to bring his favorite horse 
to the royal horse show held in London. 
Bass has more than 1,000 "blue ribbons," 
several hundred "red" ones and more than 
a dozen silver loving cups which he won in 
various parts of the United States, Canada 
and Mexico on horses that he has trained. 
Mr . Booker T. Washington has called 
together a number of his friends to organize a semi-centennial exposition for the 
Negro, to be held at Tuskegee; $10,000 has 
been contributed for the preliminary plans. 
The Fourth Annua l Colored State Fair 
has been held in Georgia. 1 0 THE CRISIS 
The Colored State Fair of South Carolina was held in Columbia. 
A few colored men have been appointed 
on the county constabulary of Charlotte, 
N . C. 
Mr . Booker T. Washington with a number of companions has been making a tour 
of the State of Nort h Carolina. 
The Governor of Virgini a made an address at the Virgini a Colored State Fair. 
The Nort h Carolina Colored State Fair 
was the largest ever held. 
Five hundred white citizens have suc-
.essfully protested against the establishment of the Negro park in Memphis, Tenn. 
Colored people taxed for public parks in 
that city are not allowed to use them. 
A Negro Organization Society has been 
formed i n Virginia , at the suggestion of the 
Hampton Negro Conference, to organize 
social and educational work. 
From Springfield, Tenn., a local report 
says that the first Colored Industrial Fair 
was a success, from a financial standpoint, 
there being a large attendance and a number of fine exhibits. The colored people 
are commended for the interest shown and 
the good order that prevailed during the 
entire time of the fair. 
A successful Negro fair was held at 
Trenton, Tenn. The exhibit of horses was 
especially good. 
The Eighth Illinois Regiment, composed 
of colored men, have celebrated their fifteenth anniversary in the presence of 5,000 
citizens. This regiment was mustered into 
the Illinois National Guard in 1895 under 
Governor Altgeld. It has a splendid record, 
having served in Cuba and on riot duty. 
CRIME . 
Near Asbury Park, N . J., a colored man 
has been accused of murdering a child. 
Lynching was threatened for a while, but 
the prisoner has maintained his innocence, 
and the police now think that he is telling 
the truth, after they have tortured him 
with the "Thir d Degree." 
A t Montezuma, Ga., two Negroes have 
been lynched for killin g a night policeman. 
In Maryland, Dic k Titus, a colored person, has just died. Whe n the city jail 
caught fire, in 1893, he saved prisoners 
and firemen from death. Titus has spent 
the best part of his life in prison. Most 
of his offenses were larceny. It was said 
that all the goods that Titus stole would 
not amount to $100 worth. H e was sent 
to Bayview several months ago, .having 
been picked up on the street sick. 
In Huntington, W . Va. , several race 
riots have taken place in which a Negro, 
supposed to be George Johnson, was killed, 
three of a posse probably fatally wounded 
and five others shot. There were numerous fights between the whites and the 
blacks. Negroes were knocked down on 
the least provocation and threats made to 
wipe out the entire Negro population. 
FOREIGN . 
The Hon . Ernest Lyo n has returned to 
America , having been succeeded by Dr. 
Crum as Ministe r to Liberia . A number 
of severe charges were filed against Mr . 
Lyon , and considerable bitterness is manifest over him in the Liberian papers. 
Liberi a will elect a President in a few 
months. 
Mention has been made of the paper of 
Mr . G. W . Ellis, F . R. G. S., the colored 
ex-Secretary of the Liberian Legation, at 
the Races Conference recently held at 
Clark University. President G. Stanley 
Hal l pronounces this paper "one of the 
most condensed and admirable reports of 
the whole conference." 
Dinuzulu, the South Africa n Zul u Chief, 
has been released from confinement, in 
which he has been held since the last attempted Zul u uprising. 
A n investigator of the English Aborigine s 
Society reports as follows as to conditions 
in Mexico : 
" I am asked to emphasize the important 
fact that several investigators, entirely 
ignorant of the presence of other parties in 
the territory, and traveling in different 
directions, and with different objects, all 
arrive at practically the same conclusions; 
that these conclusions coincide with the 
revelations made in the Mexica n press itself; that this independent and public testimony confirms the private information in 
the possession of the Society from many 
correspondents in Mexico—again unacquainted with each other. The whole of 
this testimony tends to show that a system 
of peonage is widely prevalent, involving 
many thousands of human beings in Yuca ­
tan in a bondage at once as cruel and 
hopeless as almost any form of slavery 
within the knowledge of the Society. This 
testimony, coming as it does from many 
sources, including different nationalities; 
from merchants, missionaries, travelers, 
and journalists; supported by photographic 
evidence; first from one, then from another part of Mexico , cannot—in the opinion of my Committee—be lightly dismissed 
as being 'highly colored and overdrawn.' " OPINIO N 
OKLAHOMA . 
The decision of the Oklahoma 
Supreme Court sustaining the "grandfather" clause i n the State Constitution has excited some editorial 
comment, but not as much as the 
importance of the matter would seem 
to demand. The Ne w Yor k Evening 
Post calls attention to the fact that the 
court exempts the Indians from the 
educational test on the ground that 
they were under an electoral form of 
government prior to 1866. 
"Naturally, " says the Post, "the Negroes 
are very indignant at the plight they find 
themselves in—not because they are afraid 
of the educational test, but because they 
know that the test will be applied so as to 
pass every white man, foreign-born or 
otherwise, while they will be defrauded of 
a part in the government—through the 
Indians' vote—by subterfuge, by trickery 
or open lawlessness. T o the credit of the 
Republicans be it said that they have no 
part in this fraud, and that their candidate 
for Governor denounces it." 
The St. Pau l Pioneer Press remarks: "I n most of the Southern 
States that have adopted such disfranchising amendments the plea is 
made that the plan is necessary to prevent Negro domination of the political 
affairs. The statistics of population 
show some warrant for this contention, particularly in Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama, where the Negro 
population is about equal to that of the 
white, but no such excuse can be 
urged in Oklahoma. Wit h the whites 
outnumbering the Negroes by more 
than 12 to 1, the talk of a fear of 
Negro domination is simply ridiculous." 
The Boston Mornin g Herald says 
that while there are "as many ways of 
disfranchising a Negro in the South 
as of killing Satan" the Oklahoma 
method is beautifully simple and direct. "It takes a vigorous, untrammeled new community like Oklahoma 
to disregard musty precedent and 
establish injustice after its own bold 
and original fashion." 
The Southern press does not seem 
to have commented widely. The 
Charleston News and Courier is frank 
and direct: 
In thus putting herself in line with the 
action of other Southern States, in which 
the Negro population is large, Oklahoma 
evinces a proper understanding of the 
necessities of the occasion. Popular government even in the North suffers terribly 
because of ballots cast by ignorant or 
vicious men. Whe n to the vote of this 
vicious white element is added the vote of 
thousands of Negroes, popular government, 
which must be based on intelligence if it is 
to be effective, is struck a body blow. The 
Oklahoma case will finally come before the 
United States Supreme Court, but there is 
little reason to believe that that tribunal 
will interfere with the State Constitution as 
it stands, Republicans themselves having 
been foremost in teaching the doctrine of 
expediency. We believe that the "grandfather" clause is constitutional, but if it is 
not, according to the dangerous teachings 
of Mr. Roosevelt, even a "fossilized" court 
will see the advantage of reading constitutionality into it by construction. 
The New Orleans Picayune is noncommittal : "The place of the Negro 
in the political and social and business 
life of the country will one day be 
finally settled. His place will be very 
much as he himself makes it under the 
sanctions and restraints of law. He 
will get what he deserves, and no man 
should get more." 
SOCIALIST S I N OKLAHOMA . 
The organ of the New Yor k Socialists, the Call, gives this hearty 
welcome to the Oklahoma Negro 
Socialists: 
A convention of various Negro associations, recently held at Chickasha, Okla., has 
indorsed the platform of the Socialist party 
and has advised all the colored people of 
Oklahoma to vote the Socialist ticket. This 
action of the Negroes of Oklahoma is destined to be recognized as of epoch-making 
importance in the history of the American 
Negroes as well as in the history of 
American Socialism. 1 2 THE CRISIS 
By this action the Negroes of Oklahoma 
are blazing a pathway to true freedom for 
their entire race in this country. Fo r the 
problem of the Negro in Americ a is essentially a part of the great labor problem. 
The Negro is despised and robbed of his 
rights for the reason that, taken as a whole, 
he belongs to the most exploited section of 
the working class. The Negro has to bear 
not only the burden of wage labor, but also 
the burden that he has inherited from the 
days of slavery. His present is weighted 
down by his past. An d the action of the 
Negroes of Oklahoma is an emphatic expression of their resolve to help themselves 
in the present by joining the ranks of those 
who in working for the present never forget the future. 
But the action of the Oklahoma Negroes 
is also of the greatest significance to the 
Socialist movement of this country. It is a 
principle universally acknowledged by 
Socialists that although Socialism is primarily the movement of the working class 
for the overthrow of capitalist rule, it 
nevertheless must rush to the assistance of 
every oppressed class or race or nationality. 
The working class cannot achieve its ultimate grand aim of freeing itself from 
exploitation unless it frees all other elements of the community from exploitation. 
It cannot put an end to its own oppression 
unless it puts an end to all forms of oppression. Our party must stand everywhere 
on the side of the weak and oppressed, even 
if this course should bring upon us temporary reverses. Ultimate victory can be 
achieved in no other way. 
TH E MARYLAN D DECISION . 
Judge Morris of the United States 
Circuit Court has declared unconstitutional the Annapolis attempt to 
disfranchise Negroes and considerable 
comment has resulted. Says the Baltimore News: 
N o matter how much of an evil one may 
think Negro suffrage, it has always seemed 
to The News that it was a foolish thing to 
try to get rid of it by flying directly in the 
face of the Constitution of the United 
States, the Federal courts, which are here 
to declare what it is, and the Federal administration, which is here to enforce it. 
It is still possible to disfranchise ignorance, 
or vice, or poverty in Maryland. W e can 
have an educational qualification or a 
property qualification whenever the people 
of the State declare for it. Al l that Judge 
Morris' decision means is that when we disfranchise ignorance we must not look at the 
color of skin; when we disfranchise vice, it 
must not be only vice in the black man, and, 
if we disfranchise poverty, the application 
must be to all poverty alike. This is the 
law, Judge Morris declares, as Congress 
meant it to be. The decision is precisely 
what those who have fought against this 
method of trying to get rid of the Negro 
voter anticipated if the case ever got into 
court. It is to be hoped, however, that an 
appeal will be taken to the Supreme Court 
of the United States, so that the highest 
authority in the land may pass upon this 
vexed question, settle it past all dispute and 
get it out of the way of other things more 
important to Maryland's progress and welfare. 
The Springfield Republican says 
this is the first time a court has 
squarely faced the "grandfather" disfranchising clause. "I n the past, 
federal judges even as high up as those 
of the United States Supreme Court 
have decided these cases on technical 
points of jurisdiction or the like, evading the issue of disfranchisement as 
presented by the acts in question, 
fudge Morris's decision indicates what 
must happen whenever a United 
States court can be brought squarely 
to the point of passing judgment on 
the 'grandfather' hocus pocus." The 
New Yor k Sun, however, says: 
It may be doubted whether the decision 
rendered by Judge Thomas J. Morris in the 
United States Circuit Court in Marylan d 
invalidating the law of 1908 which sought 
to exclude Negroes from local elections 
would, if affirmed by the Supreme Court of 
the United States, have the effect of erasing the "grandfather clause" from the 
statute books of several Southern States. 
The Annapolis law, as it is called in 
Maryland, could be sustained only if it 
were determined that the Fifteenth Amend ­
ment did not apply to all public elections. 
State or local as well as national. The 
framers of the Annapolis law contended 
that as Marylan d had never accepted the 
Fifteenth Amendment the Legislature in 
regulating local elections was not bound by 
it; they conceded that no law could be put 
on the statute book to prevent absolutely 
the participation of Negroes in Congress 
elections. If it be assumed that the Su ­
preme Court will affirm Judge Morris's decision it does not follow that the 
"grandfather clause" in the Constitutions of 
Southern States wil l be declared invalid in 
consequence. 
The Springfield (Mo.) Journa l declares : "If the Constitution, or any of 
its amendments, places the Negro citizen on an equal political footing with 
the white citizen, no attempt at subterfuge or illegal compromise should be 
permitted in any of the Southern 
States. That some Negroes, or a majority of the race, may be ignorant, or OPINION 1 3 
improvident, or brutal, is aside from 
the main issue; if they have any constitutional rights, the whole power of 
the Constitution should be brought 
into play to the end that they may get 
those rights." 
Mr . William L . Marbury, one of the 
counsel in the Annapolis registration 
law cases on the anti-Negro side, gave 
an interview to the Baltimore Sun in 
which he said: " I am glad to see that 
my friend, Mr . Bonaparte, is advising 
the Republican party of this State to 
test the question of the validity of the 
laws for the limitation of the franchise 
of the Negro in the courts. The Supreme Court alone has the ultimate 
decision of these questions, and I presume, of course, that these cases wil l 
go to that tribunal on writ of error. 
We are a law-abiding people,and whatever the Supreme Court says on this 
subject wil l be accepted as absolutely 
binding, as a matter of course. I for 
one am only too glad to see this controversy transferred from the political 
area to the judicial tribunals of the 
land. " 
Rabbi Willia m Rosenau, of Baltimore, preached a sermon on the topic : 
"United in Ou r Humanity, " in the 
course of which he said: "If you 
would have an example of the unwarranted disaffection between races, 
which, disregarding all ties of humanity, has eventuated in enmity, then 
consider that reprehensible attitude of 
the white man, which would go the 
lengths, not merely of depriving the 
Negro of his Constitutional franchise, 
but also of limiting his educational advantages. Civi l rights should never be 
withdrawn with the establishment of 
social discrimination." 
TH E LEWI S APPOINTMENT . 
Late in October an apparently wellfounded rumor declared that President 
Taft would appoint William H . Lewis, 
of Boston, to be an assistant attorneygeneral of the United States. Unde r 
the date of October 27, N . B. Marshall, 
the colored lawyer who was associate 
counsel for the dismissed Brownsville 
battalion, addressed a letter to the 
President, in which he said: 
The appointment of a few colored men 
to high Federal offices, although delayed 
until a few days before election, does not 
blind the eyes of the colored people to the 
wrongs and injustices they are suffering 
from the nullification of the Constitution, 
which you are sworn to uphold. When we 
recall your Greensboro, New Orleans and 
Kansas City speeches, and your inaugural 
address, in which you, for the first time 
since the war amendments were adopted, 
boldly proclaimed a policy for colored citizens flagrantly at variance with the 
fundamental law of the land, we feel that 
you insult our intelligence by assuming that 
the American Negro is so ignorant and 
venal that he would exchange his political 
and civil rights for a few offices. 
W e cannot forget that while you are 
appointing a few Negroes to office you 
have removed hundreds from office. W e 
cannot forget that while our people in the 
Southern States are being disfranchised, 
indiscriminately "jim-crowed" and massacred by savage mobs, you have voiced 
no protest. We cannot forget that it was 
you who charged the colored soldiers with 
"conspiracy of silence" at Brownsville, 
which charge was completely and emphatically disproved by two great tribunals ; 
nor can we forget that it was you, who, 
when the funds of the Brownsville Court 
Enquiry became exhausted before the enquiry was complete, refused to permit your 
Secretary of Wa r to ask Congress for more 
funds. An d this, too, in spite of the fact 
that Senator Aldridge had promised to see 
to it that the Court of Enquiry should have 
all the money necessary for a full and fair 
hearing. 
Whil e we are glad and grateful to receive our just dues in the appointment of 
some colored men to high office, what we 
want above all things is that you use the 
powerful influence of your exalted office to 
the creation of a national sentiment for 
securing to our people the rights guaranteed to them by the Constitution of the 
United States. 
The Boston Post, pleased with the 
appointment, offers this forceful comment: "If Mr . Taft allows himself to 
be turned aside from the making of a 
fine and deserved appointment through 
the raising of the color issue by those 
servants of the government in Washington who cannot bear to think of an 
educated and refined Negro as their 
superior officer, he will prove himself 
more of a doughface than we can possibly imagine him to be." The 
Christian Science Monitor, of Boston, 
says: "Whatever construction is 
placed by political analysts on President Taft's announced decision to 
name William H . Lewis, of Boston, as 14 THE CRISIS 
assistant attorney-general of the 
United States, there is certain to be 
widespread approval of the appointment, on the ground that it is a 
tribute to a race as well as to an individual. " The Cleveland Plai n Dealer 
disapproves of the appointment, but 
not on the ground of color: "There is 
no reason in the world why colored 
men of ability should not be given federal appointments. Intrinsically the 
appointment of colored men merits no 
censure. But the selection of this 
time, just before election, for making 
the appointments savors very strongly 
of cheap politics." 
The Charleston News and Courier, 
as usual, goes directly to the point in 
an editorial, entitled, " A Sop to the 
Blacks, " in which it calls the appointment a "palpable bid " for the Negro 
vote in doubtful States: 
The appointee is, we believe, the famous 
Harvar d halfback who made such a wonderful football record a few years ago, and 
he is probably quite capable intellectually 
of discharging the duties of the important 
office to which he has been called, but even 
if this be true the appointment is not 
thereby to be justified nor is it any the 
more likely for that reason to meet with 
public approval. 
The public has a right to expect that in 
the filling of an office of the dignity and 
importance of the assistant attorney-generalship the appointee shall be a man 
acceptable to the body of the people, and 
we are profoundly convinced that the 
public generally does not approve the appointment of Negroes to positions of this 
character. This is true Nort h as well as 
South. The race prejudice of the Nort h 
differs materially from that of the South 
and it is largely irrational, but it is none 
the less real and it is steadily on the increase. In the face of it the appointment 
of colored men to high office is highly injudicious and must inevitably prove 
harmful to the Negroes generally. It were 
better for the race were the policy of baiting them with false hopes abandoned 
definitely and finally. 
T o this comment the Rochester 
(N . Y. ) Democrat and Chronicle replies : 
This appointee represents a race in this 
country of 10,000,000 or more citizens. 
Amon g them are many men and women of 
education, ability and the highest moral 
character. The News and Courier says it 
is "profoundly convinced that the public 
generally does not approve the appointment 
of Negroes to positions of this character." 
T o what "public" does our contemporary 
refer? There are Negrophobists 'in the 
Nort h and in the South who object; but we 
do not believe that the masses of the 
American people, with their sense of justice 
and fairness, desire to shut out of participation in all Government affa;
rs millions of 
American citizens simply because they belong to a race which is antagonized i n this 
country by senseless prejudice and bigotry. 
The meanness of that proposition is 
equalled only by its cruelty. 
The Houston (Texas) Chronicle, 
remarking that "the Negro i n politics 
is, as a rule, the Negro out of work " 
prophesies that such an appointment 
"wil l tend to encourage the impudence 
and crime of bad Negroes." 
A COLORE D REFORMATORY . 
The Nort h Carolina Legislature 
wil l soon consider the question of 
establishing a reformatory for colored 
young people, and an organization has 
been formed among Negroes to further the movement. Th e Charlotte 
Observer quotes from the Lexingto n 
Dispatch 'the following story: " A 
colored woman who was raised i n 
Greensboro died in Ne w York , possessed of considerable estate accumulated through years of saving of 
wages earned in domestic service. In 
her wil l she bequeathed a valuable 
tract of 365 acres of land i n Guilfor d 
County to be used as a nucleus fund 
for the establishment of a reformatory 
and manual training school for young 
Negroes. Wherever such a school is 
established she directed that the proceeds of the sale of this valuable 
farm should be applied to the fund 
necessary to begin active work. " Th e 
Observer points out that sociologists 
are agreed boys should not be sent to 
jail to mi x with hardened criminals, 
and after expressing its sympathy wit h 
the project concludes: "Fe w more important duties rest upon this Common ­
wealth than that connected wit h the 
proper training of its colored citizens. 
Surrounded by the proper environment 
the Negro has evidenced a most commendable disposition to make the best 
out of himself, not i n isolated cases 
here and there, but in thousands of in ­
stances. Left to himself, especially in 
the cities, there are many obstacles to OPINION 15 
his progress. It is to be hoped that 
the legislators wil l give serious consideration of the early establishment 
of this greatly needed institution and 
the story related by the Dispatch 
should furnish not a little food for 
thought." 
BULLDOZIN G NEGROES . 
The Louisville, Ky. , Post, in an attack upon the police department, says : 
"Running along with this failure to 
detect crime and apprehend criminals 
was the systematic process of bulldozing the Negro population of Louisville. 
Causeless arrests were made. Provocations of every character were given 
by the police to the Negroes. Offensive and illegal commands' were 
thrown at quiet, inoffensive citizens 
on the street. The policemen acted 
upon the assumption that the Negro 
had no rights, civil or political, that a 
. police bully was bound to respect. The 
result was seen on registration days. 
Intimidation had been most effective. 
Fro m four to five thousand Negroes 
were kept away from the polls. Whe n 
that report went in there was great 
rejoicing in the Buckingham green 
room. " 
TH E PANAM A EXPOSITION . 
Ne w Orleans Times-Democrat remarks: "The action of the Negro 
Baptist Convention in attaching to its 
resolutions indorsing New Orleans for 
the Panama Exposition a proviso demanding suspension or repeal of the 
'Jim Crow' laws, not only in this city, 
but in the Southern States, requires, 
we think, a brief but emphatic reply. 
Eve n if the securement of the Ex ­
position, important and greatly desired 
as it is, depended absolutely upon the 
abrogation of laws devised for the protection of both races, the people of 
Ne w Orleans would never consent to 
a programme so fatuous and dangerous." 
FOREIG N COMMENT . 
The Londo n Nation comments as 
follows on Mr . B. T. Washington's 
words i n Europe : 
Mr . Booker T. Washington recently gave 
us a glowing picture of the progress, industrial, intellectual and moral, made by 
his colored fellow-citizens in the United 
States during recent years. His policy, 
"Let politics alone and acquire efficiency," 
is, however, repudiated by a strong body of 
educated opinion in America, which finds 
expression in a remarkable letter published 
this week in the Press. The signatories 
point out that the withholding of the franchise, in the States where most Negroes 
live, is attended by a refusal of criminal 
and civil justice, a denial of equal opportunities of education, a caste proscription 
which practically excludes from most 
skilled trades and other grave disabilities. 
Al l aware of the current tendencies of 
American sentiment recognize that race 
feeling with all that it imports is growing 
more intense in all sections of the country, 
and that in various subtle ways it is eating 
into the very spirit of democracy. The 
doctrine of '-^equal rights |p r all civilized 
men" is definitely contravened by the constitutions and laws of most Southern 
States. Amon g the signatories of this 
powerful appeal to Europe, we find the 
names of many of the most influential 
teachers and professional men among the 
colored people. 
The following cartoon from L'As -
siette au Beurre, Paris, illustrating the 
life of Mr . Roosevelt, shows something 
of prevailing European opinion of 
America : 
"I was born October 27, 1858, in the 
midst of indescribable enthusiasm. 
" A great banquet was given. Each guest 
brought a present of ale, whisky, mutton 
chops, ginger ale, or corned beef. The 
poor people having nothing of this sort to 
offer decided to burn a Negro alive under 
our windows." EDITORIA L 
GOO D WIL L TOWAR D MEN . 
THI S is the month of the Christ 
Child . This is the month 
when there was reborn in men 
the ideal of doing to their neighbors 
that which they would wish done to 
themselves. It was a divine idea—a 
veritable Son of God. In blood and 
tears the world has struggled toward 
this Star of Bethlehem, and to-day, in 
the intercourse of man with man 
within large and growing groups, we 
see glimmerings of the fulfilment 
of the vision. But in the intercourse 
of group with group and nation with 
nation and race with race the ideal has 
not only miserably failed, but even its 
truth has been denied. Go d grant that 
on some Christmas day our nation and 
all others will plant themselves on this 
one platform : Equa l justice and equal 
opportunity for all races. 
N . A . A . C. P. 
WHA T is the National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People ? It is a 
union of those who believe that 
earnest, active opposition is the only 
effective way of meeting the forces of 
evil. They believe that the growth of 
race prejudice in the United States is 
evil. It is not always consciously 
evil. Muc h of it is born of ignorance 
and misapprehension, honest mistake 
and misguided zeal. However caused, 
it is none the less evil, wrong, dangerous, fertile of harm. Fo r this reason it 
must be combatted. It is neither safe 
nor sane to sit down dumbly before 
such human error or to seek to combat it with smiles and hushed whispers. 
Fight the wrong with every human 
weapon in every civilized way. 
The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People is organized to fight the wrong of race 
prejudice: 
(a) By doing away with the excuses for prejudice. 
(b) By showing the unreasonableness of prejudice. 
(c) By exposing the evils of race 
prejudice. 
This is a large program of reform? 
It is, and this is because the evil is 
large. There is not to-day in human 
affairs a more subtle and awful enemy 
of human progress, of peace and sympathy than the reaction war and hatred 
that lurks in the indefinite thing which 
we call race prejudice. Does it not call 
for opposition—determined,.persistent 
opposition? Ar e rational beings justified in sitting silently, willingly dumb 
and blind to the growth of this crime ? 
W e believe not. W e are organized, 
then to say to the worl d and our 
country: 
Negroes are men with the foibles 
and virtues of men. 
To treat evil as though it were good 
and good as though it were evil is not 
only wrong but dangerous, since in the 
end it encourages evil and discourages 
good. 
To treat all Negroes alike is treating 
evil as good and good as evil. 
To draw a crass and dogged undeviating color line in human affairs is 
dangerous—as dangerous to those who 
draw it as to those against whom it is 
drawn. 
W e are organized to fight this great 
modern danger. Ho w may we fight 
it? 
1. By the argument of the printed 
word in a periodical like this, and in 
pamphlets and tracts. 
2. By the spoken wor d in talk and 
lecture. 
3. By correspondence. 
4. By encouraging all efforts at 
social uplift. 
5. By careful investigation of the 
truth in matters of social condition 
and race contact—not the truth as we EDITORIAL 17 
want it or you want it, but as it really 
is. 
6. By individual relief of the 
wretched. 
If you think such work is worth 
while aid us by joining our organization and contributing to it. 
TH E RACE S I N CONFERENCE . 
WE DOUB T if the Twentieth 
Century will bring forth a 
greater idea than the First 
Universal Races Congress in London, 
in the summer of 1911. Its possibilities are tremendous and its plan 
unique. Man y will, of course, instinctively fear it. They will ask: "Wha t 
good after all can come of such a congress? Wha t can it do save talk— 
what can it initiate save profitless agitation?" The chief outcome of the 
Congress wil l be human contact—the 
meeting of men; not simply the physical meeting, eye to eye and hand to 
hand of those actually present, but the 
resultant spiritual contact which will 
run round the world. 
Great as is the theoretical value of 
such human meeting there are many 
men and good men who shrink from it 
with strange fear. Some quail at 
meeting any stranger, more at meeting 
men alien in look and habit. 
Outside this physical shrinking 
which we have in common with 
children, comes the mental recoil— 
the disinclination to have our thoughts 
and ideas disarranged and upset. An d 
still further on comes the moral dread 
of blame—of facing the man we have 
wronged and hearing the hurt from 
his own quivering lips. From such 
fears comes an eagerness to justify exclusion—to refuse any association with 
lower classes or lower races and sometimes in extreme cases we seek in our 
panic to build walls and say not simply " I wil l not meet and listen to the 
stranger," but "you shall not on penalty of my high displeasure." 
The Races Congress is the meeting 
of the Worl d on a broad plane of human respect and equality. In no other 
way is human understanding and 
world peace and progress possible. 
Ever y attempt to reach the desired 
goal otherwise has had failure written 
on its forehead. 
T o be sure, we are fond of experimenting in these lines. W e like to assemble on the avenue and discuss the 
East Side or meet at Mohonk and discuss the Indians, who are seldom 
present, or form a Southern Educa ­
tional Board, whose meetings no 
Negro may attend. Such meetings 
may do good, but they can never settle 
the problems they attempt and their 
unanimity is always deceptive and 
often misleading. Onl y the man himself can speak for himself. W e say: 
Put yourself in his place; but after all 
we know that no human soul can thus 
change itself. The voice of the oppressed alone can tell the real meaning 
of oppression and, though the voice be 
tremulous, excited and even incoherent, it must be listened to if the world 
would learn and know. 
Onl y then in a world-wide contact 
of men in which the voices of all races 
are heard shall we begin that contact 
and sympathy which in God's good 
time wil l bring out of war and hatred 
and prejudice a real democracy of 
races and of nations. A s some slight 
step toward this vast end has the 
Races Congress been called in London. 
To such a meeting should go particularly those people to whom the 
physical differences of race and nation 
are ridiculous or incomprehensible, 
those to whom mental disagreement is 
foolishness and those who cannot see 
that the canons of morality extend beyond their own family or nation, or 
color of skin. Fro m such a congress 
should come the beginnings of a vast 
tolerance and sympathy. No t only a 
tolerance of the Chinese and Hindus 
on the part of Europeans, but the just 
as necessary comprehension of Euro ­
pean thought and morality on the part 
of millions of darker peoples who 
have slight cause to view it with respect. W e may sympathize with the 
great Peace Movement, we may sympathize with world-wide efforts for 
moral reform and social uplift, but before them all we must place those 
efforts which aim to make humanity 
not the attribute of the arrogant and THE CHRISTMAS RECKONING 
At Christmastide two million Southern Negroes ma 
their annual wage reckoning with the plantation owne 
and either receive the small balance due or arc remand, 
to debt slavery. 2 0 THE CRISIS 
the exclusive, but the heritage of all 
men in a world where most men are 
colored. 
TH E ELECTION . 
FOR colored men the Congressional election of 1910 marked 
an event. Never before since 
Emancipation have so many colored 
voters cast the Democratic ticket. 
The reason for this was fourfold: 
1. Air. Roosevelt's blunder at 
Brownsville. 
2. The failure of the Republican 
party to redeem its reiterated pledges 
to colored men. 
3. The policy of ousting Negro officeholders inaugurated by Mr . Taft. 
4. The invitation extended by various Democratic candidates in the 
Nort h and by the party in border 
States like Missouri. 
Wa s it wise for colored men to vote 
the Democratic ticket? It is always 
wise for any voter to vote his honest 
convictions. Whether or not the 
colored people will be treated decently 
by the triumphant Democracy remains 
to be seen. O n this point the appeal 
sent out to newly elected congressmen 
by the United Colored Democracy of 
Ne w Yor k is significant: 
"The result places a heavy responsibility on us and, we venture to 
suggest, on you. Fair and honest as 
has been the treatment of Negroes' by 
a large part of your party it is nevertheless unfortunately true that a 
reactionary branch is continually endeavoring through legislation and 
judicial decision to proscribe and degrade our people. 
"In view of this fact we earnestly 
appeal to you to do all in your power 
to see that the forces of reaction and 
race hatred do not take advantage of 
this Democratic victory to pass oppressive legislation. Should this be 
done, our efforts for a series of years 
will be nullified, the Republicans wil l 
be able to say, 'I told-you so,' and the 
growing Negro vote will be lost to the 
Democrats for a long time. A s you 
know in a close contest the colored 
voters of several large Northern 
States hold the balance of power. 
"W e do not expect or ask for special legislation, but we do ask that 
your party stand up for progressive 
measures and refuse to be made responsible for any effort to degrade 
American citizens." 
TH E GHETTO . 
IT IS curious how old ideas recur 
and ancient ones persist. In 
earliest times the easiest way to 
prevent trouble was to separate the 
combatants—put space between them, 
herd them in separate sections and 
territories. So long as the worl d was 
wide this was feasible and often effective. A s the worl d grows narrower, it is not so easy and as it 
grows more civilized it is less advisable. Fo r after all culture is the 
meeting and learning of men. 
Fo r instance, one meets on street or 
car an impudent colored man. He 
has some education, he has good 
clothes and he feels his importance 
and asserts himself. Lik e a flash you 
rush to the conclusion: Such a man 
ought not to associate with white 
folks until he learns good manners. 
But hold ; suppose all the ill-mannered 
white folk were segregated, would 
that improve the world's deportment? 
Certainly not. It would make it distinctly and dangerously worse. It is 
association with the well-bred that 
brings manners. 
Ho w has Americ a come to improve 
the manners which justly shocked 
Dickens and Mrs. Martineau ? B y 
associating with gentlemen and ladies 
here and in Europe. It was and is a 
bit hard on Europe, but it is a great 
boon for the world. 
In Americ a by the accident of color 
it is possible roughly to separate much 
ignorance and bad manners by drawing the color line. But it is a 
barbarous and unjust and unwise expedient, and it leads to the extreme 
Ghetto idea. The half-trained white 
Baltimore tradesman reasons logically: 
If I can push black men out of my 
way in train and street car, in theatre 
and art gallery, in church and park, 
wh y can I not segregate them in a 
Ghetto? The Atlant a "cracker," new-EDITORIAL 21 
born to good wages and political 
power, is jealous of ambitious black 
folk. If he can take a black man's 
vote away why can he not take his 
home and force him back to the.alley, 
whence he came? 
It is time that the thought and 
conscience of Americ a took a firm 
stand on these matters and stopped 
now and forever such dangerous and 
undemocratic doctrine. 
ADVICE . 
THER E is a matter which calls 
for a solemn editorial in a 
metropolitan newspaper , 
namely, the pre-emptying of seats on 
suburban trains. The New Yor k 
Times says: "Ver y often the question, 
'Is this seat taken?' which it is well 
enough to ask before sitting down beside a stranger, is answered with a 
gruff and resentful 'Yes,' though 
obviously it is not then 'taken' by 
anything more than a hat or a newspaper or a valise. This reply is 
impudent, and it ought to result in a 
'scene,' more or less vivacious, every 
time it is made." 
This is the advice to commuters: 
Mak e a scene "more or less vivacious" 
every time! 
There is another serious matter 
which calls our attention: Tw o thousand five hundred colored men have 
been lynched in this land in the last 
25 years. O n this matter we have 
not been advised to make a scene 
"more or less vivacious," but on the 
contrary, a large number of good and 
influential men have united to deprecate complaint or agitation. Man y 
colored men are disposed to accept 
this advice, but on the heels of it 
comes the action of Mexico . One— 
just one—Mexican was burned in 
Texas. "W e thought no more of it," 
says the Associated Press dispatch 
naively, but the land of Mexic o was 
moved from center to circumference; 
denunciation and even mob violence 
was threatened and all over one 
criminal. 
Ca n we black men fail to contrast 
with this the recent interview with 
a distinguished American in Vienna? 
He is reported in the columns of Die 
Zeit to say: "There was no race war 
in Americ a over the Johnson-Jeffries 
fight. Not more than a dozen Negroes 
were killed and now the whole matter 
is forgotten." 
Al l of which shows how advice 
may be tempered by race prejudice. 
TH E INEVITABLE . 
IN TH E argument of the prejudiced there is a certain usual 
ending: "Bu t this is inevitable." 
Fo r instance, a crime is committed by 
you. I am lynched. "It is inevitable," 
cries the bystander, "they were both 
Negroes." A brown man is admitted 
to a theatre, misbehaves and is ejected. 
I apply for a ticket and am refused. 
"It is inevitable," sighs the manager, 
"you are brown. " A yellow man is 
a fool; therefore, Smith, who is also 
yellow, is treated like an idiot. " I 
am sorry," remarks the policeman, 
"but they are both yellow." 
Wha t is the real argument in these 
cases? It is this: "People who resemble each other in one important 
respect ought to resemble each other 
in all important respects and therefore be treated alike. If by any 
chance they do not so resemble each 
other, this is unfortunate, for the 
same treatment must be meted out. 
This is inevitable." 
Is it? It is not inevitable. It is 
criminal injustice. It is inhuman 
treatment and it is socially dangerous. 
It is based on the unscientific assumption that human beings who resemble 
each other in one important particular, like color of skin, resemble each 
other in all particulars. This is patently false. Moreover, the social condemnation of an undesirable act or 
character loses all force or reason 
when it is directed against one who 
has not committed the act or has not 
the condemned character. T o allow 
the mistreatment of such an innocent 
man—to condone it or defend it, is 
not inevitable; it is a crime. TH E REA L RAC E PROBLE M 
By FRAN Z BOAS , Professor of Anthropology, Columbia University 
[Professor Franz Boas, who writes the leading 
article this month, is a member of the Department 
of Anthropology in Columbia University. Th e editor of Science reports that the leading scientists of 
America regard this department of Columbia as the 
strongest in the country. This gives a peculiar 
weight to Dr . Boas' words, which were first delivered at the Second National Negro Conference in 
May , 1910.] 
The essential problem before us is 
founded on the presence of two entirely 
distinct human types in the same community, and relates to the best possible correlation of the activities of these two types. 
On the whole, the answer to this problem 
has been based on the assumption of the 
superiority of the one type and the inferiority of the other. The first question to be 
answered by scientific investigation is, in 
how far the Negro type may be considered 
the inferior, the white type as the superior. 
TH E NEGRO NO T INFERIOR 
The anthropologist recognizes that the 
Negro and the white represent the two most 
divergent types of mankind. The differences in color, form of hair, form of face, 
are known to all of us. Other differences, 
better known to anthropologists, are those 
in the proportions of the limbs and of the 
trunk of the body, and in the size of the 
brain. 
Whe n we consider inferiority and superiority from a general biological point of 
view, it must be interpreted as meaning 
that one type is nearer to certain ancestral forms than another. In this sense, the 
anthropologist must say that in certain respects the Negro resembles the hypothetical ancestral forms of man more than does 
the European; while in other respects the 
European shows greater similarity to the 
supposed ancestral form. Amon g the 
Negro race it is particularly the form of 
the face that reminds us of the ancestral 
forms of man, while in regard to the proportions of the body, and particularly the 
length of the limbs, the Negro is more remote from ancestral forms than is the 
European. 
On the whole, the morphological characteristics of the two races show rather a 
specialized development in different directions than a higher development in the 
one race as compared with the other. 
Ordinarily, however, the question of inferiority and superiority is formulated in 
a different manner, based essentially on the 
capacity of mental achievement; and much 
stress is laid on two points—the lesser size 
of the brain of the Negro, and the supposed shortness of the period of development of the Negro child. 
SIZE OF BRAI N 
It is true that the average size of the 
Negro brain is slightly smaller than the 
average size of the brain of the white race; 
but it must be borne in mind that a wide 
range of brain-forms and brain-sizes occur 
among the white race, beginning with very 
small brains and extending to very large 
ones; that the same is true of the Negro 
race, and that the difference between the 
averages of the two races is exceedingly 
small as compared with the range of variability found in either race. Thus it happens that the brain-weights of the bulk of 
the Negro race and of the bulk of the white 
race have the same values, with the sole 
exception that low brain-weights are slightly 
more frequent among the Negroes, high 
brain-weights slightly more frequent among 
the whites. 
Elaborate studies of brains of great men, 
criminals, and normal individuals have 
proved that the relation between mental 
ability and brain-weight is rather remote, 
and that we are not by any means justified 
in concluding that the larger brain is always the more efficient tool for mental 
achievement. There is presumably a slight 
increase of average ability corresponding 
to a considerable increase in average brainweight ; but this increase is so slight that 
in a comparison of the mental ability of the 
Negro race and of the white race, the difference in size of the brain seems quite 
insignificant. 
The second point of which much has 
been made is the question of the difference 
in period of development between the two 
races. It has been claimed that the Negro 
child develops favorably, but that its development is arrested at an early date. 
Unfortunately, these statements are not 
based on careful examination of facts; and 
while I am unable to refute these views by 
bringing forward actual anthropometrical 
statistics bearing upon the subject, I am also 
not in a position to sustain them by any 
reliable evidence. The question is an important one, and should receive serious 
attention. 
But even if the observation had been 
made, its interpretation would not be an 
easy one without the most painstaking in ­
vestigation of the social conditions with 
which the phenomenon is correlated. W e 
know that in the white race the most favorably situated social groups show the most 
rapid growth in early childhood and an 
early completion of development; while the 
poor, who live under more unfavorable 
social conditions, show a slow and longcontinued development, which, however, in THE REAL RACE PROBLEM 23 
its entirety, does not equal the amount of 
physiological development attained by better-situated individuals of the same race. 
It appears, therefore, that the simple fact 
of an early completion of development does 
not by any means prove mental inferiority, 
because the better-situated element of our 
white population furnishes a disproportionately large number of capable and efficient 
individuals, as compared to the less favorably situated groups. 
The whole anatomical and physiological 
comparison of the Negro and of the white 
race may be summed up in the statement 
that certain differences between the two 
races are so fundamental that they seem 
to form two quite distinct groups of the 
human species, the characteristics of which, 
notwithstanding the great variability of 
each race, do not overlap; while, in regard 
to other characteristics, the differences are 
so slight that the difference between the 
two races is insignificant, as compared to 
the range of variability exhibited in each 
race by itself; and that there are hardly any 
anatomical or physiological traits developed 
in such manner that we are justified in calling one race anatomically or physiologically 
higher than the other. The existing differences are differences in kind, not in value. 
This implies that the biological evidence' 
also does not sustain the view, which is 
so often proposed, that the mental power of 
the one race is higher than that of the 
other, although their mental qualities show, 
presumably, differences analogous to the 
existing anatomical and physiological differences. 
HANDICA P OF SLAVER Y 
The objection will be raised that the 
low stage of culture of the Africa n race in 
many parts of America, as well as in 
Africa , shows clearly a lack of mental 
power, because otherwise the Negro race 
might have developed a civilization similar 
to that of Europe. In answer to this objection, we must remember that, on the 
whole, our conception of Africa n conditions 
is based altogether too much upon the condition of the uneducated descendant of the 
American Negro slave. An y one who is 
familiar with ethnological facts will recognize that the conditions under which the 
American slave population developed is apt 
to destroy what little culture may have existed. The complete break with the Africa n 
past; the imposition of labor, in the results 
of which the slave had no direct interest; 
the difficulty of assimilating the elements 
of civilization by which they were surrounded, all tended equally to reduce to a minimum the amount of independent cultural 
achievement of the group. 
O n the other hand, the general impression of Africa n conditions is based altogether too much upon our knowledge of the 
American Negro. It is not sufficiently well 
known how highly advanced is the industrial and political organization of aboriginal 
Africa . Villages that have not been ravaged by Mohammedan or European slave 
hunters, and which have enjoyed a period 
of peace, are characterized by high industrial development. 
TRAD E WEL L ORGANIZED . 
Agriculture flourishes; men and women 
are engaged in pottery making, weaving, 
blacksmith work, and metal casting; trade 
between the different villages is well organized ; and in many cases the political 
organization, owing to the force of character of great men, has led to the establishment of states which cover territories 
comparable in size only to large sections of 
our American continent. I think it is not 
saying too much if I state that among the 
primitive people of the world, the natives 
of Central Afric a are by far the most 
advanced, and that the type of their civilization belongs to the same level of culture 
which was found a few thousand years ago 
all over the western part of the Ol d World , 
including Europe and Western Asia . 
If the Africans have not shared in the 
development which, after many vicissitudes, 
gradually extended from Egypt and Babylonia over the Mediterranean area, and 
from there later into Northern Europe, 
this is due to the fact that Afric a occupied 
a much more remote position in relation 
to these' countries, and that the current of 
civilization was carried with much greater 
difficulty through the virgin forests and 
deserts of Afric a than along the shores of 
the Mediterranean and across the forests 
and meadow lands of Europe. 
Thus it may safely be said that there is 
no anthropological evidence showing inferiority of the Negro race as compared 
with the white race, although we may assume that differences in mental characteristics of the two races exist. 
CAS E OF TH E MULATT O 
The question that confronts us is not 
alone the question of the mental aptitude 
of the full-blood Negro, but also the 
question of the ability, vigor, and adaptability of the mulatto. In the course of 
time, since the Negro has been imported 
into America, a very large amount of influx of white blood has taken place, which 
has had the result that in those parts of 
the country where the Negro does not form 
a very great majority, full-bloods are presumably quite rare. Owin g to the peculiar 
manner of development of this mulatto 
population, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to trace the exact amount of white 
blood and of Negro blood in the mixed 
races; but even a cursory examination of 
the prevalent types of the colored population shows clearly that the mixture is very 
extended. 
Here the point has often been raised that 
the mulatto population is inferior to either 
pure race, or, to use the popular form of 
expression, that they inherit all the evil 
characteristics of both parental races, and 
none of their good qualities. It is" obvious 24 THE CRISIS 
that in this exaggerated form the statement 
is untrue. A s a matter of fact, this theory 
is generally used only so far as it may suit 
our purposes; and the statement that a 
mulatto of exceptional ability and strength 
of character owes his eminence to the white 
strain in his blood is seriously made without being felt as a contradiction to this 
theory. Serious attempts have been made 
to investigate the social and vital characteristics of the mulatto as compared to 
the Negro race and to the white race; but 
here again we must recognize with regret 
that a sound basis for safe conclusions has 
not been gained yet. It is very difficult to 
differentiate clearly between those characteristics of the mulatto that are due to 
the social conditions under which he lives, 
and those that are due to hereditary causes. 
In order to determine the actual conditions 
with any degree of accuracy, extensive investigations would have to be carried 
through with this specific object in view. 
It seems to my mind that the assumption which is generally made is very unlikely, for it ought to be possible to find, 
either in history or in biology, parallel cases 
demonstrating the evil effects of intermixture upon mixed types. It seems to my 
mind that the whole early history of our 
domesticated animals indicates that mix ­
ture has hardly ever had detrimental effect 
upon the development of varieties. Practically none of our domesticated animals 
are descendants of a single species. The 
probable history of our European cattle will 
illustrate what presumably happened. In 
all likelihood cattle were first domesticated 
in Asi a and came to Europe in company 
with a number of tribes that migrated from 
the East westward. A t tnis period large 
herds of wild cattle existed in Europe. 
The herds attracted the wild native bulls, 
which belonged to a distinct species of 
cattle, and a gradual mixture of the blood 
of the domesticated and of the wild cattle 
took place, which had the effect of modifying the type of the animal that was kept. 
MODIFICATION I N TYPE . 
In the same way domesticated cattle 
would from time to time escape and join 
the wil d herds; so that admixture occurred 
also in the wild species. This gradual 
modification of the type of both wild and 
domesticated animals may be observed even 
at the present time in Siberia and in Central Asia ; and a zoological investigation 
of our domesticated animals has shown 
that practically in all cases this has been 
the development of the existing types. It 
is a peculiarity incident to domestication 
that intermixture of distinct types is facilitated. Amon g wild animals mixture of 
different species is, on the whole, rare; and 
mixture of distinct varieties of the same 
species does not ordinarily occur, because 
each variety has its own local habitat. 
If we want to understand analogous conditions in mankind clearly, we must remember that man, in his bodily form and 
in his physiological functions, is strictly 
analogous to domesticated animals. Practically everywhere human culture has advanced so far that the anatomical type of 
man cannot be compared to that of wil d 
animals, but must be considered as analogous to the type of domesticated animals. 
This condition has brought it about that 
intermixture of distinct types has always 
been easy. 
The types of man which were originally 
strictly localized have not remained so, 
but extended migrations have been the 
rule ever since very early times; in fact, 
as far back as our knowledge of prehistoric 
archaeology carries us. Therefore we find 
mixtures between distinct types the worl d 
over. Fo r our present consideration the 
mixed types that occur on the borderland 
of the Negro races seem particularly interesting. I mention among these the Western people of the Polynesian Islands, who 
are undoubtedly a mixture of negroid types 
and of another type related to the Malay, 
a highly gifted people, which, before Euro ­
pean contact, had developed a peculiar and 
interesting culture of their own. Mor e in ­
teresting than these are the inhabitants of 
the southern borderland of the Sahara. 
HO W POPULATION S WERE MIXED . 
In olden times this was the home of the 
darkest Negro races; but immediately north 
of them were found people of much lighter 
complexion, which, in descent, belong to 
the group of Mediterranean people. They 
belong to the same group which developed 
the ancient Egyptian civilization. Fo r long 
periods these people have made inroads into 
the Negro territory south of the Sahara, 
and have established the empire of the 
Sudan, whose history we can trace about a 
thousand years back. In this manner a 
mixed population has developed in many 
of these regions which has proved exceedingly capable, which has produced a great 
many men of great power, and which has 
succeeded in assimilating a considerable 
amount of Ara b culture. 
It is quite remarkable to see how, in some 
of the more remote parts of this country, 
where intermixture has been very slight, the 
pure Negro type dominates and has developed exactly the same type of culture 
which is found in other regions, where the 
Nort h Africa n type predominates. The development of culture, and the degree of 
assimilation of foreign elements, depend, in 
this whole area, not upon the purity of the 
race, but upon the stability of political conditions, which during long periods have 
been characterized by an alternation of 
peaceful development and of warlike conquest. 
The history of East Africa , with its extended migrations of people from north to 
south, is another case illustrating the infusion of foreign blood into the Africa n 
race without in any way modifying the cultural conditions of the continent, except so THE REAL RACE PROBLEM 25 
far as the introduction of new inventions is 
concerned. 
MULATT O NO T INFERIOR 
I think, therefore, that biological analogy 
as well as historical evidence do not favor 
the assumption of any material inferiority 
of the mulatto. The question, however, deserves a painstaking investigation. 
The simple facts that Negroes and Europeans live side by side in our country, that 
the European receives constant large additions from abroad, while the amount of 
Negro blood receives no additions from 
outside, must necessarily lead to the result 
that the relative number of pure Negroes 
will become less and less in our country. 
The gradual process of elimination of the 
full-blooded Negro may be retarded by legislation, but it cannot possibly be avoided. 
It seems to my mind that a very serious 
misunderstanding of the actual conditions 
of intermixture between Negro and white 
prevails in many parts of our country. The 
fear is often expressed that by intermixture 
between whites and Negroes the whole 
mass of the white population might be infused with a certain amount of Negro 
blood. This is not what has actually occurred, but what would result if unions between white women and Negro men were 
as frequent as unions between Negro men 
and white women. A s a matter of fact, 
however, the former type of unions—that of 
the Negro male and of the white female— 
are exceedingly few in number as compared 
to the others. It therefore follows that our 
mulattoes are almost throughout the offspring of Negro mothers and white fathers. 
Now, we must remember that the total 
number of children born in the community 
depends upon the number of mothers, and 
that the number of children born of the 
Negro or mulatto women would be approximately the same, no matter whether the 
fathers are Negroes, mulattoes, or white 
men. It thus appears that in all cases where 
mixture between whites and Negroes occurs, 
as long as this mixture is predominantly a 
mixture of white fathers and colored 
mothers, the relative proportion of Negro 
blood in the following mixed generation 
becomes less, and that therefore a gradually increasing similarity of the two racial 
types may develop. 
I think we may say with safety that the 
intensity of racial feeling always depends 
upon two important causes. The one is 
the relative number of the two races 
which come into contact. Where one of 
the races is overwhelmingly in the majority, and the other race is represented by a 
few individuals only, intensity of race 
feeling is generally rather slight; while in 
all cases where both types are so numerous as to form large social divisions, 
characterized by habits of their own, and 
representing a strong economic influence, 
intense race feelings easily develop. These 
feelings are strongly emphasized by a second consideration: namely, the amount of 
difference of type. 
This is true, at least, in all countries inhabited by north European, particularly by 
Teutonic, nations. A s long as the general 
emotional state of our society persists— 
and there is no reason to assume that our 
general attitude will change to any appreciable degree within a measurable time 
—it seems obvious that our race problems 
will become the less intense, the less the 
difference in type between the different 
groups of our people, and the less the isolation of certain social groups. From this 
point of view, it would seem that one 
aspect of the solution of the Negro problem lies entirely in the hands of the 
Negro himself. The less Negro society 
represents a party with its own aims and 
its own interest distinct from those of the 
members of the white race, the more satisfactory will be the relation between the 
races. On the other hand, it would seem 
that the inexorable conditions of our life 
will gradually make toward the disappearance of the most distinctive type of Negro, 
which will again tend to alleviate the 
acuteness of race feeling. It may seem 
like a look into a distant future; but an 
unbiased examination of conditions as they 
exist at the present time points to the ultimate result of a levelling of the deep distinctions between the two races and a more 
and more fruitful co-operation. 
N . A . A . C. P. LECTUR E RECITA L 
Mrs. Mar y Church Terrell and Madame Azali a Hackley, at the Berkeley Theatre, 
21 West 44th Street, Wednesday, December 7, at eleven a. m. 
PATRONESSES : 
Mrs. William H . Baldwin, Mrs. O. H . P. Belmont, Mrs. Harriet Stanton Blatch, 
Mrs. Walston R. Brown, Mrs. John Dewey, Mrs. Clinton P. Farrell, Mrs. Ida Husted 
Harper, Mrs. Robert G. Ingersoll, Miss Mau d R. Ingersoll, Mrs. John E . Milholland, 
Mrs. Ma x Morgenthau, Jr., Mrs. Frederick Nathan, Mrs. E . R. A . Seligman, Mrs. V . C. 
Simkhovitch, Miss Lillia n D . Wald , Mrs. Henry Villar d and Mrs. Diana Belais. 
Tickets may be had of Miss Frances Blascoer, 20 Vesey Street, Room 610. TH E BURDE N 
If blood be the price of liberty, 
If blood be the price of liberty, 
If blood be the price of liberty, 
Lor d God, we have paid in full. 
COLORE D ME N LYNCHE D WITHOU T 
TRIAL . 
.. . 102 
.. . 84 
.. . 107 
.. . 107 
.. . 86 
.. . 86 
.. . 83 
.. . 60 
.. . 60 
.. . 60 
.. . 80 
.. . 73 
.. . 50 
1885 78 1898.. 
1886 71 1899.. 
1887 80 1900.. 
1888 95 1901.. 
1889 95 1902.. 
1890 90 1903.. 
1891 121 1904.. 
1892 155 1905*. 
1893 154 1906*. 
1894 134 1907*. 
1895 112 1908*. 
1896 80 1909.. 
1897 12^ 1910t. 
Total. 
*Estimated. 
tEstimated to date. 
.2.425 
PIN K FRANKLIN . 
A s was mentioned last month, Pink 
Franklin is sentenced to die two days before Christmas. Ha d it not been for the 
three years' fight made by two colored lawyers he would be dead to-day. Yet here is 
the history of his case, not from black lips 
or Northern lips, but from a local white 
Southern paper, the Columbia State: 
Ma y 25, 1907, J. I. Valentine, magistrate, 
issued a warrant for the arrest of Pink 
Franklin, a Negro, charged by J. D. Thomas 
with violating an agricultural contract. 
Franklin had moved before that date to the 
farm of Sol Spires, twelve miles distant. 
"About daybreak" on July 29th—64 days 
after the date of the warrant—Henry E . 
Valentine, brother of the magistrate, and 
W . M . Carter, who lived near the Spires 
place and had been pressed into service as 
constable by Valentine, who wished some 
one to identify Franklin, whom he did not 
know, appeared at Franklin's door, and 
Valentine demanded admittance. There 
was no response. Valentine sent Carter to 
guard the rear of the house while he entered the front door. The prosecution's 
witnesses refer to his opening the door and 
going in ; the defense to his bursting down 
the door. Pistol in hand he entered a hall 
and then the door of the dark bedroom in 
which were Franklin and his wife. Firin g 
began. Carter returned to the front, ran 
in the hall and reached the room door, 
when he received a pistol shot flesh wound 
in the side, and thereupon ran to Sol 
Spires's house, and asked to be taken to a 
doctor. A minute later Pin k Frankli n came 
up wounded in the shoulder, "made mention" he had shot a man in his house, and 
asked Spires to take him to a doctor. 
Franklin spoke to Carter and told him he 
did not know him when he shot. Before 
Spires got a horse hitched up Frankli n left 
the yard. Neither Constable Carter nor 
Spires made any effort to arrest or detain 
him. 
Constable Valentine was found lying mortally wounded inside the bedroom of 
Franklin's house; Franklin's wife was 
slightly wounded. 
Henry E . Valentine, the slain constable, 
was a popular young man, and his friends 
and neighbors were enraged at his killing. 
Parties went in search of Franklin , and a 
lynching was predicted. H e fell into other 
hands, however, and was taken to the penitentiary at Columbia for safe keeping. 
Several Negroes, suspected of knowing 
where Franklin was, were whipped by Val ­
entine's friends. Ton y Jerry, after being 
whipped, was committed to jail as a state's 
witness. The gist of his testimony was 
that he saw a pistol in Franklin's vest pocket the day before the shooting, and " I heard 
him say that no one man could arrest him. " 
Subsequently Jerry made affidavit that he 
testified as he did against his will, and that 
there was no truth in what he said. 
Now we come to the question of a juror 
—the jury having returned for further in ­
formation from the judge—and the reply of 
the judge. There are two points for the 
lover of justice to bear in mind ; first, that 
the warrant for breach of contract was issued more than two months before the attempted arrest of Franklin, that the defendant had no knowledge of the proximity 
of the constable, nor did he know Valentine ; and, second, that there was no demand in the name of the law, or other 
word to indicate that the invasion of 
Franklin's house was supported by a legal 
process. 
W e quote from the record. A conscientious juror, seeking to harmonize the power 
of the law with the sacred right of a man 
to defend his home—his "castle"—and to 
have defined where one shall respect the 
other, speaks: 
Juror Wannamaker asks: "Ha s a constable or officer of the law a right to 
enter a house without first stating his 
mission ?" 
His Honor: "No t unless it is necessary." 
Juror: "Is it not necessary for an officer to call to the party on the inside and 
state his mission?" THE BURDEN 27 
His Honor: "I should think not, Mr. 
Wannamaker. Common prudence would 
demand that he ask admission, but he has 
the right to demand admission." 
Juror: "If he received no response to 
his call he would have the right to enter?" 
His "Honor: "Yes, sir; or, if the house 
were closed and he received no response 
and he has good reason to believe that the 
refusal to answer amounts to a resistance 
to his authority, then he has the right to 
force an entrance. If admission be refused 
he has a right to force admission." 
If that is the law, then the law is despotic, and home has no sanctity. If a man 
must open his door to any that come knocking, without announcing their authority or 
their mission, his legal "castle" is built of 
tissue paper. 
Wha t possible "necessity" justifies an ununiformed officer, personally unknown to 
the occupants of a house, in forcing his 
way in without saying, " I am an officer"? 
If the law is based on common sense and 
if a man has the right to protect his home 
against unlawful attack, then the burden 
of establishing legal authority for an assault upon a home must rest upon the 
assailants, and not upon the householder. 
Let justice be done. 
A JI M CRO W LINE . 
Efforts of the Democrats to prevent 
Negroes from voting were centered in Precinct C of the Fift h Ward , where a Jim 
Crow line was established for Negro voters. Negroes were jerked out of line by 
the police to make way for Democrats. 
The establishment of the Jim Crow line 
delayed the Negroes from entering the polls 
as rapidly as white voters. Once inside 
they were given a lengthy examination as 
to their qualifications. They were compelled to read the sections of the Constitution containing a long list of Indian names, 
legal and technical terms. In case the 
pronunciation of the name of some Indian 
county was not in accord with the election 
officer the voter was turned down. 
T. R. Debman, Negro, head of the science 
department in the high school, and Rev. 
H . H . Martin, Negro, were jerked out of 
line by Patrolman Veazey and Ike Ash -
burn, and their places given to white voters. 
Several other similar cases were reported. 
—Oklahoma City Times, Nov. 8, 1910. 
TH E CAS E O F BLACKWELL . 
A Negro farmer named Blackwell, of 
Clarendon County—a man who makes about 
100 bales of cotton a year—is in jail at 
Manning, held without bail, pending the result of pistol shot wounds inflicted by him 
upon a chain gang "trusty," who came to 
Blackwell's house armed with gun or rifle, 
acted in a suspicious manner and refused 
to leave when ordered away. 
According to our dispatches from Man ­
ning a convict escaped from the chain 
gang, and the "trusty"—wearing stripes, we 
presume—"was armed and sent in search 
of the fugitive." 
Whe n an armed convict comes to a man's 
home, acts queerly and refuses to leave 
when ordered off, what is the householder 
to do? Ha d Ned Blackwell been a white 
farmer "growing 100 bales of cotton" and 
having the same respect of his neighbors 
enjoyed by the Negro farmer, and had he 
wounded an armed convict who came to his 
house, acted suspiciously and refused to 
move on, would the white farmer be held 
in jail without bail. Most emphatically, 
No!—Th e State, Columbia, S. C. 
TH E REWAR D O F THRIFT . 
"Notice has been sent at least three wellto-do colored men living in Warrenton, 
Ga., and to one widow, who have succeeded 
in making money in some kind of business 
enterprise, that they must leave immediately, 
because the white people of that section 
won't stand for wealthy colored people. 1 
have secured the names of these colored 
men and the woman. One of the men dares 
not leave his house by the front door, and 
never answers a knock at the door for fear 
of being shot on sight. N o charge has been 
presented against them. They have simply 
offended their white neighbors, because they 
have become too prosperous. The man who 
never goes to his front door was forced to 
close out his business altogether. H e was 
paid dollar for dollar, as I understand it, 
but the white people who forced him to sell 
refused to pay him a cent profit." 
PRECEP T AN D PRACTICE . 
A large audience was leaving New York's 
finest theatre. The play had been upon the 
Negro question, and one couple had been 
especially thrilled by the fine heroism of 
the white man, who, finding that he had a 
few drops at colored blood, allied himself 
with the despised race. "Ho w magnificent," 
they were saying, "to dedicate oneself to the 
cause of the oppressed!" 
Walkin g a few blocks they turned into a 
restaurant. Afte r giving their order thej 
noticed a man, a mulatto in coloring, enter 
and seat himself at a table. Presently a 
waiter came to him and whispered something. The man shook his head, and the 
waiter went to the proprietor. 
"I really believe," the couple said, watching curiously, "that they are going to ask 
that man to leave. Wha t a shame, for he 
is quite light and very good looking." 
The proprietor came to the man as he 
sat at the table, and after a few words, 
the couple amusing themselves guessing 
their import, the colored man rose and left. 
"That was too bad, wasn't it," one said 
to the other, "and right here in our own 
city. Perhaps the poor fellow really needed 
a meal," and they went on placidly enjoying 
their own. TALK S ABOU T WOME N 
NUMBE R ON E By Mrs. JOH N E . MILHOLLAN D 
The restlessness of woman the world over 
has led the female members of our population into activities never dreamed of in the 
days when our mothers and sisters were 
content to be simply good homekeeping 
and homemaking housewives, devoted entirely to the family, its interests and their 
own social duties. That day has passed, 
and with the change in economic conditions, 
women have had to go into the business 
world to compete with men. In many cases 
their work is of a kind that in years gone 
by was looked upon as belonging by right to 
the stronger sex. 
to bring about the reform they all have 
at heart—"Votes for women." 
This emerging from the home into 
a broader and more competitive field of labor has given to woman an opportunity to 
develop along lines quite new to her in the 
more conservative and homebound horizon. 
In a way, too, modern society has been 
largely affected by this new development, 
and that in a manner most desirable in a 
country like ours, which has for its very 
foundations democracy, both in form and 
fact. Take, for instance, the suffrage, certainly the most vital, as well as the most 
important, of interests of the New Woman 
Movement. In this reform alone we have 
a complete upsetting of former social 
standards. W e find the woman of fashion 
and wealth working side by side in all harmony with a sister who earns her living 
by working in a factory or shop. Each is 
so interested in procuring for herself, as 
well as for her sex. the right of political 
freedom, that there is neither time nor inclination for the one to think or care about 
the social standing of the other. Al l that 
the cause requires is live, active workers, 
with a vital interest and determined effort 
The colored women have done their share 
in this march for progress and the betterment of their sex; but, as yet, their efforts 
seem to have been made principally within 
their own circle and among their own race. 
It is time now, however, that they come 
forward and help share with their white 
sisters their responsibilities, and seek to 
obtain for both recognition as citizens 
possessed of political rights. 
These rights which the progressive 
woman of to-day claims as her own are 
demanded of the same spirit of justice 
which granted to the Negro, fifty years ago, 
his right of Suffrage and made him a factor 
in the political affairs of the nation. But, 
as any one who thinks about the matter at 
all well knows, the political freedom of the 
colored man is really "freedom" in name 
only so far as the South is concerned. 
Though he may sometimes have the right 
to vote, he certainly is not allowed the right 
to cast that vote where and for whom he 
chooses. So it would seem a wise and progressive step for our colored women to 
look carefully into the question of Suffrage. 
Surely its value as a useful weapon for 
bringing about not only her own enfranchisement, but also for securing to the 
Negro of the South the political freedom 
to which he is justly entitled, must appeal 
to her. 
A t any rate "In union there is strength," 
and therefore the woman's rights movement demands and deserves the united and 
harmonious effort of every woman in this 
country, no matter what her color, her 
creed or her condition among men. 
LETTER S 
FRO M DUTC H WORKINGMEN . 
The Protestant Laboring Men's Association, "Francisco Ferrer," of Amsterdam, 
adopted the following motion in their 
meeting of November 1st last: 
H aving taken due note of the circular issued by the National Negro Committee, 
which was brought to the attention of the 
people of Great Britain and Europe, and 
considering that the existing conditions of LETTERS 2 9 
the Negro in America, as described in the 
circular above mentioned, are mainly due to 
the apathy in regard to similar affairs of 
other people and to the general absence of 
interest of the world at large in humane 
affairs, we are of the opinion that everybody 
who means well and who wishes to change 
present living conditions and circumstances 
must realize that the interest in humanity 
must find its foundation in the depths of 
his own heart; that such social evils must 
be attacked at their source, and overcome 
there. 
Influential corporations and persons 
should be asked humbly but earnestly to 
take the initiative in establishing an international committee (such, for instance, as 
the "Association Internationale pour la lutte 
contre le chomage"), and we request the 
press to be so kind as to publish this 
motion. 
FRO M A RUSSIA N REVOLUTIONIST. 
"I was arrested for intellectual and cultural influence upon my fellow exiles and 
transported to the wild banks of the Rive r 
Pecpora, near the North Pole. Have we 
not to struggle with the same inaccessible 
wall of prejudice and hatred, nursed by 
centuries? I shall try to know better the 
history and modern condition of your race, 
whose good nature and ingenuous beauty of 
a good and open heart I admired from 
childhood, reading descriptions of voyages 
into Africa . Perhaps it does not suit me, 
as a stranger, to criticise the words of some 
honorable men of your race, but they are 
not right who speak about the spiritual submission of the Negroes. There is something that nobody of us can give up—it's 
the manly pride and self-respect. An d 
when the intelligent part of a people is 
given up they commit a' crime toward 
their nation. An d never will it be redeemed." 
FRO M A NORTHER N WHIT E MAN . 
I grew up with a personal repugnance to 
black folks and Jews. Since I learned to 
recognize the groundlessness of all class 
distinctions I have never come sufficiently 
close to either Negroes or Jews to entirely 
ri d myself of this physical feeling. But 
that religion, any real religion which accepts 
the Golden Rule and the law of love, must 
reject all class and race distinctions is beyond doubt. The old saying ran, "Scratch 
a civilized man and you find a savage." 
The race prejudice against "Chink " and 
"Jap" and "Hindu, " almost as strongly as 
against "Nigger, " is one of the most persistent of our savage traits; but there are a 
lot of others that are found in the Negro 
as i n the White. An d isn't the problem 
with all of us, after all, not how we can 
reform the world, but how we can reform 
ourselves, individually, and live our individual lives in accordance with the law of love 
and the Golden Rule? 
FRO M A SOUTHER N WHIT E MAN . 
"I know that we white, or so-called white 
people, are prejudiced against the darker 
races of the human family. It is, indeed, 
unfortunate that we are so. I am a native 
of a Southern State. I was much surprised 
to find, when I went north of the Mason 
and Dixo n line, to find, in some instances, 
the prejudice stronger against the black 
man than it was in the South. 
"Experience has long since taught me 
that color does not make the man. I have 
three sons all of whom have attended the 
same school with black boys. We have endeavored to teach them that color was only 
'skin deep,' and that true manhood and 
womanhood does not belong to any particular race, and I think that we have succeeded 
in doing so." 
FRO M A COLORED MAN . 
"The unjust discriminations which are imposed upon Negro travelers I believe are 
due largely to our own failure to do what 
we can to ward off such. Now I do not 
believe that there is any respectable court 
that would sustain the open, flagrant discrimination that can be established all over 
the South. Fo r example, I was visiting in 
Oklahoma City. There are three waiting 
rooms, namely, one each for white ladies, 
white men, and Negroes; but a casual 
glance will show one is for respectable 
white people, one is for white toughs, foreigners, Indians, etc., and the other for 
Negroes. There are two ticket offices: one 
for respectable white people, and one foi 
the white toughs in that room labeled foi 
white men, where all kinds of white people, foreigners, Indians, and everything 
deemed improper to be in the room labeled 
Whit e Ladies,' are, and there the best, 
most refined colored lady has to go in and 
get a ticket. There could be no question 
about the unfair discrimination there, and 
others might be mentioned. But it is useless 
to speak to you about this, because you 
know better than I can tell you how easily 
we can establish the practice of unfair 
discrimination by the railroad companies. 
"No w I am satisfied no one Negro ought 
to make this fight against these corporations. It is not an individual fight, it is a 
race fight. I am also satisfied that the race 
has the intelligence and the money necessary to vigorously prosecute the practice of 
manifest unjust discrimination. It seems to 
me that until we do this, we ourselves are 
largely responsible for the inequality in 
railroad travel: for the refusal in so many 
cases of allowing the Negro to take advantage of the Pullman service. I am deeply 
interested, and I thought possibly making 
this suggestion'to you, you might be able to 
suggest or work out a way by which we 
could make an organized effort and appeal 
to the race and get the necessary fund that 
the race and not an individual may make 
this fight." WHA T TO REA D 
ARTICLES . 
Warnock Street Sketches. Frances R. 
Bartholomew. The Forecast, November. 
Vocational Education. Mason A . Hawkins. 
Education, November. 
The Fee System. Carl Crow. Saturday 
Evening Post, November 19. 
Chapters from M y Experience. B. T. 
Washington. World's Work , November. 
Negro : A Portrait. Outlook. September 
10, 1910. 
Real Africa . H . Ward . Scribner's, October. 
Ful l Light on Indian Unrest. J. R. Garvin. 
Fortnightly Review, September. 
Just Wha t Does India Want Politically? 
S. N . Singh. North American Review, 
September. 
Indian Lan d Troubles. F . E . Leupp. Review of Reviews, October. 
Law and the Indian. E . Flower. Atlantic. 
October. 
Actua l China. Independent. September 22. 
Diary of Reconstruction Period. Gideon 
Wells. Atlantic, October and November. 
Africa n Sketches. Janet Allardyce. Scribner's, November. 
Africa n Guides I Have Met. E . A . Forbes. 
World's Work , November. 
BOOKS . 
Sir Harr y Johnston—Britain Across the 
Seas. Africa : A History and Description 
of the British Empire in Africa . London, 
pp. 450. 
F. Va n der Linden—Le Congo: Les Noirs 
et Nous. Paris, pp. 389. 
F . E . Leupp—The Indian and His Problem. 
New York . pp. 396. 
G. C. Wheeler—The Tribe and Intertribal 
Relations in Australia. 
J. R. Ficklen—History of Reconstruction in 
Louisiana Through 1868. Johns Hopkins 
Press. 
E . Sheldon—The Nigger. McMillan , pp. 
269. 
G. T. Stephenson—Race Distinctions in 
American Law. Appleton. pp. 388. 
Gertrude Stein—Three Lives. Grafton 
Press, New York . pp. 279. 
B. T. Riley—The Whit e Man's Burden. 
Birmingham, Ala . pp. 238. 
E . Smith Jones—An Ode to Ethiopia, pp. 
14. 
R. L. Waring—As W e See It: A Novel. 
Washington, pp. 233. 
C. G. Davis—Wh y Not Now? Badger, 
pp. 114. 
Cassell—Wake Up, Liberians ! Government Printing Office, Liberia, pp. 21. 
ARCHER' S AFRO-AMERICA . 
"Through Afro-America " is the attempt 
of an English philosopher, on a hasty tour 
through the States, to find an offhand solution of the race problem. His observations 
are always interesting, and sometimes 
shrewd. There is an inchoate jumbling of 
the journalistic and the philosophic features. 
A book that is the outcome of a holiday 
jaunt or a hunting trip rarely ever contains 
a convincing philosophy. Mr . Arche r professes a personal dislike or at least distaste 
for the Negro, which he persuades himself 
to believe is a natural antipathy. There is 
no doubt that while Mr . Arche r would object to close association with a well-dressed 
and well-mannered black person, and with 
an ill-dressed and ill-mannered white one, 
his objection would doubtless be less accentuated along a lonely road than on a fashionable boulevard. Wha t part of this repugnance, in either case, is innate and what 
part is derived from the prevailing fashion 
of environment and tradition would constitute a problem in psychology which would 
tax the ingenuity of the author if he were 
bent on a more serious task than a holiday 
diversion. 
O f course, Mr . Arche r preserves an attitude of fairness. Ever y Englishman is 
bound to do this. Wit h the notion of innate race antipathy there is but one logical 
outcome, which it is not necessary to cross 
the waters or write a book to discover. 
Wit h such notions, it is easy to foresee that 
the author would advocate race separation. 
Wit h no originality and less convincing 
force, he proposes as a solution a racial 
state with legal restriction of the right of 
residence. This is merely the Baltimore 
proposal on a large scale. Al l such shifting substitutes for right and justice must 
be repudiated or else we must rewrite, not 
only our National Constitution and declaration of rights, but the very laws of ethics 
upon which the permanent progress of the 
human race depends. 
"Eminent Negro Me n and Women, " by 
John Edwar d Bruce, is a laudable attempt 
to bring before the minds of Negro youth 
the deeds and doings of the best of their 
race. The author's express purpose is to 
"awaken race pride." The selections lack 
proportion. One is surprised to find in the 
same category with Fre d Douglass and 
Toussaint L'Overture, names of men who 
are redeemed from obscurity only for the 
moment and by the author's generosity. 
The questionaire placed at the end of each 
biography admirably renders the book suitable as a supplementary reader in schools. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 31 
BOOK S 
When our readers wish to know where< to buy the best books on race and other 
human problems they should consult this list: 
A BOOK AL L INTERESTED IN HUMA N PROBLEMS 
OUGH T T O REA D 
JOH N BROW N 
A Biography Fifty Years After 
By OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD 
THOMA S WENTWOET H HIGGINSO N 
''I can only say after reading from first to last its more than 700 pages that I 
have neve r encountered anything this side of Gibbon'6 'Rome ' which has made 
me feel more the personal power of a single work.' 1 
JOH N T . MOBSE , Edito r of America n Statesmen Series. 
' 'Perhaps in thus dramatically fashioning his volume Mr . Villar d obeyed an instinct 
rather than acted upon a preconceived plan; that is often the case with great work, 
where a writer's feelings are deeply enlisted. Be this as it may, the merit and 
charm are none the less; he has seized well a splendid opportunity and has 
written one of the greatr biographies of our literature. 1 1 
H E NE T WATTEBSO N i n the Louisvill e "Courier-Journal " 
"N o fault may justly be found with Mr . Villard's telling of the story. It is 
minute and lucid, altogether fai r and unvar'nished." 
Full y Illustrated with Portraits, and Other Illustrations 
Wit h Copious Notes and Bibliography $5.00 Net; Postage 20 Cents 
Bo.ton HOUGHTO N MIFFLI N COMPAN Y New York 
Atlanta University Studies 
OF TH E NEGRO PROBLEMS 
13 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A . G. DILL , Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
The Souls of Black Folk 
By W. E. Burghardt DuBois 
"It is one of the noteworthy hooks, not merely of a year, but of the epoch. Its every page 
is filled with vigor, spontaneity and spirituality."—Bosto n Transcript. 
" A stripping bare of the moral and mental anatomy of the Africa n in Americ a so as to 
reveal the naked soul in its primitive simplicity, seared and scarred by ages of suffering."—New 
Yor k Age . 
Eighth Edition. 
Wit h frontispiece portrait of the author. $1.20 net. 
Ma y be ordered through any bookstore or direct from the publishers. 
A . C. McCLUR G & CO . 
New York . Chicago. San Francisco. 3 2 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
'Phone 2870-J Harlem . 
W . A . PARKE R 
INSURANC E 
19 WES T 132D STREE T 
Agent Continental Casualty Company 
Accident and Health 
Largest Insurance Company in the Worl d 
Office Hours: 9 A . M . to 9 P. M . 
Dr. FRED . STERLIN G 
SURGEO N DENTIS T 
Crown and Bridge Wor k a Specialty 
100 West 134th St., cor. Leno x Ave., New Yor k 
Brookly n Branch : 1479 Bergen St. 
Office Hour s by Appointment 
Tel. 295-W Bedford 
Te n Year s with Dr . D . C. Whit e 
Telephone 7189 Morningkside 
Dr. JAME S A . BANK S 
DENTIS T 
204 WES T 133D STREET , NE W YOR K 
Porcelain, Crown and Bridge Wor k a Specialty 
Pur e Nitrous-Oxide Gas Administered 
Can't Sec Well? Sec Me 
when your eyes feel painful, hot, uncomfortable 
and grow weary while reading, writing, sewing 
or looking at near objects, letters run together 
while reading and become blurred. 
Eye s examined by me and fitted with glasses 
accurately made never grow weary, but are perfectly comfortable. Yo u may not like to wear 
glasses, but do you like headaches, red eyes and 
wrinkle s better ? Scientific examinations of the 
eyes for defective eyesight is my specialty. 
Dr. R. G. ADAMS , Optometrist 
Physical Eye Specialist 
16 Wes t 134tli Street , Ne w Yor k City , N . Y . 
Howard University 
WILBU R P. THIRKIELD , President 
Washington, D . C . 
The College of Arts and Sciences—Kell y Miller , 
A.M. , Dean. _ 
The Teachers' College—Lewis B . Moore , A.M. , 
Ph.D. , Dean. , _ 
The Academy—Georg e J . Cummings, A.M. , Dean. 
The Commercia l College—George W . Cook, A.M. , 
Dean. , _ . 
School of Manua l Arts and Applie d Sciences— 
PROFESSIONA L SCHOOL S 
The School of Theology—Isaa c Clark, D.D. , Dean. 
The School of Medicine : Medical, Denta l and 
Pharmaceutica l Colleges—Edwar d O. Balloch, M.D. , Dean. 
The School of La w — Benjami n P. Leighton, 
LL.D. , Dean. 
Fo r catalogue and special information address 
Dean of Department. 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
The courses of study include Hig h School, Normal School and College, with ' manual training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Fisk University 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
65 College Freshmen. 
A New Department of Sociology. 
A Notable Equipment in Lan d and Buildings. 
Successful Graduates in Nearly Ever y State. 
Fo r information address 
President GEORG E A . GATES . 
Mme. BECK'S School of Dressmaking 
Designing, Cutting, Fitting, Embroidering and Ladies' Tailoring Taught by the Improved 
French System 
Separate Courses in Any of tlic Branches, and Diplomas Awarded the Successful 
Graduates 
Day and Evening Classes 
238 WEST 53d STREET NEW YOR K CITY 
The Firm for the Negro Farmers and Shippers to Deal With 
Try Us Before Shipping Elsewhere. 
FRUIT S AN D VEGETABLE S OYSTER S AN D GAM E POULTR Y AN D EGG S 
COTTMA N & COTTMA N 
WHOLESAL E COMMISSIO N MERCHANTS . 107 Pine Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Reference: The People's Savings Bank Bell 'Phone Connection: Lombard 4035 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 33 
Only , 
$65.0 0 
Laurent Nep m Carriage concei 
No. 24 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A Value Unequaled. Sold on Ji.oo 
I'rofit Margin pro m 
Factory to User 
Writ e for prices 
and other styles. 
Send for catnlo^ue. 
C . R. PATTERSO N 
& SONS . 
Greenfield, Ohi o 
lie United States. 
JUS T OU T 
A beautiful sentimental song entitled 
"My Home is Down in Dixie, Where thi 
Cotton Grows," 
By EUGEN E ALEXANDER BURKES 
Pric e k B Cent s Postpai d 
Published by 
WEBB , ARBUCKL E & CO. , 
BOSTON . MASS . 
THE M. T. B. WASHINGTON COMPANY 
(INCORPORATED) 
A manufacturing corporation, sole owner of patents in cutlery and brake gearing, will 
demonstrate its NE W POWER , which will displace steam, water, electricity and all 
known power in use to-day. Capital Stock, $100,000. Shares, $5. 
47 WES T 66TH STREET 
NYANZ A DRU G CO. 
(Incorporated.) 
35 W . 135th ST. , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
CAPITA L STOCK , $15,000 
Shares $5.00 
Writ e for information. The best paying 
investment ever offered our people. 
NYANZ A PHARMAC Y 
is the only colored Dru g Store in New Yor k City , and 
the purpose of the Corporation is to establish chains of 
stores, carrying Drugs and everything incidental to the 
Dru g business. It is really the indisputable duty of 
every self-respecting member of the race to give it his 
support. 
AGENT S WANTE D EVERYWHER E 
$100,00 0 stoc k issue : 
T O BUIL D A N 
Auditorium in Greater New York 
CONTAININ G 
Reception, Concert and Banquet Halls, Modern Offices and Lodge Rooms 
This proposition is bound to succeed, because it is giving the people what they want. 
We are offering 
10,000 Shares at $10 Each, Par Value 
Stock sold in blocks to suit the investor on easy terms. 
Th e capita] already in hand and the rapid increase of business means the realization of the 
Auditorium . .This enterprise assures each investor Safety of Capital and Growth of Income. 
Call or write for furthe r particulars. 
I. L . MOORMAN , Mgr., 83 W . 134th St. 
Superior Bread, Cakes, Pones, Etc. 
At 
Phillips & Co.'s Bakery 
17 West 133d Street 
We Serve the Best People 
If you want a Satisfactory Smoke see 
J. M. CERTAI N 
Manufacture r of 
HIGH-GRAD E HAVAN A AN D DOMESTI C 
CIGAR S 
45 West 135th Street New Yor k 
Tel . 2870-J Harle m 
Bo x Trade a Specialty 
SOLOMON GARRET T 
Tonsorial Artist 
782 Fulton Street, near Adelphi Street 
BROOKLYN , N . Y . 
All Kinds of' Workmanship 
Cigars and Tobacco for Sale 
Daily and Weekly Papers and Magazines 
Brooklyn Agents-for THE CRISIS THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
STANDARDIZ E 
== = WIT H TH E ==== = 
L.C. Smith & Bros. 
Typewriter 
The DuPont Powder Company of Wilmington, 
Del., the most prominent manufacturers of explosives for Government and private use in the world, 
purchased on a single order— 
521 L . C. Smith & Bros. 
Typewriters 
T o Standardiz e thei r equipment, acting on unanimous recommendation 
of a board o f fiv e o f thei r mechanica l engineers, t o who m all competin g 
make s wer e submitted. 
It wil l pa y yo u t o standardiz e you r typewrite r equipmen t wit h the 
L . C . Smit h & Bros. Typewrite r fo r the same reaso n that decide d this 
shrewd , hard-heade d business corporation—superio r merit o f the machine ! 
An d the reason hold s goo d whethe r yo u us e one typewrite r o r fit)e 
hundred. 
Write To'dog for thm Free Boo%. 
L . C . Smith & Bros. Typewrite r Co. 
SYRACUSE, N. Y., AND AL L LARG E CITIES 
3 4 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Do You Want 
a Position ? 
Best Places 
Best Families 
The New York and New Jersey 
Industrial Exchange, through its 
Employment Agency Department, 
furnishes more Colored Help to 
the leading families in the city 
and in the suburban towns than 
any other medium in New York. 
It is located in the acknowledged 
best section of the city, being in 
the Henry Phipps' Model Tenements for Colored Families. No 
other Exchange is so well patronized by the foremost families, 
many of whom have never employed Colored Help before. 
Our demand for competent 
Southern Help exceeds the supply 
many times over. Call and register. No charge. Bring your references. We can place you in a 
good position. If inconvenient to 
pay our required office fee, you are 
at liberty to take advantage of our 
Credit System. This new feature 
has proven extremely beneficial to 
many worthy persons seeking employment. 
N.Y. & N. J. Industrial Exchange 
237-239 Wes t 63 d Stree t 
Telephones 5016-4546 Columbus 
Cosmopolitan Automobile School 
course or opportunities in the automobile business we shall be 
Th e aim of the School will be to 
give its students a sufficient knowledge of the theory and practice of 
Automobile and Automobiling to enable them to meet the emergencies 
that constantly arise to make those 
who complete the course competent 
to run machines, take them apart 
and assemble them properly, and to 
make such repairs as may be necessary and possible on the road. 
TUITION—Si x weeks' course, including Shop and Road Work, $25; 
installments if you wish, payable $5 
on enrollment and $20 by the completion of the fourth week. 
SHO P WORK—Consists of naming all the parts of the automobile, 
taking the engine and the rest of 
the automobile apart and putting 
them together again properly, and 
making such repairs as may be 
necessary and possible. 
ROA D WORK—Whe n the shop 
work is complete the student takes 
up the operating and handling of 
cars on the road until he is competent. 
If there is any special information which you desire respecting the 
glad to hear from you. 
COSMOPOLITA N AUT O CO . of New York 
Telephone 803 Columbus School: Hotel Maceo, 213 Weil 53d St. LE E A. POLLARD, Mgr. 3 6 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Does the New York Negro Tenant Pay More 
Rent Than Any Other Class of Tenant? 
YEAR S ago in New Yor k Negro tenants were only permitted to live, with very 
few .exceptions, in alleys and rear houses that could not be successfully rented 
to whites. Now and then a landlord for some reason or other, most usually 
that of revenge for some actual or imagined wrong done him by his neighbor, 
would throw his house, facing on the street, open to Negro tenants. In such 
cases his desire for satisfaction never lessened his desire for gain. 
In 1900, when we started out in the real estate business, as the first Negro agents 
in New Yor k City, making a specialty of the management of colored tenements, rents 
were lower in the city than they had been in years, as every well-informed real estate 
man knows. The supply of apartments for white tenants was far in excess of the 
demand. Notwithstanding this state of affairs, owners preferred to maintain their houses 
with vacancies and low rents rather than to fill them with Negroes at increased rents, 
so intense was the prejudice against Negroes as tenants. 
A s an illustration of the conditions that existed, we cannot do better than to cite 
an actual case. W e opened a house for Negro tenants at the end of a row of houses 
occupied by whites. Naturally, the house immediately adjoining suffered the most. 
There was a reduction made in the rents for the entire row, notwithstanding that many 
whites moved; but the most peculiar phase of the whole affair was that it was necessary 
to rent the apartments on the side of the house adjoining the Negroes at $4.00 per month 
less than those on the other side of the same house, although the apartments were 
exactly alike. 
Now, then, when the Negro tenants were put in these houses an effort was made 
to restore the rents to something like what they were before the invasion of Negroes. 
The Negro, knowing nothing of the continual dropping of rents for whites, due to 
this event, most naturally concluded that he was paying more rent than was ever paid 
by the whites. 
To-day the Negro tenant, besides having one of the very finest sections of the city 
in the neighborhood of West 134th Street and Lenox Avenue, containing over 250 fine flats 
and private dwellings, also has, due solely to the efforts of Negro agents, West 119th 
'Street, between Eighth and Manhattan Avenues; West 99th Street, between Central 
Park West and Columbus Avenue, and many other desirable blocks, each block containing houses of a class never before occupied by Negroes. Thus has the supply been 
made to equal the demand. Thus has the wonderful fact been made possible—that to-day, 
especially in Harlem, with a few exceptions, Negroes are paying less rents than are 
whites for similar accommodations in neighborhoods that are not threatened with Negro 
invasion. 
A fair and unbiased investigation will prove beyond a possible doubt the absolute 
correctness of this statement, strange as it may seem. 
DESIRABLE APARTMENTS FOR DESIRABLE TENANTS 
ALSO HOMES FOR SALE ON EASY TERMS 
Philip A. Payton, Jr., Company 
New York's Pioneer Negro Real Estate Agents 
BROKER S — APPRAISER S 
67 West 134th St., New York City 
TELEPHONE S 917-91 8 HARLE M 