Do you call this the land 
of the free? 
What is it to be free from 
King George and continue the slaves of King Prejudice? 
What is it to be born free 
and not to live free? 
—Thoreau 
KNOXVILLE- NUMBER 
The Crisis 
February - 1915 "Out of the House of Bondage" 
Th e latest and greatest book from the pen of 
PROFESSOR KELL Y MILLE R 
"No man of his race has so sure a power of prunning falacies with passionless 
intellectual severity."—Boston Transcript. 
"Th e man searches deeply into underlying causes."—St. Joseph, Mo. , News-Press. 
" A philosophic treatise."—Charlotte, N . C , Observer. 
"N o student of social conditions of Americ a at the present time will want to fail to see 
it on his shelves."—Southern Workman . 
Address: Prof. KELL Y MILLER , Howard University 
Washington, D. C . 
242 Pages. Price $1.50. 
Agents Wante d Everywher e 
The Story of a Little Colored Girl 
B y MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Autho r of "Hal f a Man " 
Price $1.0 0 net. Postage Extr a 
For sale through our agents and at TH E CRISI S 
office, as well as at leading book stores. 
TH E CRISIS, 70 Fifth Ave., New Yor k City 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 
HAZE L TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 7 0 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducted by 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILL E DILL, Business Manager 
Contents Copyrighted, 1915, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for February, 1915 
PICTURE S 
COVE R DESIGN . By L . H . Latimer. Page 
SIX KNOXVILL E LEADER S 185-187 
TH E HAMPTON-HOWAR D FOOTBAL L GAM E 192 
"O SAY , CA N YO U SE E B Y TH E DAWN' S EARL Y LIGHT, " etc. 
Cartoon by Jackson 197 
ARTICLE S 
O F COLORE D KNOXVILL E 185 
TH E SEASON' S FOOTBALL . By Edwin B. Henderson 191 
BREAKIN G TH E COLOR-LINE . A Story. By Annie McCary 193 
TH E LYNCHIN G INDUSTR Y 196 
A PIL E O F BOOK S 198 
VILLANELLE . A Poem. By Otto Bohanan 187 
DEPARTMENT S 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 163 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 169 
OPINIO N ,. . . . 172 
EDITORIA L 181 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 188 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTR A 
RENEWALS : When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANGE OF ADDRESS: The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 160 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include Hig h 
School, Norma l School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Amon g 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard , 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-five years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Mora l and Spiritua l Environ ­
ment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work . 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, Hig h School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for self-help. 
Fal l Term Began September, 1914. 
Fo r information address 
President R. W . McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
The Agricultura l and 
Mechanica l College 
Maintained by the governments of North Carolina and 
of the United States. Open 
all the year round. For 
males only. Fall term began September 1, 1914. 
Board, lodging and tuition, 
$7 per month. Best opportunities for Negro youth. 
Night school for indigent 
but ambitious young men. 
For catalog or further information, address 
PRESIDEN T DUDLE Y 
A . & M . Colleg e Greensboro , N . C . 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerl y Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinit y School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C A., 
athletics, all live features. 
Fo r information address 
JOH N HOPE , President 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
A n Episcopal boarding and day school for 
girls, under the direction of the Sisters of S t 
Mary . Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
611 N . 43d St. W . Philadelphia, Pa. 
AVOI D BA D SCHOOL S 
Educat e you r childre n at hom e unde r ou r exper t teacher s 
Courses for Adults 
Pupil s receive d at an y time . Writ e t o 
Educational Extension School, Box 3194 Station F , Washington, D . C . 
Highly Endorsed. Financially Responsible. 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXA S 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard , Yal e and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M . W . DOGAN , President 
FISK UNIVERSIT Y 
NASHVILLE . TENN . 
Founded 1866 C. W . MORROW , Dean 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational 
and Social Science Courses. Pioneer in 
Negro music. Special study in Negro history. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
Hig h standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. 
Mention TH E CRISI S 
TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 161 
The National Religious Training School 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to all who believe 
in the Negro race and in our obligation to help promote its intellectual, moral 
and religious uplift." 
—REV . DR . CHARLE S H . PARKHURST , New Yor k City. 
IT IS MOR E THA N A MER E SCHOO L 
IT IS A COMMUNIT Y O F SERVIC E AN D UPLIF T 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, Y . M . C. A . 
and Y . W . C. A . secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their 
studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced co-workers and actual every-day 
practice through the school's SOCIA L SERVIC E DEPARTMENT . 
W e aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
W e can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
Fo r catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDEN T JAME S E . SHEPAR D 
National Religious Training School Durham, N . C. 
The school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance fund 
of $15,000 for running expenses. Won't you help us this year? 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNSYLVANI A 
Unde r the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, 
healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach of a great variety of educational institutions, public and private, extending from West Chester to 
Philadelphia ; representing a wide range of educational problems and 
practice. 
This school offers to young colored men and women who have a reasonable 
secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to become teachers, 
carefully graded courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, 
manual crafts and agriculture. Fo r teachers of experience and intending 
teachers it offers also a six weeks' summer-school course during the months 
of July and August. Tuition is free. Board, lodging, heat, light and 
laundry privileges are offered for nine months for $100. The charge for 
the same during the summer-school course is $15. Writ e for particulars to 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , Principal 
Mention TH E CRISI S 162 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Enroll now in the 
BEREAN MANUA L TRAINING 
and Industrial School 
SOUTH COLLEGE AVENUE , Opposite Girard College 
PHILADELPHIA , PA . 
Winter Term opens Monday, January 4th, 
1915; Spring Term opens Thursday, April 
1st, 1915. 
MATTHE W ANDERSON , D. D„ 
Principal 
Georgia State Industrial College 
Graduate d i n Tunc 51 members; 2 fro m Col ­
lege Department , 15 fro m Norma l Depart ­
men t an d 34 fro m Industria l Department . 
Open s Octobe r 1st. 
R . R . WRIGHT , PRESIDENT, SAVANNAH , GA . 
The Poems of Phillis Wheatley 
the early Negro poetess collected by 
RICHAR D R . WRIGHT , JR. , and 
CHARLOTT E CROGMA N WRIGH T 
Price, One Dollar 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenu e :: :: : : Ne w Yor k 
"GLEANING S FRO M DIXIE-LAND " 
Te n poems by 
EFFI E T. BATTLE , A.M . 
"Mrs . Battl e ha s a n individua l gift of melody. " 
—Springfiel d Republican . 
"Yo u ow e it to you r rac e to publis h you r poem s i n 
boo k form."—Editor , .Southwester n Christia n Ad ­
vocate . 
"Verse s ar e smooth , graceful , high-minde d an d clear , 
reveren t to al l truth , appreciativ e o f al l beaut y an d 
tru e inspiration."—Georg e W . Cable . 
PRIC E 2b CENTS . 
ADDRESS: OKOLON A INDUSTRIAL SCHOO L 
Okolona , Miss . 
OF INTEREST TO VOCA L STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMEN T 
Points explained, viz.: Breath in 
Singing, Tryin g the Voice , the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto, Teno r Leggiero or Hig h 
Tenor , the Baritone , the Bass, 
Parts of. the Voca l Apparatus, the 
Mouth , the Tongue , Position when 
Practising, Position when Singing, 
Ho w to Practice, Good Rules for 
Singing. 
Comment from the conductor of the Pauhst Choristers, the celebrated choral society which received 
the first prize awarded at the International Singing 
Contest held in Paris on Ma y 25, 1912: 
"Dear Mr . Tinsley : 
"I take great pleasure in commending your very 
useful and succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development.' You r own appreciation of 
the psychology of singing and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly reduced to a 
simple system Cordiall y yours, 
" Father William J . FINN , C . S. P. , 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago. 
Fro m "Musica l Courier, " N . Y. : " A very practical 
little book is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development, 
by Pedro T . Tinsley. It contains some very excellent 
material and vocal exercises, and should be in the 
hands of all vocal students." 
Fro m "Musi c News," Chicago, 111.: "Accordingly 
his 'Practical Method of Singing' is a most concise 
and practical little manual, containing many valuable 
vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be helpful to all 
ambitious vocal students." 
HELPE D HI M GREATL Y 
"Since I practised your exercises of 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' my voice is more resonant 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a new voice." Prof. John T . Layton, 
Director Coleridge-Taylor Musica l Society, 1722 10th 
St., N . W. , Washington, D . C . 
PRIC E $1.00 
Address the publisher: Pedr o T . Tinsley , 6448 Drexel 
Ave., Chicago, 111.; or Clayton F . Summy , 64 E . Va n 
Buren St., or Lyo n & Healy , Adams and Wabash 
Ave., Chicago, 111. 
TH E NATIONA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
Throug h u s schoo l authorities , withou t expense or 
delay , ge t int o communicatio n wit h th e strongest and 
most carefull y investigate d teacher s i n al l lines. 
Teacher s wh o see k position s o r advancemen t should 
registe r wit h u s an d avai l themselve s o f our expert 
service . Promp t an d courteou s attentio n to correspondence . 
B . F . BOWLES , MANAGER . 
273 9 CONVERS E AVENU E EAS T ST . Louis , III . 
(Trad e Mark ) 
"A MOTHER' S LOVE " 
is the title of on e of ou r five ne w Negr o pictures, just off the press. 
It portrays a beautifu l youn g colore d mothe r fondlin g her sturdy babe . 
Painte d in 12 colors it is ric h an d elegant an d ever y hom e shoul d 
hav e a cop y hangin g o n its wall . Writ e us for descriptio n o f ou t ne w 
picture s an d terms to agents. Fo r 1 5 cents in stamp s w e wil l send a 
sampl e cop y of " A JOYFU L WELCOM E INT O HEAVEN" , 
the picture whic h ou r agents hav e sol d 25,00 0 copie s of durin g the 
past few months. 
We make a specially o( enlarging photographs. The finest work possible, guar ­
anteed, at reasonable prices. 
AGENTS WANTED EVERYWHERE 
Th e Douglas Specialties Co . 
Departmen t K 
354 8 Verno n Avenue , :: Chicago, 111. 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISI S 
Vol. 9 -No . 4 FEBRUARY , 1915 Whole No. 52 
SOCIA L UPLIF T 
A SOCIA L center is planned i n connection with the Metropolita n A . M . E . 
Zion Church i n St. Louis, of which Dr. B . 
T. Shaw is pastor. 
<J Socia l service conferences are being held 
i n the South under the council of Congregational Churches. One has been held i n New 
Orleans and has determined upon a social 
surrey of the colored city. 
<J The probation officer of Oakland, Cal. , 
says that the nationalities who keep their 
children out of the courts are the Chinese 
and Japanese, the Negroes and the Jews. 
<I The State of Virgini a is going to devote 
$3,000 of the Leve r Agricultura l Fun d to 
Negroes. This state and Alabama are the 
only ones thus fa r who have shown any disposition to let the Negro population share 
i n this nationa l fund. 
<J I n Charleston, TV. Va. , an examination for 
mine foreman certificate was recently held. 
Out of 96 applicants 19 were successful, 
among whom was a Negro, W . H . Lacey. 
<I Los Angeles, Cal. , has a colored Doctors' 
Association and a Nurses' Association. 
(£ A social center for colored people is being 
planned i n West Chester, Pa . 
«j[ The Rev. H . H . Dun n of New Orleans i n 
a sermon has outlined the progress of the 
colored people of Ne w Orleans for the last 
year: The first publi c pla y ground for colored children was opened; $500 was raised 
by the colored citizens for it, and white citizens contributed $2,300 i n addition ; white 
and colored physicians met together to discuss Negr o health; a Negro publi c librar y 
has been started; the city council has purchased a site at a cost of $8,000 and appropriated $2,500 annually for maintenance; a 
buildin g valued at $33,000 is nearing completion. The publi c school system still lacks 
a high school but there are 8,164 pupils enrolled and 155 public school teachers of 
whom 8 are white. One new school buildin g 
has been opened. The eighth grade has been 
restored i n 3 schools and wil l be started i n 
other schools this month. There are a number of patrons' and parents' clubs. 
<I The u
n
iversity Race Commission composed of southern white men has held its 
fifth annual meeting i n Washington. 
<J Howar d Universit y is makin g a collection of Negro Americana . Dr. J. E . Moore -
land has recently given his collection of 7,-
000 books to this collection. 
CJ The America n Publi c Healt h Association 
met i n Jacksonville, Fla. , and discussed 
health and sanitation among Negroes. 
<J A t the first public exhibition of the 
Thumb Bo x Painters of Syracuse Universit y 
25 artists presented 135 separate paintings. 
James Herring , a colored student, received 
first prize for figures out of doors. Mr . Herrin g has for several years had charge of the 
art instruction at the Wilberforc e Summer 
School. 
<I The Negro Yea r Boo k for 1914-15 edited 
by M . N . Wor k of Tuskegee, Ala. , has been 
issued. It contains 417 pages of encyclopedic material. It can be obtained at Tuskegee for twenty-five cents, or thirty-five 
cents by mail. It is a most valuable compilation. 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 164 TH E CRISIS 
<J The Duluth . South Shore and Atlanti c 
Railwa y Co., with headquarters at Sault Ste. 
Marie , Mich. , operates its own sleeping and 
dining- cars wit h colored help entirely. The 
three sleeping-car conductors are A . Ray , 
C. M . Blackbur n and M . F . Mason , all colored. 
<J Col. C. A . P . Hatfield was recently retired from the Nint h Regiment, U . S. Cav ­
alry. I n his general orders he pai d tribute 
to "the soldiers of the Nint h and Tenth Regiments, saying among other things: " I feel 
that never i n my militar y career has it come 
to me so intensely and wit h such heartfelt 
feeling to say before I leave what I think of 
you and what the Government of the Unite d 
States must surely think of you, as to the 
duty you have performed i n this camp while 
under my command. " 
<J Charitable work among colored people has 
been carried on to an unusual extent durin g 
the Christmas season. The Times Picayune 
of New Orleans, a white paper, distributed 
toys among thousands of poor colored children. The colored people raised $1,100 toward the fund. I n Philadelphi a the Colored 
Hote l Brotherhood distributed gifts among 
462 colored children. 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
THE Philadelphi a Concert Orchestra, an 
organization deserving the highest 
praise for its continued maintenance of the 
highest standard i n the art of music, gave an 
excellent concert at Parkwa y Auditorium, 
Philadelphia , Pa. , on December 28th. Miss 
Blanche Esthe r Williams, soprano, was the 
soloist and was heard i n Scene and Ari a 
from the opera "Aida " by Verdi . The orchestral numbers were the overture "De r 
Freischuetz" by Weber; Symphon y No . 2 in 
D major, and the march "Tannhauser " by 
Wagner. 
C| Ricord i and Co., music publishers, announce among their new songs: "The Hou r 
Glass " and two poems by W . R. Henley, 
"Brin g He r Agai n to Me " and "The Spring , 
M y Dear, " set to music by the distinguished 
composer, Mr . Harr y T. Burleigh . 
<I On December 18th at Albaugh's Theatre, 
Baltimore , Md. , The Nationa l Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People presented Mr . Rolan d W . Hayes, tenor, of Boston, Mass., and Mr . Feli x Weir, violinist, 
assisted by Miss C. Beatrice Lewis, before 
an appreciative audience. Mr . Hayes, whose 
beauty of voice and communicating power 
gives great pleasure i n the singin g of songs, 
was also heard at Clarksburg , Va. , and other 
southeastern cities i n the month of December. The pieces assembled on his program 
were by Jensen, Johnson. Coombs, Bond , 
Rummel, Tipton , Burleig h and Puccini . 
<J Durin g the month of December, Mme . 
Estelle Pinckne y Clough, the well-known soprano of Worcester, Mass., .filled a number 
of engagements i n Philadelphia , Pa . A t the 
concert given at Musi c Fun d Hal l Mme . 
Cloug h sang most effectively "Th e Indian 
Bel l Song " from Lakme and "The Cuckoo" 
by Liz a Lehmann . 
<J Throug h the services of Mr . Donaldson 
Smith , the Africa n explorer, valuable ethnological specimens have been installed i n 
the Museum of the Universit y of Pennsylvania . The collection includes many war 
weapons, wood carvings, beautiful ornaments of ivor y from Abyssini a and cloth 
made on primitiv e looms. 
<J "The Dust o f the Earth " was produced 
at Wilberforc e Universit y under the direction of Miss Halli e Q. Brown . It was a play 
i n four acts wit h 9 players. 
<J A caste of 35 people under the direction 
of Mr . Willia m Speights produced a comedy 
opera at the Carlto n Avenu e Branc h of the 
Brookly n Y . M . C. A . 
<J The Fis k Jubile e Singers gave a concert 
at Nashville , Tenn.. i n aid of the Belgian 
Relie f Fund . Eigh t hundred people were 
present and the gross receipts were about 
$400. 
C| Edwar d Dennis, pianist and baritone, appeared in "A n Evenin g of Interpretations." 
Mr . Dennis wil l sing the title role i n Men ­
delssohn's "Elijah " under the direction of 
Mr . Frederic k Wood . 
<J Mr . Hilbert E . Stewart gave a piano 
forte recital at Bethe l A . M . E . Church, 
Chicago. 
<I The CRISI S was mistaken last month i n 
saying that Willia m Farro w won a first prize 
in paintin g at the Montgomer y County, 0., 
art exhibtion. His wor k did, however, receive this notice i n the Dayton , 0., Journal: 
"There are two very excellent canvases i n the 
exhibit done by a youn g colored artist, Will ­
iam Farrow , who is forgin g to the front by 
sheer force o f will . H e is studying at present at the Chicago Ar t Institute. Whil e 
workin g eight hours a day to support himself, he puts i n his spare time and his evenings at his favorite occupation and is getting 
results. The portrait 'Alice ' is gentle and ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 165 
attractive in color and i n his other pictures 
he has achieved the difficult task o f showing 
glass and flowers and sheet music set against 
the light of an open window. " 
<J Miss C. D . Boger, contralto soloist of 
Chicago, 111., and Miss Hele n Hagan , of 
New Haven, Conn., the well-known piano 
soloist, are appearin g i n concert work i n the 
South. 
<J Several troupes of jubilee singers are on 
tour, among them the Han n Jubilee Singers 
who recently gave a successful concert i n 
Santa Fe , New Mexico , and the Williams' 
Colored Singers of Chicago who are touring 
the East and wil l give concerts i n Mt . Carmel Baptist Church , Washington , and the 
Manhattan Casino, New York . The latter 
concert is under the Utopi a Neighborhood 
Club. 
EDUCATIO N 
THE Genera l Educatio n Boar d has durin g its existence given aid to colored 
institutions as follows: Hampto n Institute 
$138,000, Tuskegee Institute $135,483, Spelman Seminary $196,912, other institutions 
$85,384, makin g a total of approximately 
$555,780. To provide for higher education 
of Negroes, contributions have been made to 
colleges and universities as follows: Atlant a 
Baptist College $5,000, Atlant a Universit y 
$8,000, Fis k Universit y $70,000, Lak e College $7,000, Lelan d Universit y $2,000, Living ­
stone College $12,500, Mile s Memoria l College $5,000, Pain e College $5,000, Shaw Uni ­
versity $18,000 and Virgini a Unio n University $11,500; total $144,000. 
<J A School o f Domestic Science for Negroes 
will be opened in Tampa , Fla . 
<J Negro educators of West Virgini a are 
asking for state scholarships for deserving 
young colored students. 
<J The schools o f the Distric t of Columbi a 
are again in turmoil. Mr . R. C. Bruc e is the 
storm center and the conduct of the Norma l 
School is especially criticized. A n "Oldest 
Inhabitants' Association " has published a 
strong indictment o f the present conduct of 
the colored schools. 
€J The effort to have Mrs. Francis Russell, 
the colored teacher o f Cincinnati, in charge 
of a special class o f white pupils at the 
Peaslee School removed has so fa r resulted 
only in high praise. The superintendent 
says: "It will be impossible to replace Mrs. 
Russell, for her attainments are o f an exceptionally high order and her work is very 
nearly incomparable. " He declared that the 
complaints had emanated neither from the 
children under Mrs. Russell's care nor from 
their parents. 
IJ The Northern Virgini a Colored Teachers' Association has held its eight annual 
institute at Manassas. 
Cfl Cardina l Farle y of New Yor k opened the 
colored parochial school on 138th Street. 
The school will accommodate 500 children. 
<J The State Superintendent of Publi c In ­
struction of Texas says: "The Negro has 
for more than a generation been our scapegoat for backwardness in educational statistics. Bu t no longer can this old excuse do 
service in face of the facts. The same records above referred to show that i n Texas 
there are 275,346 Negro children withi n the 
scholastic age, 7 to 21 years. Last year 162,-
000 of these Negro children enrolled i n the 
publi c schools of the State, and their attendance record was 57 per cent., compared wit h 
66 per cent, for the while children of the 
State. The Unite d States census report for 
1910 shows that Negro illiteracy i n Texas 
decreased durin g the decade 1900-1910 by 
42,520 persons, while the same report shows 
that illiteracy among the whites increased by 
11,299 souls." 
i j The colored people of Delaware are protesting to the authorities against the 
wretched condition of the colored schools in 
that state. 
•I The ninth annual conference of the 
Highe r Colored Schools of Virgini a met at 
Virgini a Unio n University. 
MEETING S 
THE annual Tuskegee conference met 
Januar y 20th and considered the present agricultura l depression and kindred 
subjects. 
<J The America n Negro Academy held its 
eighteenth annual session in Washington. 
Amon g the speakers were: Dr. W . H . 
Brooks, Dr. C. G . Woodson, and the Rev. 
J. R. L . Diggs. 
*3 The colored people of Jacksonville held 
an important mass meeting and adopted a 
protest addressed to the authorities of the 
city and county setting forth circumstantially that in the last few months 8 colored 
citizens have been shot and killed by policemen without any action on the part of the 
city to punish the reckless officers. 
<J The Seventh session of the Texas Con ­
gress of Mothers and Parent Teacher's Associations for Colored Wome n was held i n 
Austin , Texas, i n conjunction with the 166 TH E CRISIS 
Colored State Teachers Association on Nov . 
26, 27 and 28, 1914. Mrs. Josie B . Hal l 
presided and music was furnished by PaulQuinn , Sam Housto n and Tillotson Colleges. 
The Kindergarte n program was managed by 
Miss B . V . Cummings, more than One Hun ­
dred children particicating. A n important 
"feature was the "Better Bab y Show, " little 
Miss Louis e Turne r of Austi n takin g first 
prize. Bisho p I. B . Scott and other prominent persons were in attendance. 
PERSONA L 
THE Hon . W . T. Vernon , former Reg ­
ister of the Unite d States Treasury, is 
lecturing i n the West. 
Ifl The Rev. W . H . Weave r of Indianapolis 
delivered the address at the Emancipatio n 
Celebration i n that city. 
Ifl Mr . Booke r T. Washingto n addressed the 
white Y . M . C. A . i n Bridgeport, Conn . 
Mr . Willia m Monroe Trotter, editor of 
the Boston Guardian, has been lecturing 
in the East and Middl e West on his experience at the Whit e House . 
Ifl Mr . W . H . Jackson for eight years assistant doorkeeper of the Hous e of Representatives, Rhode Island, was recently elected to 
the Cit y Council of Newport on the Repub ­
lican ticket. 
Ifl Rev. Willia m Beckham, a prominent field 
secretary of the colored Baptists of America , 
is dead. 
Ifl James F . Bundy , secretary of the How ­
ard Universit y La w School since 1890, is 
dead. H e served six years as a member of 
the Washingto n Boar d of Education. 
<J The Rev. Joh n B . Reeve for a long time 
pastor of the Centra l Presbyterian Church 
of Philadelphi a has retired from his pulpit 
at the age of over 80. H e is succeeded by 
the Rev. Willia m E . Griffin. 
Ifl A competition calling for designs for a 
civic center in a suburban district of Pasa ­
dena, Cal. , was recently held. The first 
prize was won by Mr . Pau l R. Williams a 
colored architect of Lo s Angeles. 
Ifl Prof. Frederick Fairfield, a white man 
who for many years was Dean of the College 
of Arts and Sciences of Howar d University , 
is dead. 
<J Frederick Arthu r Robinson, a colored 
police sergeant, i n the city of Cambridge , 
Mass., died after 30 years service. H e was 
given a publi c funeral. 
<J Charles S. Sutton, a youn g colored man 
of Cleveland, has been appointed enrolling 
clerk in the State Senate of Ohio. 
Ifl Mrs. Effie T. Battl e is givin g recitals of 
her own poems in a number of schools i n 
the South. He r second volume is in press. 
Ifl A colored man, Mr . Took, attempted to 
prevent a white ma n of Pine Bluff, Ark., 
from abusing a mule. The colored man was 
fatally stabbed. 
II Randolp h J . Tarns, the only colored member of the Dayton , Ohio, Fir e Department, 
for the past eight years, recently made the 
highest grade i n an efficiency examination of 
all the members of the department. His 
mark was 99.2 per cent. 
POLITIC S 
IT is reported that President Wilson is 
••• now wavering i n his promise to appoint 
a colored man as Recorde r of Deeds of the 
Distric t of Columbia . 
Ifl The attempt of the Unite d States Senate 
to exclude colored immigrants to the United 
States was killed by a decided vote i n the 
House . Congressman Burnett, of Alabama , 
Representative Mann , of Illinois and Representative Madden , o f Illinois, were the 
chief defenders of the Negro . 
Ifl Vardama n of Mississipp i is still tryin g 
to repeal the Fifteent h amendment of the 
Constitution of the Unite d States, modify 
the Fourteenth and introduce "Jim-Crow" 
cars into the Distric t of Columbia , 
f A n estate valued at $139,000 is said to 
have been left by Joh n W. Holland , a retired Negro caterer of Philadelphia . 
ECONOMIC S 
THE unfortunate order of True Reformers of Virgini a is again i n trouble. 
Floy d Ross, late head of the order, has disappeared from Richmond . 
Ifl The Unite d Brothers of Friendship , a 
colored fraterna l insurance company of 
Texas, reports an income of $32,916 for the 
last three months. It has an invested fund 
of $34,000 and claims 13,500 members. 
Ifl The Colored Socia l Settlement of Washington, D . C , expended $2,153 last year. 
It holds propert y wort h about $6,000. 
Ifl The Nationa l League on Urba n Conditions Amon g Neai'oes reports an income of 
$17,615 for 1914. 
TH E CHURC H 
MOTHER ZIO N CHURC H has recently 
it A
 removed to 136th Street, New York 
City , and been re-dedicated. The church 
was founded i n 1796, had its first building in 
1800, was rebuilt in 1820, burned down i n 
1839 and rebuilt in 1840. It moved to West ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 167 
Tenth and Bleecker Streets i n 1864, to West 
89th Street i n 1904 and to West 136th 
Street i n 1914. Its pastor is the Rev. J . W . 
Brown . 
q I f the new parkwa y is built i n St. Louis 
three Negro churches wil l be dispossessed but 
wil l receive good prices for their property. 
They are therefore i n the market for new 
property and the white Christians of St. 
Louis are correspondingly alarmed. 
q The Baptist Sunday Congress of 1915 
wil l be held i n Birmingham, Ala. , and 
promises to be a large meeting. There wil l 
be four brass bands, a special train and a 
large attendance. 
q St. Thomas Episcopa l Church of Phila ­
delphia has recently been celebrating the anniversay of the birth of its first rector, the 
Rev. Absalom Jones. 
q Bishop W . H . Hear d of the Africa n M . 
E . Church has been collecting funds for a 
motor boat to aid i n his work i n Liberia . 
The boat was recently launched and named 
the "Africa n Methodist.' ' 
COURT S 
THE Crimina l Court in Louisville , Ky. , 
has affirmed the judgment of the Lowe r 
Court i n upholdin g the segregation ordinance. The ease now goes to the Appellat e 
Court. 
q The white Shriners of Atlant a are again 
tryin g to silence the colored body through 
the courts. 
q The colored Masons of Nort h Carolin a 
have been fighting each other in court. The 
case has finally been settled by a fine on 
four of the defendants, 
q Mrs. Lucreti a Nichols of Philadelphi a 
sent her two children to the moving picture 
show. Whe n they did not return in time 
she went for them and was roughly treated 
by one of the attendants and finally arrested 
for "riot. " She was given a small fine i n 
court, but determined to fight the matter and 
finally secured a judgment in her favor with 
damages. 
TH E GHETT O 
T
H E Centra l Labo r Unio n of Miami , Fla. , 
declares that "organized labor must 
maintain the barrie r between whites and 
blacks i n Miami. " The trouble arose over 
a colored orchestra and the head of the Centra l Labo r Unio n said to the Boar d of 
Trade : 
"It is a question of white or black. I 
am not talkin g union labor, I am talkin g 
white labor or black labor. D o you want 
Nigge r labor and will you tolerate it ? It is 
white territory over on the beach the same 
as it is here, but those Niggers are livin g 
in a house there. Woul d you like to have 
a Nigge r family livin g in a house next door 
to you'? The Niggers go bathing with the 
whites. Woul d you want to go in bathing 
with a Nigger. There are two ways of 
doing things, and I don't believe in passing 
it along and ignoring it. " 
q Colored people of Wilmington , Del. , are 
protesting against the dismissal of the only 
colored man on the police force. 
MRS. ARTHU R LITTL E 
q A year ago Arthu r Little , son of a prominent physician of Detroit married Alm a 
Wade. Two months ago Mr. Littl e refused 
to live with her longer, alleging that she is 
colored. Mrs. Littl e is now tryin g to find 
out whether she is "white " or "black. " 
q Mar y C. Marshall has sued the Aitkin , 
Minnesota, Methodist Sunday School for 
making her sit apart from the other pupils. 
A judge has granted a temporary injunction 
against further discrimination, 
q Miss Christobel Pankhurst, the Englis h 
suffragrette, has found to her surprise that 168 TH E CRISIS 
DESIGNED BY MA Y HOWAR D JACKSON 
ON SALE AT GORHAM'S, NEW YOR K 
Telephone Co., recently protested at a hearin g against grantin g a license fo r a moving 
picture show at Leno x Avenu e and 129th 
Street, Ne w Yor k City . Their reason was 
that this woul d brin g a n influx o f colored 
people and that 130th Street ought to be the 
dividin g line between colored an d white 
people. 
*J The State Boxin g Commission of Wiscon ­
sin has decided not to allow colored boxers to 
give exhibitions i n the State. 
€J Mr . Joseph Carroll , an industrious 
colored man, bought propert y at 474 Monastery Avenue , Philadelphia . His white 
neighbors nailed u p his front door and tried 
other methods of drivin g him out. The 
police are, however, protecting him. 
CRIM E 
A SUMMAR Y of lynchings for 1914 wil l 
*- be found on page 196. Durin g the 
month of Januar y two Negroes, E d and Wil l 
Smith, were taken from jai l at Wetumpka , 
Ala. , and lynched. They were accused of 
being implicated i n the murde r o f a white 
farmer. 
t[ The followin g is from the Atlanta , (Ga.) 
Constitution: 
"The delegates to the America n Roa d 
Congress, hundreds of whom are from distant sections of the country and have never 
had an opportunit y of witnessing the 'great 
black mass of highway labor of the South," 
wil l be treated to this rare sight Wednesday 
afternoon at 1 o'clock, when 700 Negr o convicts of Pulto n Count y wil l march by the 
Auditorium. 
"The striped procession of black criminals, 
doomed by the hand of justice to pay the 
penalty of their crimes, wil l assemble at the 
State Capito l and march across the Wash ­
ington Street viaduct past the Auditorium. 
"Ever y movable piece of property belongin g to the Fulto n Count y department of 
publi c works wil l be i n the procession. It 
wil l include the wealth of road machinery 
owned by the county. Ever y convict camp 
guard, every bloodhound puppy , used to 
track escaped convicts, and every county 
road official wil l be i n the propaganda. " 
The white man who tried to rob a Negro 
bank i n Atlanta , Ga. , has escaped from 
jail . H e simpl y walked out an d the guard 
di d not stop him. 
there is discrimination against the colored 
people i n the Unite d States even i n philan ­
thropy. 
C| I n Oberlin, Ohio, Mr . Lero y Field s was 
for two months temporary drive r for the 
America n Express Co . The loca l agent 
said that he was one of the best drivers that 
had ever worked for him and local patrons 
asked for his permanent appointment. The 
higher officers i n Cleveland, however, refused 
to appoint him permanently on the ground 
that it was against the policy of the compan y to appoint colored drivers i n the 
North . 
<][ The Harvar d men of Washington , D . C , 
recently asked Mr . C. G . Woodso n to joi n 
their club. H e filled out the application and 
was thereupon visited by the president of the 
club who explained that his application could 
not be accepted because he was colored. Mr . 
Woodson was recently granted the degree of 
Doctor of Philosoph y by Harvar d University. 
<J Judge Charles E . Gathreaux of New Orleans, a ric h and influential white man, left 
his entire estate to his Negro nurse. The 
estate is valued at $375,000. 
q Col . A . H . Jennings of Shelby County, 
Tenn., willed his entire estate of $80,000 to a 
colored woman, Mrs. Bettie Hicks, and her 
seven children, of whom he acknowledged 
himself to be the father. 
<I The Rev. Dunca n J . McMillan , pastor 
emeritus of the New Yor k Presbyterian 
Church ; the Rev. Bruc e Clar k of the Churc h 
of the Puritan ; Robert Levers, a real estate 
man, and T. P . War d of the New Yor k A POLICEMA N 
LAFAYETTE REI D MERCER , for more 
than twenty years a policeman i n Steubenville, 0., was killed last Jul y while arresting a drunken man. Mr . Merce r was one 
of the most efficient officers on the force and 
had kept his position durin g many changes 
of the city administration. One o f the local 
newspapers said : "H e combined intelligence 
with an utter lack, of fear." Whit e people 
of the highest character who desired special 
protection for women members of their 
family always put them i n the care of Mr . 
Mercer. 
H e was born fifty-two years ago i n Mt . 
Pleasant, 0., and was three or four generations removed from slavery. It was at Mt . 
Pleasant that Benjami n Lund y started his 
anti-slavery magazine i n 1821. Mercer's 
parents a few years ago celebrated their 
golden wedding. H e leaves a brother who is 
a physician, another who is a dentist, and 
another a trusted employe of the Westing -
house Ai r Brak e Company . Beside these 
there arc eight other brothers and sisters. 
The funeral service of the murdered policeman was a remarkable tribute to his character. The body la y i n state i n the court 
house and thousands of white and colored 
people pai d their respect to it. The city 
offices were closed and business largely suspended while the officials, police and fire departments, joined i n the funeral procession. 
A N ASSISTAN T POS T OFFIC E 
SUPERINTENDEN T 
ALEXANDE R G . KIN G was born i n 
Petersburg, Va. , Januar y 24, 1875. H e 
TH E LAT E L . R. MERCE R MR. A. G. KIN G 
MEN OF THE MONTH 170 TH E CRISI S 
TH E LAT E RICHARD HOOPS 
has lived in New Yor k Cit y since he was five 
years old, was educated i n the publi c schools 
and received appointment as a clerk i n the 
New Yor k Post Office i n March , 1892. His 
first appointment was at Station E , Seventh 
Avenue and West Twenty-eighth Street. 
Fro m here lie was transferred to the sub-station at Columbus Avenue and Eighty-fourt h 
Street. On Februar y 17, 1907, he was assigned to the Wal l Street Station as assistant 
superintendent. There are three such assistants and the}' supervise the work of numerous white clerks. The Wal l Street Sub-station handles more mail matter than any other 
station i n the city. Postmaster Willcox , who 
made the appointment, said : "Whil e Kin g 
happens to be a Negro, I want it, to lie understood that this has nothing to do with his 
appointment. W e do not draw any racia l 
distinction i n this service. Kin g has been 
in the service for fourteen years and is a 
thoroughly capable man. " 
Whe n the Democratic administration came 
in at Washingto n there were some rumors 
that certain white clerks were beginning to 
see the shadow of the color line in Wal l 
Street, but it is pleasant to know that Mr . 
Kin g still holds his position. 
A CENTENARIA N 
RICHARD HOOPS , perhaps the oldest 
colored man i n the Unite d States, died 
about a year ago i n Osage City , Mo . H e 
was apparently considerably over a hundred 
years old, and insisted that he was livin g i n 
Yorktown , Va. , when Cornwallis surrendered 
to Washington . Two of the oldest white in ­
habitants of Osage City , both seventy years 
of age, say that Hoop s was regarded as an 
old man when they were boys. 
Fo r many years Hoop s lived i n a little hut 
on the banks of the Osage River, spending 
his lif e i n the open air huntin g and fishing. 
Afterwar d he removed to a cave up i n the 
wilds of the rive r and finally the county 
clerk provided an allowance for him. His 
memory was excellent as to dates, names and 
faces. H e left one married son and a number of distant relatives. 
A N EDITO R 
IN the Northwest Numbe r of TH E CRISI S it 
was said, "Tacoma has a colored paper 
that is not colored. " The editor of this 
pape r is a colored woman, Mrs. Ell a E . 
Ryan . The Forum has a loca l circulation of 
a thousand and is supported b y the white 
MRS. E. E. RYA N ME N O F TH E MONT H 171 
community almost entirely. It is a newsy little 
sheet, out-spoken, and 
busy i n local politics. 
Whil e it is not "colored, " 
it always takes a strong 
stand fo r racia l justice 
and against segregation 
and discrimination. The 
paper is now eleven 
years old. Mrs. Ryan , 
assisted by her husband, 
who is a publisher, has 
been prominent i n many 
of the forwar d movements i n Tacoma. Form ­
erly, as a hairdresser i n 
Spokane, she acquired 
property and is said to 
be worth $20,000. On 
three occasions she and 
her husband have published "Ryan's Biblio ­
graphica l and Statistical 
Compendium" of the legislature, State of Wash ­
ington. Mrs. Rya n was 
born i n Hamilton , 0., 
and reared i n St. Louis. TH E LAT E N . L . GILBER T 
A PREMATUR E DEAT H 
NEWTON LLOY D GILBERT , Colgate 
Universit y '15, died November 23, at 
Selma, Ala. , from paralysis, at the age of 25. 
The students' association of his college allude 
to him as "Ou r beloved friend and fellowstudent," and refer to his "manliness and 
nobility of character." It is easy to see from 
the numerous testimonials that Gilbert was 
an unusua l youn g man. H e led his class 
through the publi c schools of Ne w Yor k Cit y 
graduating from the gramma r school in 1909 
wit h two gold medals. I n DeWit t Clinton 
Hig h School he was 
president of' his class of 
500 hoys and graduated 
as second man i n the 
class. A t Colgate he 
made a remarkable record, receiving the highest marks, and would 
undoubtedly have gained 
the Ph i Bet a Kapp a key. 
A n editorial in the college paper says: "H e 
was a i|iiiet man. There 
was a line restraint i n 
all that lie said and did. 
li e never swept into 
things with overwhelmin g enthusiasm, which 
promised more than it 
accomplished. Bu t now 
that lie is gone, we are 
beginning to know how 
much he was to us. Ho w 
faithful he was to the 
task that was his. Ho w 
unassuming, and yet how 
full of quiet confidence 
were those words with 
which he was wont to accept new obligations. We can hear him now, 
as he used to say, 'Well , ah reckon ah can, 
ole man !' An d we remember that we were 
sure, when he said the words, that the thingwould be done. W e are braver, because he 
fought the good fight. W e are truer because 
he was true, i n our own. W e have felt the 
impress of his lif e on our own lives, and we 
know that we shall be better men through 
all our days for having known him. " 
Ho w fine it would be i f every white college 
boy i n the Unite d States could meet a colored school mate like this! 
Youn g Gilbert's father, the Rev. M . W . 
Gilbert, is a Colgate man and now president 
of Selma University, Alabama . 
<J The Churc h Peace Unio n has offered 
$5,000 i n prizes for essays on international 
peace. $1,000 wil l be given for the best 
monograph by any pastor; two prizes of 
$300 and one of $200 wil l be given to students i n theological seminaries. Seventy 
other prizes of smaller sums wil l be awarded. Ful l particulars may be obtained from 
the Rev . Frederic k Lynch , 70 Fift h Avenue , 
Ne w Yor k City . 
IJ The Africa n Pompei i was discovered 
durin g the recent explorations i n the Nil e 
Valley , as told by Prof. Sayce at the Egyp t 
Exploratio n Fun d meeting held at the rooms 
of the Roya l Society, London . The ruins 
cover a larger area than those of Memphis 
and include a roya l city wit h palaces, publi c 
baths and gymnasia, as well as streets and 
dwellings. The town was the center of the 
iron industry, and the smelting furnaces 
which have been unearthed, worked enough 
metal to supply the whole of northern Africa . TH E SMOULDERIN G FIR E 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard , writin g i n 
the New Yor k Evening Post, says: 
"The smouldering intensity of the race 
problem i n Americ a is well illustrated by 
the steady stream of books dealing wit h it 
which reaches the reviewer's desk. Ever y 
shade of opinion is usually represented, but 
i n the list before us the hopelessly bitter 
anti-Negro screed is fortunately lacking . It 
is a sign of good omen, as is the fact that 
the book of emotion and purely personal 
feeling without knowledge is less and less to 
the fore. Instead, we have a growingl y serious effort by white and colored writers alike 
to deal i n a scientific spirit wit h what is 
the least solved and least understood of our 
social problems; to appl y to it the laboratory 
method so warml y urged as the necessary 
resolvent i n all matters sociological. 
" I woul d not, of course, deny that the 
tract is still urgently needed. There is so 
much that cries out to high Heave n i n our 
treatment of the Negro that ardent appeals 
to the America n conscience, to our spirit of 
justice and fair play, must still be i n order. 
Dr. D u Bois's 'Souls of Blac k Folk ' remains 
the high-water mark of this form of writing , 
as is attested by its reaching its ninth edition 
•—one of the few really great books to come 
out of the South since the loosening of the 
fetters. Bu t notable as is this portraitur e 
of a soul oppressed, there is the greatest 
need of still other forms of writing , such as 
the coldly scientific portraya l of historic 
fact and the calm analysis of the clashing 
elements i n this social and politica l problem. 
There is, moreover, increasing need of interpreting not only the views and aspirations 
of one race to another i n a friendly and 
helpful spirit, as does Booke r Washington , 
but of approaching the Southern difficulties 
as a governmental question to which some 
answer must be found that is consonant wit h 
I lie grim realities—so grim as to make quite 
possible the appearance any day o f a new 
'Uncl e Tom's Cabin. ' 
"Is it not incredible, i n view o f the magnitude and threatening character o f the 
problem, that it remains practicall y untouched from an administrative point of 
view, that it is almost wholl y overlooked 
by our governmental agencies, that our 
statesmen are indifferent to it. Eve n 
President Wilson , wit h his keen constructive mind , his readiness to tackle every other 
problem and to offer a solution fo r it, is 
content to pass this by when he can, or i f 
he cannot, to lose his temper over a rudely 
aggressive recita l of the race's wrongs, or to 
dismiss the question wit h a story as be did 
the other day when a group o f Southern 
investigators called upo n him. " 
TH E MOUNTAI N I N LABO R ! 
The extraordinarily small result of President Wilson's attempt to express himself on the race problem has brought much 
plainl y expressed disgust and little praise. 
The President is reported to have said 
to the Southern Universit y Commission on 
Race Problems: 
"Ou r object is to know the needs of the 
Negro and sympathetically help him i n every 
way that is possible fo r his good and our 
good. 
" I think that men like yourselves can be 
trusted to see this great question at every 
angle. There isn't any question, it seems to 
me, into which more candor needs to be put 
or more thorough human good feeling, than 
this. I know myself, as a Southern man, 
how sincerely the heart of the South desires 
the good of the Negr o and the advancement 
of his race on all sound and sensible lines, 
and everything that can be done i n that 
direction is of the highest value. It is a. 
matter of common understanding. " 
To this the Ne w Yor k World replies: 
"It is not often that President Wilso n 
OPINION OPINIO N 173 
can be accused o f lack of sincerity but what 
shall be said o f his remark relative to the 
Negroes o f the South that 'there isn't any 
question it seems to me, into which more 
candor needs to be put or more thorough 
human feeling,' and that '1 know myself, as 
a Southern man, how truly the heart of the 
South desires the good of the Negro and the 
advancement of his race on all sound and 
sensible lines; it is a matter of common 
understanding'? 
"These words were spoken to the Uni ­
versity Commission on Southern Race Questions, made up o f representatives of eleven 
Southern colleges. They might have been 
uttered fifty years ago by a Confederate 
. Brigadier. They do not var y much from 
the sentiments expressed i n the years before 
the wa r by the most extreme advocates of 
slavery. 
"Negroes are citizens of the Unite d 
States, entitled to all the rights which Mr . 
Wilso n as President is sworn to protect. To 
what other section of our population, large 
or small, woul d he refer i n such terms of 
condescension? I f it is imaginable that any 
other elements of our people could be subject 
to the limitations placed upon the blacks, is 
it conceivable that the President would 
speak thus of their possible advancement on 
'sound and sensible lines'? 
"Mr . Wilso n chanced to be born i n Vir ­
ginia, but he is not President because he is 
a Southern man, and the World ought not 
to be forced to acquaint him wit h the fact." 
The Ne w Yor k Globe adds: 
"The Negro is supposed to be the equal 
of the white man before the law. His 
rights should be respected, above all, by the 
Federa l Government. An d as head of the 
Federa l Government President Wilson , as 
far as lies i n his power should compel this 
respect, which, unfortunately, is so lackin g 
i n substance. H e cannot better show his 
'thorough human good feeling' toward the 
Negro than by puttin g an end to the present 
Jim-Crowism i n Washington. " 
The Norristown (Pa.) Times says: 
"I f President Wilso n hoped, by his late 
speech on the Negr o question, to 'cover up ' 
the unpleasantness caused by the segregation acts o f some of his Cabinet members, 
wit h respect to white and Negro clerical 
workers, he wil l be disappointed. His 
words were those of a scholar, to be sure— 
hig h sounding and interesting; yet, boiled 
and pu t to the crucia l test, they reveal, after 
all, only the characteristics of the one who 
parries. " 
The Syracuse (N . Y. ) Standard, speaking 
of "common understanding, " says: 
"I n Caddo parish i n Louisian a there has 
been a grievous misunderstanding the past 
fortnight. Because o f the murder of two 
whites a mob of 200 men have taken the 
administration of injustice into their own 
hands. Eigh t Negroes have been lynched 
in ten days in this small community, without 
a pretense o f resistance by the local authorities and with no claim that all of them 
were guilty. There is no Southerner who 
values his self-respect who wil l defend this 
substitution of anarchy for law, by consent 
of public officers." 
The paper continues: 
"Ma y we suggest; because the question has 
only recently been under discussion, that it 
is not dealing wit h the Negro sympathetically, that it is not biddin g his friends who 
are seeking to serve him 'Go d speed' to segregate him i n the government offices at Wash ­
ington. " 
To the manifest delight o f the Bourbon 
South Mr . Booke r T. Washington hastened 
to commend the President. The Maco n 
(Ga.) Telegraph says: 
"It is interesting to read of the present 
attitude of Booke r T. Washington toward 
President Wilson , since the Trotter incident. 
H e was i n New Yor k a few days ago and 
the Sun publishes the following relative 
thereto: 
"The present wa r wil l have a serious effect 
on more than ten million white and Negro 
farmers who grow cotton i n the South, according to a statement made yesterday by 
Dr. Booke r T. Washington, the noted Negro 
educator, when seen at the Hote l Biltmor e 
on his arriva l from Tuskegee, Ala . H e was 
much pleased, he said, with the remarks of 
President Wilso n i n outlining his attitude 
toward the Negro when he told the University Commission on Southern Race Questions 
on Tuesday that 'our object is to know the 
needs of the Negro and sympathetically help 
him i n every way that is possible for his 
good and our good. " 
"Ever y thoughtful man Nort h and South, " 
he went on, "wil l agree wit h the President. 
I think his statement represents a growin g 
liberal sentiment on the part of an increasingly large group of Southern white people. 
The President has always manifested a deep 
interest in the education and development 174 TH E CRISIS 
of our race, even before he went to the Whit e 
House, as I have had occasion to know. 
"The above is simpl y additional evidence 
that Booke r Washingto n deserves the position he occupies as a leader of his race. H e 
is not outwardly concerned wit h the question of whether or not his people are to be 
allowed by the President to wash their hands 
with white people. H e has always advocated and advanced industria l education for 
his race, not bothering about social recognition by the whites. His college at Tuskegee 
is for the trainin g of the min d to guide the 
hand i n useful enterprise. 
"There are millions of white people who 
don't enjoy social equality wit h their own 
race, and they would be miserably uncomfortable i f they had it. 
"Wheneve r the Negro equips himself and 
demonstrates his social equality, he wil l be 
above quarreling with any man for not associating wit h him. H e wil l convert his ostracism into exclusiveness, and be just as 
happy in it as any of the white ultr a elects 
are now. 
"It is the Booke r Washingto n doctrine 
that is sensible, upliftin g and helpful for the 
Negro, rather than the Trotter theory. The 
latter's agitation of a few weeks ago accomplished nothing but a little politica l thunder, 
to the hurt of the people, who can il l afford 
to be hurt." 
The Montgomery (Ala.) Advertiser 
quotes the foregoing editorial with approva l 
and adds: 
"The less attention America n Negroes 
give to the frenzied words of irresponsible 
agitators of the impossible Trotter type and 
the more attention they give to Booke r 
Washington's sound views, the better off wil l 
our Negroes be." 
The McCom b Cit y (Miss.) Enterprise gets 
right down to business: 
"The recent episode in which a Nigge r 
leader of a delegation of Niggers practically 
insulted the President of the Unite d States, 
at the Whit e Hous e in Washington, is exciting unusual comment i n the press throughout the country. A s long as some of our 
misled Northern friends continue to preach 
equality of the races to the Niggers, and as 
long as some of our Republican and Democratic politica l leaders court the Nigger's for 
their votes, we are going to have incidents 
of this kind and incidents of a nature fa r 
more serious. Go d never intended that the 
Negr o should ever be the equal of the white 
man morally, mentally or socially, and until 
we settle the Negr o question once and for all 
along the lines advocated by Senator Varda -
man o f this State, it is useless to hope for 
an improvement of present conditions. " 
Bu t "Ou r Negroes " do not seem to agree 
with Wilso n and Washington . The fightin g Louisvill e (Ky. ) News mentions the 
Trotter interview and says: 
"Sinc e that interview the President talked 
with the President o f the Universit y Commission on Southern Rac e Questions and in ­
dulged i n the merest generalities i n a patronizin g manner. One strikin g thin g he said 
was: 'I know, myself, as a Southern man, 
how sincerely the heart o f the South desires 
the good of the Negr o and the advancement 
of his race on all sound and sensible lines.' 
Yo u catch the drift, don't yo u Taliferio"? 
Well , after the Trotte r incident few papers, 
i f any, white or colored, commented on that 
because they all knew what the President 
meant by 'sound and sensible lines.' Bu t 
long comes Dr . Washingto n and the 
Southern papers are runnin g the following : 
"BOOKE R WASHINGTO N PRAISE S 
WILSON. " 
The editor continues: 
"I n the last issue of the CRISIS magazine 
there was quoted at length editorials from 
The News anent Dr . Booke r T. Washington's 
alleged statement on segregation. 
"The News, since the appearance of the 
CRISIS, has received letters from all over the 
country—from the South as well as the 
Nort h and judgin g from the tone of some, 
from white as well as Colore d people— 
commending what was said i n those editorials. The CRISIS must cover a deal of 
ground, judgin g from the postmarks of these 
letters. 
"Followin g the custom of our race papers 
we ought to publish these letters, but they 
have no news value and we have no space. 
The letters are merely letters o f commendation and encouragement and also of 
evidence that Dr . Washingto n is not the 
accepted 'leader of the Negr o race.' I n 
reply to some o f these letters we said : 'It is 
encouraging to the editor of a race paper 
to learn that the views he expresses are not 
merely his own but that they represent the 
thoughts of others.' An d so we thank those 
who have written us letters of encouragement 
on this and other matters. Eve n when OPINIO N 175 
finances are runnin g low it helps a great 
deal toward keeping his spirit up when an 
editor receives from out i n the distant somewhere a wor d of encouragement from a 
kindred spirit. " 
The Louisvill e (Ky. ) Columbian-Herald 
says: 
"The camp followers of (Booke r T. Wash ­
ington) the light and leader of the apostle 
of 'submission' and acquiescence to all kin d 
of humiliation, regard that little unpleasantness between Mr . Wilso n and Mr . Trotter 
as one o f the greatest calamities that has 
ever befallen the black man in this country. 
They consequently believe that the race has 
sustained an irreparable loss, and they are 
trembling i n their boots, their knees are 
smiting together like Belshazzar. The in ­
cident wil l be forgotten by President Wilso n 
long before it wil l be by that class of Negroes 
referred to above. • * » There is a fast 
growing class of self-respecting Negroes i n 
this country with backbone and courage, who 
wil l resent every insult and indignity forced 
upon them. It is the highest duty of every 
man who believes i n the peace and perpetuity of Americ a to recognize and encourage them, for a failure to do so spells dire 
conditions fo r the future. I f the present 
conditions are allowed to continue there is 
trouble ahead, as sure as there is a God. " 
"A s a matter of fact, " says the Richmon d 
(Va.) Planet: "wit h the surrender of civi l 
and politica l rights wil l soon come the confiscation of the very materia l wealth of which 
Dr. Washingto n so glibl y speaks. Prop ­
erty rights are based upon manhood rights, 
the right of citizenship. Whe n you yield 
up the right of citizenship, yo u endanger the 
pi g and the property that yo u have accumulated and you make the Negr o the foot-ball 
of every avaricious white man who desires 
to rob him of his property. 
"W e see this now i n the segregation act 
passed i n many Southern cities where 
colored citizens who own property are denied 
the right to enjoy the possession of the prop ­
erty that they own. " 
The Pittsburg h (Pa.) Courier calls Mr . 
Wilso n "Th e Jester " and the St. Luke's 
Herald writes: 
"President Wilso n who was a self-styled 
Christian gentleman when he was Governor 
of Ne w Jersey, seems to be slippin g from 
the rock of basic, everlasting and unchangin g faithfulness and according to report is 
about to back slide and go back upon his 
pledged word. 
"Althoug h having promised to make a 
Negro the next Recorder of Deeds at Wash ­
ington, it is now an open secret that the 
President has almost, i f not already changed 
his mind, and now contemplates the appointment of a white man. Well , President Wil ­
son is not the only President, who went long 
on promises and short on deeds. Wasn't— 
guilty of the same charge? 
"Wha t does a pledge by a white man 
amount to, when made to a Negro ? Wha t 
right has any Negro to expect that a white 
man, although President of the Unite d 
States, wil l keep his word to a Negro? No , 
this would savor too much of social equality, 
between the races; for the Negro, equivocations, segregation and prevarication. " 
Kell y Mille r has issued a pamphlet which 
is attracting notice. Amon g other things 
he points out: "the outstanding and significant fact that the President of the Unite d 
States, speaking ostensibly for the America n 
people, avowedly sanctions the segregation 
of the races as the national policy under his 
Administration . The vita l question is, according to Professor Miller, Does this policy 
fairl y represent the spirit and purpose of 
the -American people? "Whe n a delegation 
of women waited upon the President some 
time ago," says Professor Mille r pungently, 
"to secure a declaration i n behalf of woman 
suffrage, he declared that he could not speak 
on such a momentous issue until his part y 
had spoken for him. On the still more 
momentous question of establishing the caste 
system i n the Federa l service, so fa r as the 
record discloses, the President speaks on his 
own initiative, with neither the authority of 
his party nor that of the America n people. 
"Durin g the extra session of the present 
Congress, one or more bills were introduced 
by Southern members wit h the purpose of 
segregating the colored employees i n the 
civil service of the Federa l Government, 
but under the guidance of wiser and more 
comprehensive leadership, such resolutions 
were relegated to the pigeon-hole of Con ­
gressional oblivion. Should such propositions be enacted into law or be allowed to 
crystallize into custom and practice, it 
would more definitely establish the inferior 
status of the Negro race before the law 
than any legislative act or administrative 
policy since the adoption of the Constitution. It would, indeed, seriously affect the 176 TH E CRISIS 
declared purpose and spirit of our nationa l 
policy based upon the absolute equality of 
citizens i n all publi c considerations. 
"The question of granting women the 
right of suffrage affects but feebly the 
foundation principl e of free institutions as 
compared wit h the proposition to relegate 
a part of the people to an inferior caste. 
One is a progressive measure i n harmony 
with the aim and purpose of free institutions, the other is reactionary i n the 
direction of darker and more benighted 
ages; one points towards the new freedom, 
the other towards old slavery; one makes 
for the equality of all before the law, the 
other grafts the blighted branch of Hindo o 
caste upon the tree of America n liberty. " 
Willia m Pickens says i n the Colored Alahamian: 
" I notice that i n this late committee there 
was not a single Negro, and yet the President wants 'to know the needs of the Negro.' 
One intelligent Negro can tell him more 
about the Negro's needs than a dozen white 
men. I have always contended that i f a 
dog could talk he would give us more light 
on dog-psychology i n ten minutes than all 
the philosophers of all the ages have given 
us. Me n may settle the question of lower 
animals with the lower anima l absent—but 
the question between man and man is not 
settled that way, for both must be parties 
to the settlement. Me n must mutually 
tolerate, discuss and agree or compromise; 
and the nearer and better you know a fellow, the more likely are yo u to sympathetically help him. I f white men want to define 
their own relations to cows or boll weevils or 
potato bugs, they need only consult themselves; but they can never settle the question 
between them and the America n Negro with 
the Negro i n absentia." 
m 
SEGREGATIO N 
W . D . Weatherford, Southern Fiel d Secretary of the International Committee of 
the Y . M . C. A. , writes i n the Survey, and 
says: 
"The truth is, that most of the Negroes 
i n the cities who seek to buy land and build 
homes i n the white sections, do so not hecause they prefer to live among white people 
as white people, but because they prefer to 
live i n a community where the controlling 
people wil l see to it that decency and order 
are maintained. N o fair-minded white man 
can for one minute doubt that there is much 
to be said on both sides of this question of 
city segregation. W e are, perhaps, not yet 
in a position to face this thin g i n a dispassionate attitude, leavin g aside petty financial 
problems—or perhaps I had better say, subordinating economic problems to those 
greater and more fundamenta l problems 
which are wrappe d up i n human justice and 
the buildin g of human character. 
"Bu t it is not the question o f segregation i n cities which gives the thoughtful 
Southern white man the most annoyance at 
the present hour. It is this determined 
move on the part o f a few white leaders 
to see to it that segregation is carried out 
i n the rura l communities throughout the 
entire South. " 
H e argues against this agitation and concludes wit h this fine word : 
"Th e great problem o f the South is, after all, not primaril y an economic problem, 
but a problem of manhood. W e of the 
South who claim to be the more advanced 
and the stronger race, are on trial. It is 
not the Negro to-day who is on trial, but the 
Southern white man, and I say this as a 
Southern white man. The question is not 
whether the Negr o is as mora l as the white 
man ; whether he is as intellectual, as strong, 
as the white man ; whether he is or ever will 
be as advanced as the Southern white man. 
The question is whether we, the boasted leaders of the South, wil l so deal wit h the Negro 
as to prove to the rest of the worl d that we 
are men with a brotherly spirit, worthy to be 
trusted with a great responsibilit y i n the development of human life . 
"M y honest conviction is that the rising 
generation of Southern white men wil l i n in ­
creasing measure assume the responsibilities 
laid upon their shoulders, and wil l deal fairly 
with the man i n black b y their side. This, 
and this alone, wil l really solve our race 
problem. " 
Eve n Broug h of the Rac e Commission 
addressed by the President, after a screed 
on miscegenation, has to admit that: 
"The question of segregation of the races 
is a cloud on the horizon of race adjustment. 
Segregation i n departments of publi c service 
and i n railwa y and street cars, and even i n 
cities, may be expedient and just, but the 
idea of farm segregation, proposed to give 
the white man a better chance i n agriculture, 
is a travesty upon Anglo-Saxo n superiority 
and an injustice to the Negro. " 
The Boston (Mass.) Traveller says: OPINIO N 177 
"Miss Davis, Commissioner o f Corrections Department of Ne w York , when told 
that white and colored girls were allowed 
together i n the Bedfor d Reformatory, said 
that she came from an abolitionist famil y 
and thought that an institution such as Bed ­
ford should be conducted on the 'character, 
conduct and needs' of the inmates, not on 
their 'color, race or religion.' It might be 
well i f her point of view were recommended 
to President Wilson , wit h the purpose of 
making it applicable to the employees of the 
Federa l departments at Washington . 'I am 
very much opposed to segregation on the 
basis of color,' said Miss Davis, adding that 
she considered the Negro girls not greater 
offenders than the whites when it came to 
the question o f morality at Bedford . 
"No t having been reared i n the South, 
where at birt h so many white babies are 
given over to colored nurses, who rear and 
care for them, teach them their prayers, look 
after them through all their tender years, 
prepare their food, make their beds and 
launder their linen for them all the rest of 
their lives, etc., etc., Miss Davis naturally 
does not know how very wron g it is for a 
colored child, brought u p by these same 
colored women i n the same way, later on to 
work i n an office wit h white clerks or to 
occupy a war d wit h whites i n a reformatory. " 
TH E SUPREM E COUR T 
The Chicago (111.) Tribune says: 
" A certain strange fatality seems to hover 
over and about all attempts to test the 
validity of 'Ji m Crow ' or anti-Negro discrimination and 'segregation' legislation i n 
the highest court o f the land. Important cases 
have been appealed again and again, but 
always at the last stage some technicality— 
or some omission on the part of possibly 
inexpert leaders—emerges to prevent the 
direct facin g of the issue by the impartia l 
and learned justices. Some have accused 
the court of adroit evasion, but for this 
there has been little foundation i n fact from 
the viewpoint of those who are familia r wit h 
the pitfalls and snares of the rules of prac ­
tice and procedure. 
The Springfield Republican adds: 
"Just wh y all 'Ji m Crow ' laws get by the 
Unite d States Supreme Court without havin g their constitutionality passed upo n is a 
mystery. It seems impossible to force the 
issue squarely uj)on that tribunal. I n the 
latest instance of, the Oklahoma statute, 
the Supremo Court sustains the refusal of 
the lower court to enjoin the law's operation, 
but declines to reaffirm the lower court's 
judgment in support of its constitutionality. 
The majority of the judges succeeded i n 
evading that issue on the ground that the 
rights of the Negroes were set forth 'too 
generally.' The opinion was even expressed 
by the majority that the law was invalid , 
but that was clearly an obiter dictum, in ­
asmuch as the law actually remains i n force. 
Fo r years, this kin d o f treatment has been 
given to State laws discriminating against 
the Negro race." 
The New Yor k Evening Post says: 
"Besides its opinion on the 'Ji m Crow' 
question, the Supreme Court last week gave 
another that seriously concerns the civil 
rights of Negroes i n some of the Southern 
States. The particula r case arose out of 
that peculiar system under which, i n lieu of 
the ordinar y form of punishment for a 
crimina l offence, by fine or imprisonment, 
the offender is virtuall y placed i n a state of 
peonage. The practice consists i n permitting 
a planter to become surety for a Negro condemned to pay a fine for some petty offence, 
the Negro contracting to reimburse the 
planter by a longer term of service, the 
breaking of this contract being itself treated 
as a crime and subjecting him to fresh arrest 
and punishment. Justice Day , i n handing 
down the opinion of the Court, drew a clear 
distinction between the 'involuntary servitude' imposed by the State as a 'punishment 
for crime' which is contemplated i n the 
Thirteenth Amendment, and this kin d of in ­
voluntary servitude of which the duration 
and character are practically beyond the 
State's control. 'This system,' says the 
court, 'is i n violation of rights intended to 
be secured by the Thirteenth Amendment,' 
and of laws enacted by Congress i n pursuance of that amendment. There is, moreover, i n this matter, no reason why any in ­
telligent Southerner should desire to countenance an evasion of the Constitution. Quite 
apart from any question of right, the thing 
is sordid, barbarous, and demoralizing. " 
The Pen n Ya n (N . Y. ) Express says i n 
regard to the Oklahoma case: 
"Perhaps the Negroes could get a decision 
in the case referred to this side of the crack 178 TH E CRISIS 
of doom. Seeking their rights as citizens 
they have caused several cases to be carried 
to the Unite d States Supreme Court, only 
to have them thrown out on technicalities. 
In no instance have they been able to secure 
a decision on the merits of the issues in ­
volved. 
"This evidences that they have either employed poor attorneys or else the Court of 
last resort is inclined to be unduly technical. 
It is not pleasant to believe the latter, but 
there are those who do believe it ; and other 
besides who wil l await the action of that 
Court i n the 'Grandfathe r Clause' case, before formin g an opinion. This case has been 
before the Court about a year, and evidently 
it has not been acted upon i n the order of 
its presentation to that tribunal. " 
LYNCHIN G 
The latest Auto da fe i n Louisian a has 
aroused even the South : the Housto n 
(Tex.) Post says: 
"The conviction is irresistible that the old 
man who was burned to death had nothing 
whatever to do wit h the crime. I f he had 
been guilty, the torture to which he was 
subjected would have forced a confession, 
and the wonder is that he did not confess 
anyhow i n the agony of his roasting flesh, 
as many innocent mob victims have done i n 
the vain hope of escaping torture. Wha t 
did this Caddo parish mob accomplish? Its 
members made brutes of themselves i n their 
efforts to avenge a crime by puttin g to 
death by the most fiendish methods imagin ­
able three men merely suspected of it. I n 
all probability the guilty murderers of the 
village postmaster are at large, while the 
blood of innocence rests upon the hands 
of men who took it upon themselves to discharge the functions of law. Moreover, they 
have inflicted an ineradicable disgrace upon 
their parish and State, i n addition to stainin g their hands with human blood. 
"An d this is the end of it. It is said the 
judge wil l have the grand jur y to probe into 
these lynehings. Al l a waste of time and 
effort. Lynchers are never identified. They 
invariably escape the consequences o f their 
crimes. They are murderers whom no mob 
can punish and against whom the law apparently holds no resentment." 
The South Ben d (Ind.) News Times says: 
"The lynche r pretends to a chivalrous 
disposition to defend woman against 'the 
one crime,' at any cost, even that of sinkin g 
himself to the level of the most brutish of 
Negro murderers. 
"This defense of woman is undoubtedly fine as fa r as it goes. Bu t are the men 
of the South sincere and consistent i n it ? 
"I n Fairfiel d County, S. C , is another 
case. There a Negr o woman was found 
dead, a victim o f the vilest of crimes, and 
a white man arrested has confessed Wha t 
wil l the chivalrous Southerners do about it ? 
Wil l this self-confessed white brute be prop ­
erly punished? Wil l he be sentenced and 
made to serve his sentence? This remains 
to be seen. 
"I n a nearby county a Negr o was recently lynched because he was found under 
a white man's house. 
"It is now up to Fairfield , S. C , wit h a 
self-confessed outrager an d murderer of a 
woman on its hands, to prove to the world 
that the talk about the 'one crime ' is not 
shallow and hypocritica l pretext for lawless 
and savage manifestations o f race prejudice. 
"Wil l Fairfiel d County , S. C , come to the 
mark ? We'l l see." 
The Providenc e (R. I.) Tribune says: 
"Just now it wil l be more profitable for 
Americans to think o f their own atrocities 
than of those which have been committed 
over seas. Befor e our people can fairl y or effectively criticise others they must clear their 
own skirts. A s Louisian a is a part of the 
America n Union , we are all to some extent 
responsible fo r these horribl e murders. The 
veneer of civilization in this lan d seems to 
be about as thin as it is i n the rest of the 
world. It is the duty of the people of 
Louisiana , as well as of the Governor, to see 
that punishment is meted out to the barbarians who have disgraced them and their 
State." 
The New Yor k World adds: 
"A n Alabam a mob has lynched two 
Negroes on suspicion of havin g been implicated i n the murde r of a white man. The 
'usual crime,' of course; the 'usual crime.' 
'W e must protect the honor of our womanhood,' as Cole Blease woul d say. " 
On top of this comes the Alban y (Ga.) 
Herald with : OPINIO N 179 
'Dow n here i n the South there is no 
friction between the races, and the white 
people and the Negroes are livin g together 
in peace, maintainin g a sort of bi-racia l 
civilization with entirely separate and distinct social, religious and educational institutions and associations. Her e the race 
question is settled and settled to the entire 
satisfaction of both races." 
m 
TH E WA R 
The Chicago (111.) Post says: 
" A bomb was hurled into the peace meeting of Chicago churchmen at the Hote l L a 
Salle to-day by Dr. Emi l G. Hirsch . Fol ­
lowing Frederick Lynch , secretary of the 
Church Peace Union , who spoke on 'The 
Need of the World ' and who asserted that 
that need was abolition of all nationalism, 
an introduction o f Christianity's teachings 
as well as its figures into the world's conduct, Dr. Hirsc h said : 
"We , whom I represent, cannot be held 
responsible for the failure of the world's 
teachings. Nationalism has not failed. It 
is a perverted sense of nationalism that 
has failed. Nationalism i n this very country has grown to mean racialism. The 
fallacy of race superiority has brought this 
harvest of war. " 
The Washingto n limes adds: 
"There are rather more yellow and brown 
people i n the worl d than there are white ; 
but the whites have taken possession of 
about all of the land, and are determined to 
keep it. Whereve r there are sparselypeopled lands, to which the yellow races 
would gladly send their surplus numbers, 
white men are i n possession, at least nomina l possession, maintainin g the forms of 
sovereignty; and without exception, in these 
countries the yellow man is not wanted. The 
yellow man o f Japa n and Chin a wants to 
get into Australi a and Nort h America . The 
brown men of the Indies seek footing especially i n South Africa . Bot h are made 
unwelcome; are barred with scant courtesy, 
by the white people who insist that they are 
going to save their territory for their own 
race and their own kin d of people." 
A. P. 0. of South Afric a writes: 
"The 13,000 Colored men who imbued 
with the true spirit of patriotism and love of 
country, offered their services to the Unio n 
Government wil l read wit h much surprise 
and deep regret the two letters which we 
publish i n this issue. It may be recalled 
that on the outbreak of wa r the Executive 
of the A . P . O. telegraphed to Genera l Botha 
that a corps of 5,000 Colored men would be 
raised and placed at his disposal for active 
service in the Unio n and elsewhere. The repl y came that the Government appreciated 
the offer, and would bear it in mind. 
"The A . P. O. then set about finding out 
the number of men willin g to go on active 
service. The response lo the call surprised 
even ourselves. Withi n a month after its 
first communication wit h the Government, 
the Executive was in a position to offer to 
General Botha 13,000 men, who had signed 
the enrollment forms. To that the Government replied that it di d not intend employing any troops who were not part of the Defence Force . The rebellion then broke out, 
and volunteers were called for Botha's army. 
Representations were again made to the 
Government to employ Colored troops, especially on the German Southwest border. 
The reply which we have now received, and 
which must be taken as final, is that this wa r 
is 'a Europea n Avar,' and Colored troops 
could not be employed. " 
MISCELLANEOU S 
"The Freeman observes that quite a number of aristocratic white men here and 
elsewhere i n the South who are unalterably 
opposed to 'social equality' and who don't regard Negroes as their peers, either i n business or the professions, generally hustle like 
the devil to grab and administer Negro 
estates, like Adolphu s Hardy's and others, 
that should under any and all circumstances 
be administered by Negroes. It is amusing 
to see 'prominent' white citizens, including 
lawyers, doctors and others of the blue blood, 
hump themselves even before a Negro corpse 
is buried in manifesting their interest i n 
Negro estates. Whe n the Negro has got 
money and property, things that every while 
man needs, we observe that white men, 
Southerners, anyhow, prefer waitin g til l the 
Negro dies before putting themselves on an 
equality with him. 
"Adolphu s Hard y was murdered Tuesday 
night shortly after 7 o'clock and while his remains were stretched out on a cooling board 
at the undertaker's, a white man, an aristocrat at that, had applied to the Probate 
Court for letters of administration without 
the knowledge or consent of the only legal 
heir. His estate is worth $40,000."—Texas 
Freeman. 180 TH E CRISI S 
"The sincerity and spirit wit h which this 
Negro community is attacking the problems 
common to all cities and towns, irrespective 
of the color and race of their inhabitants, 
may be judged, perhaps, by a brie f quotation 
from the programme of a meeting of Negro 
business men called to discuss certain disorders i n their district. Ver y clearly indeed 
the leading Negroes of this New Yor k committee have learned that civic disorder means 
both a social and a financial loss, and that 
(he city or organized society which permits 
and tolerates bad conditions is wantonly 
throwing away its best assets. 
"The progress made by the citizens of 
this Negro community i n cosmopolitan New 
Yor k is well worth the attention and interest 
of all those concerned wit h bettering the 
physical and mora l conditions of Negroes 
throughout the entire country. Is it too 
much to hope that the time may come when 
to all Negroes may be offered the opportunity for clean livin g and civic development such as is apparently available i n the 
'black belt' of New York?"— A Negr o Cit y 
in New Yor k i n The Outlook. 
"Ever y time I see Mr . Bert Williams, 'the 
distinguished colored comedian,' I wonder 
if he is not the patient repository of a 
secret sadness. I n the midst of his decorous 
and explicit capers i n the Follie s I think 
that sorrow concealed, 'like an oven stopped,' 
must burn his heart to cinders. Her e he is, 
unquestionably a comic artist of the first 
rank, doomed for the rest of his career to 
an environment of jigs and tales of bawdry 
— to sing the shoddy songs from the Broad ­
way hymna l and to utter the commonplace 
jests of the Broadwa y jol<e book against the 
fleshly background of a Broadwa y chorus. 
H e may not, with success, aspire to make 
his genius an instrument of .characterization 
in the more eminent realms of the theatre, 
lo fix his fame i n the more permanent foundation of the drama. H e must humbly proceed along his antic pathway, exciting the 
ephemeral admiration of the knowin g celebrants, and remaining, i n the delicate and 
not descriptive phraseology of the press 
agent, a 'distinguished colored comedian.' 
"Mr . Warfiel d was able to discard the 
cap and bells of burlesque and become a 
great actor. I believe that i n Mr . War -
field's days as a skillfu l buffoon he indicated 
no finer talents than does Mr . Williams — 
for instance, when lie sings the 'Vampire ' 
song in Mr . Ziegfeld's current cantata. Mr . 
Barne y Bernard , now established i n a lastin g and deserved reputation as a serious 
comedian, certainly showed no such abilities 
i n his performances as a musica l comedy 
Jew. The excellent Mr . Alexande r Carr has 
acquired celebrity and a temperament since 
he left the song shows flat on their backs; 
yet he never revaled a suspicion o f the endowments which mar k Mr . Williams' quiet 
fun makin g i n the Follies. Most of the 
good actors have come from musica l comedy. 
Mr . Williams, because he is known as a 
Negro, must stay there; and so the real 
theatre is deprived o f an unusua l artist."— 
Percy i n the Ne w Yor k Tribune. 
"Ou r friends down South, being sure 
that the Negroes are inferior, deny them 
advantages and provide inferior schools for 
Negro children i n order that they wil l continue to be inferior and thus prove the correctness of the contention of the scientists 
and sentimentalists that the Negr o is in ­
ferior. Afte r all, there is nothing quite so 
satisfying as the feeling that yo u have got 
things fixed so that yo u wil l always have an 
inferior race i n you r midst."—Life. 
CHURC H NEW S FRO M AFRIC A 
Ungaard , Centra l Africa , Nov . 20.— 
Resolutions were read to-day i n the Centra l Canniba l Churc h protesting against the 
atrocities of the Christia n war, now being 
waged i n Europe . "W e condemn all wanton 
destruction of life, except fo r purposes of 
food, " said the chief o f the tribe. 
The Ladies' Heathen Society o f The First 
Churc h of the Unredeemed voted to send a 
boatload o f yams, gourds and breadfruits to 
the starving wives and children of Christians 
whose husbands and fathers are at war. 
The Youn g Men's Paga n Society adopted 
resolutions callin g on all youn g pagans to 
resist the insidious teachings o f Christianity, 
and to dedicate their lives to peace. 
A t the Churc h o f the Hol y Voodoes, the 
Fir e Worshipers Templ e and the Second 
Vudist Congregation o f Junglesia , collections were taken u p to carr y on foreign 
missions among the French , Germans, and 
Englis h peoples of Europe . Missionaries 
wil l go among these war-like people and 
endeavor to persuade them to forsake their 
bloodthirsty Gods and worship the One True 
Go d o f Africa . 
"Europ e fo r Voo d i n 1950! " is the slogan 
o f these loya l religionists."—The Masses. TH E PRESIDEN T 
IT is difficult to see how 
any clear-minded American can longer doubt 
the insincerity of President Wilso n so far as 
the America n Negro is 
concerned. Wit h those of us who were 
most determined to keep our faith i n the 
President the doubt has been growing 
steadily. A t first, with his clear utterances to colored delegations and his letters durin g the campaign, it seemed impossible that so high-minded and scholarly a man could repudiate these plain, 
straightforward words. If they had been 
voiced by the ordinary type of politician 
we should justly have regarded them 
with suspicion; but here was a man who, 
despite his southern birth, his academic 
exclusiveness, and his presidency of a 
Negro-hating institution, nevertheless 
seemed so fine a type of cultured and 
honest America n that there appeared 
absolutely no reason for doubting that 
he would fulfill his" word to the letter 
and treat the Negro with absolute fairness. 
When , at the very outset of his administration he failed to do this, we put the 
blame on his southern subordinates and 
pressed him for some clear, outward sign 
or word which would prove his honesty 
of purpose. W e were fed on quiet assurances of good will , unaccompanied by 
any supporting action. Finally , we had 
the extraordinary declaration of national "Jim-Crow " policy made to Mr . Trotter, but made as we hoped under such 
stress of feeling as to be not altogether 
taken at face value. 
When , however, Mr . Wilson , after 
careful thought and preparation summons before him The University Commission on Southern Race Questions and 
gives utterances to the utterly banal assertion that we must "know the needs" 
of the Negro and "sympathetically help 
him" with the amazing qualification of 
restricting help to "sensible" lines—all 
this shows neither the statesman nor the 
sincere man, but the man who either not 
daring or not caring to utter clear; 
strong words for or against ten million 
people, contents himself with shifty and 
unmeaning platitudes. The whole affair 
is one of the most grievous disappointments that a disappointed people must 
bear. 
m 
LAN D SEGREGATIO N 
IF anyone thinks that the 
movement i n the South 
to keep the Negro from 
buying decent land is 
dead they have only to 
subscribe for the Progressive Farmer. Prizes are being offered by the editor for letters which 
shall support his contention. These letters are most informing. One writer 
from Georgia complains of the Negroes, 
noting that it is a "regrettable fact" that 
the Negroes arc more determined to have 
an education than the poorer class of 
whites. Others lament that when the 
Negroes buy land they never willingl y 
sell it. A Mississippi planter declares 
that the Negroes with 90 per cent, of il ­
literacy are the most successful while the 
landholder is the most indolent, a statement which js hard to reconcile with the 
fear i n the editor's soul. The women 
complain of the danger to white men and 
EDITORIAL 182 TH E CRISI S 
note the fact that where there are no 
Negroes there are better schools and 
longer terms and better paid teachers! 
m 
EDUCATIO N 
THE Russell Sage Founda ­
tion has been glancing 
at the public schools of 
Atlanta . It found i n 
June, 1913, that out of 
10,11S Negro children of 
school age, 2,924 were enrolled. Atlanta furnishes for its 17,000 whit
38 grammar schools, a boys' high school, 
a girls' high school, a boys' technical 
high school, and a girls' Englis h commercial high school, and 5 night schools. 
Fo r the colored children it furnishes 11 
grammar schools. The whites have 426 
teachers, the Negroes have 82. The report says that inadequacy of equipment 
was most noted i n the Negro schools. If 
Atlant a had twice as many Negro 
schools she would be making only a good 
start i n providing Negro children with 
school facilities. Not only are the classes overcrowded but practically all on a 
half-time basis. Of the 91 classes i n the 
Negro public schools 66 were on part 
time. I n addition over 300 Negro children were turned away last year because there were not even enough halftime opportunities. Man y others would 
have applied had there been any possibility of gaining admission. Negro 
teachers are paid only three-fifths as 
much as white teachers. Al l of the classes had at least 40 pupils to the teacher 
and 52 of them had 50 and more to the 
teacher. 
It must be remembered that Atlant a 
is ranked as one of the most progressive 
of Southern cities. 
ELECTION S 
IT is an interesting comment on democratic government i n the Unite d 
States that officials i n 
Terre Haute , Ind., arrested for wholesale violation of the election laws are receiving 
aid and comfort from unexpected 
sources. The southern congressmen are 
endeavoring to keep the case out of the 
Unite d States courts, for if the methods 
of electing congressmen can be looked in ­
to i n Indiana why not i n Georgia or 
Louisiana ? A Kentuck y senator will , 
it is said, defend the accused, and i n 
many ways this extraordinary case wil l 
prove to the worl d how deeply Americ a 
believes i n democracy. 
SUFFRAG E AN D WOME N 
THE woman suffrage movement this year needs 
special protection against 
its fool friends. One 
friend of suffrage has issued a circula r asking 
if the New Yor k electorate would be improved if the women voted. She proves 
that it would be improved to her own 
satisfaction by showing that it would increase the native-born white vote, decrease the foreign-born white vote, leave 
the colored vote the same and not in ­
crease the vote of criminals. W e assume 
that the author wil l circulate this remarkable leaflet on the East side and i n 
Harlem. 
SEGREGATIO N IN WASHINGTO N 
MCGREGOR, writin g in 
Harper's Weekly, makes 
out a beautiful case for 
segregation. It seems 
that the presidential patience was sorely tried 
and that Mr . McGrego r after interviewing everybody worth while i n Washington 
is convinced, first, that there is no 
segregation, and, secondly, that the segregation which exists is quite i n accordance wit h the law of Go d and man and 
for the benefit of the Negro race. He 
agreed wit h Postmaster Burleson that 
the question was not worth discussion, 
and therefore he proceeded to discuss it. 
The same happened wit h Secretary McEDITORIA L 183 
Agai n and again there was no segregation except that there was segregation 
here and there, but this was quite according to the choice of the persons segregated; wherefore, Mr . McGregor asks 
plaintively, "Is not the very best constructive policy that of instilling such 
a proper racial pride as should prevent 
any self-respecting Negro from feeling 
humiliated, by association with his own 
race exclusively so long as those of another race do not desire his company V' 
Her e we reach bed rock and it lias a 
familiar feel. I go to a lunch counter. 
"Wh y do you want to intrude yourself 
on my company?' - says the pi g on the 
stool and kicks me gently out. I go to 
the polls. "Wh y do you want to vote in 
my country? " says the dog i n the manger and forcibly disfranchises me. I go 
to the theatre. "Wh y do you want social equality? " asks the frump and 
moves her seat. To all of which I reply : 
" I am not intruding, I want something 
to eat; this is not your country any more 
than it is mine ; I do not want to sit beside you, I want to see Shakespeare; I 
do not want to make any servant of the 
United States Government sit i n any 
particular place or do any particular 
kin d of work or associate with any particular sort of person, but I do want to 
be treated as an individua l according to 
law and merit and not to be publicly insulted by the President of the Unite d 
States simply because I have passed a 
successful civil service examination. 
NEWSPAPE R STORIE S 
The editor of a prominent 
Boston newspaper has 
not only ordered that 
the word Negro be capitalized i n his paper but 
has given the following 
directions to the reportorial staff: 
"I n editing stories which involve Negroes please handle them as follows: 
"As k yourselves how the story would 
read if the word Jew, Irishman, or 
Swede were substituted for the word 
Negro. 
"Refer to the color of the individua l 
only when it is of particular and special 
interest and when the story is manifestly incomplete and inaccurate if the color 
of the person involved is concealed. This 
would apply to Lynchings, marriages, or 
where a colored person gains unusual 
and exceptional prominence among 
whites, such as, the ranking of a colored 
girl at the head of a class of white children. 
"I n crime cases where the description 
of the principal is of importance the 
color should be brought in , but as a part 
of the description. Just as, for instance, 
a woman in describing an unidentified 
assailant would say that he was of medium height, wore a cap, had a black 
mustache, and was an Italian, so, similarly, you may state that the man was 
colored. Bu t never, under any circumstances, say that five Negroes were arrested i n a raid, etc., or that a Negro 
burglar entered the house of so-and-so, 
or that Marth a Johnson, 35, colored, 
while crossing Northampton Street, etc., 
was ru n over by a street car. 
"I n doubtful cases that seem not covered by the foregoing consult me, and if 
I am not accessible omit the mention of 
color entirely." 
Next ? 
A LOS T FRIEN D 
THE late Grace Dodge was 
the kin d of friend to the 
American Negro who 
when told that race prejudice wil l not allow decent or courteous treatment simply refused to believe it. It 
was due to her more than to any other 
person that the Youn g Women's Christian Association, while gravely deficient 
i n some respects, still is so much more 
Christian and decent than the Youn g 
Men's Christian Association. Segregation and racial discrimination was 
pushed back to almost the last notch i n 
the women's association. Southern white 
women were "compelled" at summer conferences to eat i n the same diningroom wit h colored women and to treat 
them i n every respect wit h courtesy. 
Southern associations were given plainl y 
to understand that even if the women's 
Christian associations were separated i n 
the South the rights of the colored associations were, nevertheless, going to be 
guarded just as carefully and unflinchingly as those of the whites. 
The death of such a woman is a great 
loss because it probably means the gradual encroachment of Negro-hating tendencies i n this association. Fo r instance, 
two great buildings for the colored men's 
and women's associations are planned i n 
New York . Wher e are they going to be 
located ? Wil l these religious bodies listen to the Negro-hating real estate 
agents of Harlem and hide these buildings on the mu d flats of the Harlem 
River, or wil l they place them where 
they ought to be placed, between Lenox 
and Eight h Avenues and 125th and 
135th Streets? The answer to this momentous question wil l determine the attitude of many colored people toward 
this organization. 
It is a pity that Miss Dodge was not 
spared to lend her strong influence i n 
this decision. 
TH E BU Y A BOO K MOVEMEN T 
}fir^^r$K THE "Buy-a-Book Move-
^vj^W^WGyJ ment" is started I'm- the 
K^yVB^*^^ purpose of arousing a 
/>=^JK^rM deeper and wider inter-
(j£_>3$<<_!^
 es t i n the works of colored authors. It is 
hoped that our own people wil l be so 
stimulated toward the buyin g of books 
that colored authors wil l be privileged to 
follow the leadings of their own hearts 
and the laws which imperatively rule i n 
the creation of literature. One can see 
i n almost every book written by a colored author that the work has been done 
under foreign dictation. The author 
has wished his book to be read and to be 
sold; he has written too much under this 
influence. The book has been planned 
for white readers. 
The transition from the custom of 
writin g books of explanation and defense intended for white men to read to 
that of depicting our own experiences, 
givin g our own interpretation of events 
transpirin g or past, pourin g out our own 
realities of feelings and longings, telling 
of Go d an d his works as we see them, 
has as yet hardl y begun. W e remain 
chained hard and fast to one subject, 
the only one upon which the white people of this country wil l hear us, and we 
refuse to see or hear the images and 
voices that approach us from the heavens above or from the earth beneath. 
The "Buy-a-Boo k Movement " means 
to have colored men read and when 
proper applaud the colored author's 
book, for just these two reasons. One, 
we want to develop a real, live book business among ourselves, and two, we want 
to call into existence the ric h literature 
which our unique experience entitles us 
to give to the world . This latter can 
never be done unti l our authors interpret our great soul-life not for others, 
but for ourselves. Bu t wh y dwell upon 
this; all the worl d knows it. 
The pla n of the "Buy-a-Boo k Movement" is for every colored family, every 
colored single man, every colored single 
woman, to buy at least one book from 
the pen of a colored author for the year 
1915. If the colored newspapers would 
joi n so far as to publish names of those 
joinin g the movement and buyin g books, 
they woul d greatly aid it and increase 
their circulation at the same time. Suppose the Defender took all Illinois 
names, the Cleveland Gazette all Ohio 
names, the Guardian all New Englan d 
names, the Age all New Yor k names, and 
so on throughout the country, what a 
boom might be created! W e should see 
one millio n colored books sold for 1915 . 
T . G . STEWARD . 
TH E CRISI S wil l be glad to cooperate 
i n any way to forward this excellent 
movement. A s it is, we sell an average 
of $10 0 worth of Negro literature each 
month. Le t us make this $1,000 ! 
184 TH E CRISI S OF COLORE D 
KNOXVILLE 
KNOXVILL E 
KNOXVILLE, Tenn., had i n 1910 36,346 
^ inhabitants of whom 7,638 were of 
Negro descent. I f we include the suburbs 
there are to-day nearly 15,000 colored people 
in the city. Knoxvill e is a city of mines and 
manufactures, situated i n the lower Appa ­
lachian range. It affords a good example of 
Negro progress i n a small, active city of the 
southern border. It is i n no way typica l of 
the southern South and has always had 
strong union and anti-slavery leanings. On 
the other hand, it has needed the Negro as a 
laborer and servant and this group has 
grown and developed here. It has not been 
free, but it has been freer than i n many 
southern places and it has used the chances 
given. 
These are the present facts concerning colored Knoxville : Knoxvill e has two drug 
stores, one dry goods store, four chiropodists, a colored real estate company, a coal 
company doing business in the entire city 
and employing many men and several teams; 
the largest race course i n Tennessee is owned 
by a colored man, C . F . Johnson, and valued 
at over $50,000. It is used by the white 
state racing committee. Johnson has houses 
valued at over $30,000 and owns more prop ­
erty than any other colored man i n the city ; 
many of his buildings on many streets are 
rented by white firms. There are two small 
theatres, five ice cream and confectionery 
stores, one florist, three colored photographers, thirty-eight small grocery stores, 
eight contractors for road work and grading 
employing several hundred men, a weekly 
newspaper, five job printin g plants, agencies for several industrial. insurance companies, and a hundred or more minor busiDR . H . M . GREE N 
Physicia n 
MR . R. W . CANSLE R 
School Principa l 186 TH E CRISIS 
DR. J. H. PRESNEL L 
Physician 
nesses, such as restaurants, barber shops, etc. 
I n industry, Knoxvill e has 500 or more 
iron workers, fourteen machinists, eighteen 
brick masons, and fourteen carpenters. It 
is the headquarters of the Colored Railway , 
Firemen and Locomotive Workers. The 
country round about has a number of colored farmers who do market gardening. The 
five largest hotels employ colored help 
throughout. Negroes work i n all the bi g 
marble quarries and in many of the manufacturing plants. 
I n the professions Knoxvill e has six colored lawyers, seventeen physicians, three 
pharmacists, three dentists, twenty-two graduate nurses, eighty-five teachers i n publi c 
and private schools, and four colored mail 
clerks. 
I n politics colored people have always 
taken part. They have had some minor elective positions and always had one colored 
alderman until the commission government 
was installed two years ago. There are four 
colored policemen and nine colored deputy 
sheriffs, and an attempt is being made to get 
a colored fire company. I n publi c institutions there are forty-two colored churches: 
one valued at $40,000, two at $25,000, and 
five at $10,000. The others are wort h $4,000 
and less. There is a publi c insane institution i n the county, a state school for the 
deaf and dumb, a privat e hospital, four public schools, includin g a high school; Knox ­
ville College, a privat e institution wit h preparatory and privat e courses, and an industria l school. There are thirty-two lodges of 
Masons, Pythians, Od d Fellows, etc. There 
is an inter-denominationa l ministers' union 
which sometimes meets wit h the white min ­
isters. There is one colored club house which 
is unusually good. The colored people very 
largely own their homes and pa y taxes on 
considerable property. The leading white 
daily recently said that there were more colored propert y owners i n Knoxvill e i n proportion to populatio n than i n any other city 
in the South. 
This is a pretty good record for a small 
group of people and it has meant i n the past 
and at present the development of a number 
of strong leaders an d conspicuous men. Al l 
of these we cannot mention but a wor d must 
be said about a few. The physicians are especially prominent as leaders: Dr. M . L . 
Boy d is one of the youn g physicians with a 
lucrative practice who is associated wit h his 
brother, C. S. Boyd , the dentist. Dr . S. M . 
Clar k practices medicine and works faithfull y i n church affairs. Dr . J . S. Presnell 
D. W. PERKIN S 
Attorney-at-Law O F COLORE D KNOXVILL E 187 
B. B. BROWDER 
Photographer 
is another risin g physician, the youngest of 
the group. The foremost physicians are Drs. 
Green and Watkins. Dr . Green has studied 
i n the Nort h and i n Europe , is active i n various organizations, and has accumulated considerable property. H e has served as alderman twice and one of the city school build ­
ings is named i n his honor. His home and 
office buildings are especially conspicuous i n 
the city. Dr . Watkin s has a large practice 
and a convenient rest-room, laboratory and 
operating room connected wit h his office. 
The leading colored photographer is B . B . 
DR. S. M. CLARK 
Physician 
Browde r who was born i n the city and has 
worked in many of the white galleries. H e 
has often been official photographer for the 
Knoxvill e railroads. Mr . Charles W . Cansler, who is principa l of the Austi n Hig h 
School, is known for his astonishing facility 
with tigures. H e has traveled over the 
Unite d Stales givin g exhibitions of lightning 
calculations. A few years ago he astonished 
the business men of Knoxvill e by beating an 
adding machine i n a test for tria l of speed. 
H e has one of the most beautiful homes 
among the colored people of the city. 
VILLANELLE 
B Y OTT O BOHANA N 
Ho w dreary the winds shriek and whine : 
The tremblin g shadows grow chill. 
0 soul of my soul, wert thou mine ! 
0 where are the stars that di d shine? 
The moonlight that tinselled the hill ? 
Ho w dreary the winds shriek and whine ! 
Despair 'round my heart doth entwine, 
Fa r soundeth my cr y weir d and shrill : 
0 soul o f my soul, wert thou mine ! 
I've quailed to the dregs the mad wine 
O f passion, but under my sill 
Ho w dreary the winds shriek and whine ! 
Ti s thine, is the dream so divine, 
Tha t doth this vain yearning instil ; 
0 soul of my soul, wert thou mine ! 
'Tis mine, here to crave and to pine 
Fo r what thou wilt never fulfill ; 
Ho w dreary the winds shriek and whine ! 
0 soul of my soul, wert thou mine ! NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE 
ANNUA L MEETIN G 
Attention is again called to the annua l 
meeting to be held on Februar y 12 i n New 
Yor k City . The business session, open only 
to members who have pai d their dues, wil l 
be held i n St. Mark's Paris h House , 235-237 
West 53rd Street, beginning at 2:30 i n the 
afternoon. The publi c session, at which 
Governor Whitma n wil l award the Spingar n 
Medal, wil l be held i n Ethica l Cultur e Hall , 
2 West 64th Street, at 8 o'clock. I n addition to the speakers announced i n the last 
number of TH E CRISIS there wil l be fifteenminute addresses by the following : Mrs. 
Charlotte Perkin s Gilman ; Mr . Moorfield 
Storey, President of the Nationa l Associa ­
tion, who wil l speak on the Supreme Court 
and the Negro ; Dr. D u Bois, whose subject 
wil l be "The Immediate Program of the 
America n Negro;' ' and Mr . Lindo n Bates, 
Jr., who wil l tell of his researches i n South 
Americ a on the relation of the races. 
A LECTUR E TRI P 
A s already announced, Dr. Spingar n started in Januar y on an extended tour of the 
Middl e West. It wil l be remembered that 
last Januar y Dr. Spingar n covered a simila r 
stretch of territory, and it is his ambition by 
successive tours to visit and to organize for 
our work the whole Unite d States. Dr. Spin ­
garn does this entirely at his own expense. 
In the next number of TH E CRISIS a ful l account of his trip wil l be given. W e go to 
press too early to prin t more than a summary of his engagements. A t the first of 
these, in Pittsburgh Januar y 10 and 11, he 
addressed meetings i n the Unitaria n Church, 
the Bethel A . M. E . Church, St. James' A . 
M . E . Church, and also spoke before the 
Hungr y Club, the leading forum of the city 
which includes i n its membership many leadin g men and social workers. Mr . Willia m 
M . Randolp h acted as Chairman of the local 
committee and Mr . S. R. Morsell as Secretary. 
In Ohio Dr. Spingar n has made the followin g engagements: Columbus, Januar y 
12; Springfield. Januar y 13 ; Dayton , Janu ­
ary 11 ; Cincinnati, Januar y 15 ; Toledo, 
which he includes on his return trip , Janu ­
ary 26. The meeting i n Columbus was arranged by a local committee of one hundred 
includin g many of the most representative 
white and colored people of the city. Several important clubs co-operated wit h this 
committee which was i n charge o f Dr . J . L . 
Johnson and Mr . Robert B . Barcus. The 
mass meeting was held i n the auditorium of 
the Chambe r o f Commerce and the next 
mornin g Dr . Spingar n addressed the students of Ohio State University . 
Dr. Spingarn's other engagements were: 
Springfield, Ill., Sunday, Januar y 17 ; St. 
Joseph, Mo. , Januar y 19 ; De s Moines, la. , 
Januar y 20 ; Omaha , Neb., Januar y 21 ; and 
Minneapolis and St. Paul , Minn. , from Jan ­
uary 22 to 25. H e was i n Buffalo January 
28. 
Ful l programs were arranged i n all these 
cities, mass meetings i n white and colored 
churches, meetings before clubs, chambers of 
commerce, etc. A typica l program was that 
i n St. Pau l and Minneapolis, Frida y night 
Dr . Spingar n spoke i n the Jewish Temple ; 
on Saturday he addressed the Legislature, 
the Saturday Lunc h Club , which includes in 
its membership the most representative men 
i n the twi n cities and the Executiv e Boards 
of the Minneapolis and St. Pau l Branches. 
Sunday was devoted to mass meetings i n 
churches i n St. Pau l and on Monda y Dr. 
Spingar n spoke at Macalaste r College, at a 
parlor conference at the home of Mrs. C. P . 
Noyes, and before the Tow n Topic s Club, 
which comprises the most representative lawyers, ministers and physicians of the two 
cities. 
TH E "JI M CROW " CAS E 
The Nationa l Association was much disturbed at the recent decision o f the Supreme 
Court i n regard to the Oklahoma Ji m Crow 
case, which indicated that though the law 
was unconstitutiona l the form i n which the 
case was brought before the Court was not 
adequate to prove this. The Chairma n of 
the Board , Dr . Spingarn , decided to go to 
Oklahoma personally to arouse the local 
branches to more activity i n the wor k of the 
Association. Dr . Spingar n had expected to 
have Prof. Willia m Pickens of Wile y Uni ­
versity accompany him and to make speeches wit h him. Mr . Picken s was unable to, N. A . A. C. P. 189 
arrange this and Mr . W . Scott Brow n of 
Muskogee volunteered to go i n his place. On 
this trip Mr . Brow n was twice discriminated 
against as a passenger, once i n a chair car 
and once in a sleeper. The Association wil l 
bring suit to test these cases. The meetings 
which had been arranged for Dr . Spingar n 
were highly successful. He spoke on De ­
cember 30 in Muskogee to the colored Youn g 
Men's Christian Association and on December 31 in Oklahoma Cit y i u the Tabernacle 
Baptist Church , Dr . Johnson, pastor. Al ­
though the latter meeting had been arranged 
on only twenty-four hours' notice, the church 
was full. 
BRANCHE S 
District of Columbia: 
The meeting i n Washingto n on December 
8 was to celebrate the birthday of Willia m 
Lloyd Garrison . It was held by the local 
branch under the auspices of the Bethel Lit ­
erary and Historica l Association at the 
Metropolitan A . M . E . Church , the Rev. C. 
H . Stepteau, pastor. The speakers were 
Mr . 0. G . Villard , Miss M . W . Ovington and 
Mr . L. M . Hershaw. Mr . A . H . Grimk e presided. A resolution was passed thanking Mr . 
Desha Breckenridge , the owner of the Lex ­
ington (Ky. ) Herald, for his recent editorial 
opposing the President's attitude on segregation, and a telegram was sent to Mr . 
Breckenridge. Lac k o f space prevents our 
quoting more than the closing words of Miss 
Ovington's inspirin g speech: 
"Race hatred is devastating Europe . It 
has devastated Afric a and Asia . To-day it 
is sappin g the lif e of America . It is an evil 
thing ; and not i n my time, nor i n the time 
of the youngest i n this gathering, wil l it 
have been expelled from the earth. W e can 
only do our part. Bu t let us work i n the 
spirit of the great man whom to-night we 
honor; in the spirit of heroic self-sacrifice, 
of indomitable courage, and of loving, understanding sympathy wit h the oppressed of 
mankind. " 
Mr . Hershaw's analysis o f the lif e and 
work of Garriso n was one of the finest addresses that has been heard i n Washingto n 
for a lon g time. Mr . Villard's address was 
a splendid tribute to his distinguished grandfather. 
Harrisburg: 
Press notices show that the Harrisbur g 
Branc h has been successful in its case against 
a local theatre, Judge McCarrel l having just 
ruled that to reserve a certain section of a 
public amusement house tor the special occupation of the white race and to deprive colored patrons of the right to occupy that particular section is a discrimination against 
the colored race, a violation of the crimina l 
statute, and punishable by a tine. This case 
was begun more than a year ago by a group 
of men of whom Dr. Stephen J . Lewis, Secretary of the Harrisbur g Branch, was one. 
The case was fought through the local court 
with a victory for the plaintiff, Mr . Pran k N . 
Kobinson , Vice-President of the Harrisbur g 
Branch . Argumen t for retria l was made to 
the local Judge m December a year ago. 
Whil e the Association di d not institute the 
origina l suit, it has practically taken charge 
of the case . and aided Mr . Robinson in 
financing the court proceedings. A t the tria l 
witnesses declared that Athens George, the 
defendant, proprietor of the Victoria , a 
Marke t Street moving picture theatre, had 
this notice posted at the ticket office: "The 
balcony of this theatre is provided for our 
colored patrons. If you do not wish to sit 
i n the balcony do not purchase tickets as 
they wil l not be honored i n any other section of the theatre." The suit was brought 
under the Civi l Rights Ac t of Ma y 19 , 1887 . 
The decision is the first of its kin d ever rendered by a Dauphi n County Court Judge. 
I n the Davenport Lunc h Room case 
brought by Dr. C. L . Carter, President of 
the local Branch , the Executive Committee 
of the Branc h agreed to settle the case when 
the defendant agreed to go before the aldermen and admit his violation of the law and 
to put himself on record as opening his 
place with equal accommodations for all. 
H e made this declaration i n the Aldermen's 
Court on December 20 where he publicly declared that his restaurant would not discriminate i n the future. H e paid all costs i n the 
case. 
Taeoma: 
A s an expression of gratitude for the workdone for the colored people in Congress by 
Senator Wesley L . Jones, the Tacoma 
Branc h of the Nationa l Association sent him 
a loving cup, a photograph of which we have 
reproduced. It wil l bo remembered that 
Senator Jones led the fight against the 
Smith-Leve r Bil l and tried to secure for the 
colored people i n the South their share of 
the federal monies appropriated for agricultura l extension purposes. H e was one of 190 TH E CRISI S 
SENATOR JONES' LOVIN G CUP 
the Western Congressmen who answered all 
the questions on our recent questionnaire 
satisfactorily. 
3 
TH E IMMIGRATIO N BIL L 
The amendment to the Immigration Bil l 
proposing to exclude Negro aliens regardless of their ability to meet the literary test 
was introduced by Senator Reed of Missouri 
who was conducting a general filibuster 
against the bil l and who brought i n every 
issue he could think of to delay a final roll 
call. The Republican senators were as much 
surprised as most of the Democrats at the 
proposa l of this exclusion. Nevertheless, it 
passed the Senate by a vote of 29 to 25. 
The amendment came as such a complete 
surprise that i t was voted through the Senate before any intimation of it reached the 
public. On receipt of the news from Wash ­
ington the Nationa l Association immediately 
wired its branches to take action and its officers at once got in communication wit h 
members of Congress. 
The work of the Distric t of Columbi a 
Branc h was characteristically brilliant. A 
committee from the Branc h literally made a 
door-to-door canvass of the Hous e Office 
Buildin g as well as callin g Congressmen from 
the floor of the House . The followin g brief 
against the amendment was then prepared 
and was on the desk of every member of 
Congress Thursda y morning : 
"Senate Amendment—Immigratio n Bill , 
H . R . G060, excluding 'Al l Members of the 
Africa n or Blac k Race.' 
"The Nationa l Association for the Ad ­
vancement o f Colored Peopl e submits the 
followin g objections to the above amendment : | 
"1 . The immigratio n laws of 1875 and 
1911 admit members of the Caucasian and 
Africa n races only to the privileges of naturalization. 
"2. Fo r the last decade Negro immigrants average only 5,000 annually. 
"3. The amendment does not exempt students, merchants, or visitors. 
"4. The amendment, i n so fa r as it affects Britis h subjects, might involve serious 
diplomati c complications, under existing 
treaty rights. 
"5. The amendment operates against 
Christianit y and civilizatio n by excluding 
Africa n students from the benefits of American schools and colleges. 
"6. The amendment humiliates the just 
pride of ten millio n loya l and patriotic 
America n citizens. 
"7. The Negr o has no voice i n making 
the laws by which he is governed. H e must 
therefore rely upon the sense of fair play 
and justice o f the Congress of the United 
States and the America n people. " 
The Hous e amendment was defeated the 
same day by a vote o f 252 to 75. Congressman Madde n of Illinois was conspicuous in 
his opposition to the amendment. The action of the Distric t of Columbi a Branc h in 
this matter is the most effective piece of 
wor k yet done by them. The committee 
which rendered this service consisted of 
Professor Kell y Miller, Mr . G . W . Cook, Mr . 
Whitfiel d McKinley , the Reverends C. H . 
Stepteau, W . H . Deans and W . H . Sydes, 
and Mr . A . H . Grimke . 
m 
"JI M CROW " BILL S 
A s we go to press we hear o f further discriminator y bills i n Congress—the Anti -
Intermarriage bil l and the Separate Street 
Ca r bill . Bot h these bills are being quietly 
and persistently pushed. TH E SEASON'S FOOTBALL 
FROM the standpoint of the game, the 
•*• players, and the behavior of spectators, 
our football games played by teams representing the colored educational institutions 
of the Middl e Atlanti c section compare favorably wit h games played anywhere in the 
country. Withi n a decade we have witnessed 
progressive stages of football, from the ofttimes rowdy demonstrations by players and 
spectators of the past to the sportsmanly 
conduct of gentlemen on the field, and orderly gatherings of onlookers. This is largely 
due to the very efficient official work by close 
students of the game. Football has also 
been improved by the selection by college 
authorities of men as coaches whose teachings make for the development of sterling 
character as well as physiques and the gradual droppin g of professional coaches whose 
entire aims center in the desire to wi n games 
regardless of the type of men developed as 
a result. O f the best types we find Charles 
H . Williams, of Hampton , Ernest Marshall, 
of Howard , Dr . Fisher, of Union , and others 
at the leading institutions i n this field. 
It is also pleasing to note that our players 
seem to have learned at last to have confidence i n the ability and impartialit y of men 
selected from among their own race. 
Washington still leads i n the field of scholastic football. Armstron g Manua l Trainin g 
School eleven, coached by Mr . Cedri c Fran ­
cis of the faculty of the school, assisted by 
Mr . Aiken , formerly a star playe r at Hamp ­
ton Institute, won the scholastic title. 
Amon g secondary schools and minor colleges 
Howar d Academy proved the best team but 
cannot claim the scholastic title, which honor 
is based on an eligibility code requiring age 
restriction. 
N o collegiate football title was decided. 
Hampton , Howar d and Lincol n rightl y lay 
claims to equal consideration. Howar d was 
decisively defeated by a 12 to 0 score on the 
campus of Lincoln ; Hampto n clearly bested 
Lincoln , although Lincol n suffered a forfeited game; and Howar d i n its crucial test 
on Thanksgivin g Day , before a large enthusiastic crowd, upset many predictions and 
defeated the Hampto n team by a score of 6 
to 0. Unio n Universit y and Livingsto n College engaged i n battles of this series and did 
themselves honor in struggles against many 
odds. 
The writer for many seasons has endeavored to create interest and develop a desire 
among players to prove of superior worth to 
their teams when compared with players 
throughout the field of competition, by selecting a list of players who in his opinion 
appear the best. Fro m the players in the 
Washington Hig h Schools the following 
were named: 
In the far Smith wo have these results 
among (he four leading football institutions: 
Morehouse 13, Tuskegee 7; Morehouse 19, 
Talladega 0; Morehouse 0, Fis k 7 ; Tuskegee 
9, Fis k 7; Tuskegee 0, Talladega 7 ; Talla ­
dega 6, Fis k 0. 
Through athletics and debates it is pleasant to find the relations between colored colleges steadily improving . Fo r instance, the 
President of Howar d writes to the President 
of Wilberforce : 
" I am moved to write you because of the 
glowin g reports which our men brin g back 
Player Position School 
Samuels Left En d M St. H . S. 
Brooks Left Tackle M St. H . S. 
Hil l Left Guar d A . M . T. S. 
Poindexter Center M St. H . S. 
Brent (('apt.) R. Guar d A . M . T. S. 
Simms R. Tackl e M St. H . S. 
Duckett R. En d A . M . T. S. 
Bacon Quarterb'k A . M . T. S. 
Parke r L . Halfbac k A . M . T. S. 
Walke r R. Halfbac k C. H . S. 
Lac y Fullbac k M St. H . S. 
Fro m among the players in Collegiate 
games there were selected the following : 
Player Position School 
U. S. Youn g Left En d Lincol n 
Wild y Left Tackle Hampto n 
Wallac e Left Guar d Lincol n 
Smith Center Lincol n 
Beamon R. Guar d Howar d 
Randall R. Tackle Howar d 
Gayl e (Capt.) R.En d Hampto n 
Stratton Quarterb'k Howar d 
Howel l L . Halfbac k Unio n 
Penderhugh R. Halfbac k Howar d 
Flyn t Fullback Hampto n 
By EDWI N B. HENDERSO N 
Physical Director, Colored High Schools, Washington, D. C . TH E HOWARD-HAMPTO N FOOTBAL L GAM E BREAKIN G TH E COLO R LIN E 193 
from Wilberforc e Universit y as to the treatment which they received at the hands of 
your fellow-workers and the students and the 
success o f the debate. It gratifies me very 
much to have our two institutions brought 
closely together. I think the report that was 
made by Professor Gregory and Mr . Smith, 
who went to you, i n chapel the day before 
yesterday, did a great deal to establish a 
high regard for Wilberforc e and keep us in 
mind of the fraternal relations which ought 
to exist between the two institutions. " 
"/^OAC H Hard y has selected for the twomile relay team to go against Gale, 
Carter, Pratt, Staunton and Thacker, lo run 
in the order named. Payne , yo u wil l 'sub'." 
"Captai n Pratt, I certainly object to that 
nigger's presence on the team. Who m do I 
mean? Thacker, of course, he's a nigger, 
and no southern gentleman would compete 
against or ru n wit h a nigger and I " 
"Now , Staunton, none of your southern 
idiocyncrasies go here," cut i n Pratt. "Yo u 
know we want to wi n that relay, and Gale 
is primin g her best half-milers for the race 
and since Thacke r can do the half i n less 
than two minutes, take it from me, so long 
as I'm captain, he runs. " 
"Then I quit, " and red as a beet, Staunton 
sat down. 
"Quit, then, i f you want to! " thundered 
Pratt. 
"Hol d on, Pratt, we're all white fellows 
together and there's no need of our having 
a row over a colored chap. Yo u know, I'm 
from Texas anyway, and I want to say that 
here i n Starvar d we've never had any colored fellows on the track team i n the three 
years I've been here, and I'm hanged i f I 
see wh y we've got to start now. These nig ­
gers are always tryin g to get out of their 
place," said Payne , the junio r who had been 
crowded off the team by Thacker. 
"Wel l by Jove, he seems to have pushed 
TH E HAMPTO N TEA M (SE E ALS O PAG E 200) 
BREAKING TH E COLOR-LINE 
A STOR Y B y ANNIE McCAR Y 194 TH E CRISIS 
you out of your place on the team. He's 
beaten you more than once i n the time trials 
and " 
"Just a minute, " a calm voice put in , and 
Thacker came into the meeting. " I di d not 
hear the beginning of this discussion, but I 
did hear some remarks and I judge that I am 
considered objectionable as a member of the 
relay because of—surely not the color of my 
skin [for he was as fair as any of the other 
fellows there] but because I have Negro 
blood i n my veins. " Ever y man was breathless. "Le t me say this one thing, that nigger 
or not, I have won the place on the team but 
rather than cause any discord which might 
end i n Stavard's losing the meet to Gale, 
I'l l quit! " he swung on his heel and strode 
from the gym. 
A s the door slammed the storm broke. 
" I didn't know he was colored," said one. 
"Well , he is, " answered Staunton. 
"Well , he's whiter than you both i n skin 
and i n heart, Phi l Staunton, " yelled Pratt. 
"Yo u are insulting me, you Yank, " and 
Staunton sprang at Pratt. The other men 
jumpe d i n and held the two apart. Finally , 
quiet was restored and Payn e was replaced 
on the team. 
The meet was to come off a week from the 
coming Saturday. This was on Wednesday. 
Saturday, Gale had a dua l meet wit h East 
Point, and Pratt and the coach, Hardy , went 
down to look over Gale's two-mile relay team 
and get a general line on the rest of the men. 
Silently they watched Gale wi n 69 to 20. O n 
the return to Wainbridge , Hard y said : 
"Pratt, you fellows are all sorts of fools to 
let that man Thacker get off the team. Why , 
he's the fastest half-miler I've seen. I bet 
you he walks away with the half—if his 
heart isn't taken out by this dirt y work, " he 
added i n an undertone. 
"Hardy , you know I did all I could but he 
stuck out. He's as proud as the deuce, and 
as for those Southerners, they stuck out, too. 
They're always tryin g to make it hard for 
these colored boys. Oh, they make me sick! " 
"Well , he's going to win that half i n a 
walk, although Pric e ran a pretty race 
against those soldiers. Well , here's my 
jumpin g off place, Pratt, " and the coach 
swung off the trolley. 
"Curs e (he luck ! Hard y doesn't want to 
own it, but we can't beat that Gale team." 
The day of the meet came. Gale was 
down, brimmin g over with confidence, for the 
news that the crack half-mile r on the relay 
was not goin g to ru n had spread lik e wil d 
fire. Gale had no opinion , Starvar d was 
divided. 
A t 1:30 the pisto l cracked fo r the start 
of the hundred yar d dash. Gal e took first, 
but Starvar d got second an d third . Engle , 
of Gale, won the 120 hurdles, Wilso n and 
Desmond, of Starvard , second an d third. In 
the broad jump Bates and Hine s o f Starvard 
took first and third , but again Gal e took first 
i n the hammer throw. 
The quarter-mile was next. I n a close and 
exciting race Chalmers of Starvar d "brought 
home the bacon" i n 50 flat. Starvar d began 
to hope. She grew franti c as she landed first 
i n the high jump , although Gal e took second 
and third . 
Then came the half mile. The pride of 
Gale, Price's equal, Simpson , followed by 
his teammates, Parsons and Terry , sprang 
out to toe the mark. James and Keel e threw 
off their crimson sweaters an d a thir d Starvar d man stepped up. It was Thacker. H e 
was an ideal half-miler, five feet eleven 
inches, lean o f face, broad shouldered, slender waisted, and wit h great lon g tapering 
legs. Simpso n was short and stocky with a 
chopp y stride wit h which he hoped to break 
Thacker. 
Al l six got off to a good start. Thacker 
set the pace for the first lap . Then he 
seemed to slow up and Simpso n and Terry 
drew up. Terr y was now two feet ahead of 
Thacker, and Simpso n stride and stride, with 
Parsons pushing him hard. Keel e was out 
of it. A s they turned i n the last stretch, 
pandemonium broke loose i n the Gale stands. 
Starvar d cheered on her men. Thacker had 
seen Staunton leer at him and his heart gave 
a great jump and his feet responded to the 
call. His bi g lead was gone and it would 
be no easy matter to get i n first i n the short 
distance remaining. Teeth set, head back, he 
began a great sprint. Wit h forty yards to 
go Terr y and Simpso n were leading, Terry 
a good two feet in front o f Simpso n and 
Thacker a yar d behind. Three great strides 
and the red and blue jerseys were neck and 
neck. The stands were hushed. Nothing 
was heard but the pat-pat-pat of the spikes 
on the cinders. Al l three runners were 
strainin g every muscle, callin g on their reserve strength, holdin g on b y sheer nerve. 
Fiv e great jump s and Thacke r toppled over 
a winne r in 1:58 flat, Simpso n dropped a 
hand's breadth behind, and Terr y was all in 
as he fell across. BREAKIN G TH E COLO R LIN E 195 
Starvar d cheered and cheered Thacker. 
Rooters jumpe d from the stands to pat 
Thacker on the back. Hard y drove them off 
and arm i n arm he and Thacker went to see 
to a rub down. 
"Al l out for the 220 high hurdles! " Payne 
and Gardne r showed Starvard's crimson, 
while Kittredg e and Field s wore (he Gale 
blue. Payn e was showing an easy first wit h 
Gardne r and Fields neck and neck, with 
Kittredge a good third. A s Payne took the 
last hurdle, Starvard's cheers turned to 
groans, for Payne stumbled and fell. I n a 
flash he was up, just to limp across the finish behind Gardner, who was trailin g the 
Gale man. Gloom pervaded the Starvar d 
stands when the news spread that Payne , the 
anchor man o f the two-mile relay was out 
with a sprained ankle. Second and third i n 
the 120 high hurdles gave Starvard four 
points to Gale's five. Gale took first and 
third in the mile and first i n the pole vault. 
There was but one event left on the program—the two-mile relay. In the stands it 
was figured that Gale was three points to 
the good : Starvar d 4S, Gale 51. 
"Who's going to take Payne's place? " was 
the question i n the Starvar d stands. Then 
calls for "Thacker! Thacker! " came from 
the crimson supporters. Fo r i f Starvar d 
took the relay, the meet was hers by a scant 
two points. I f Gale won, the meet was hers, 
together wit h the Eastern championship. 
"Hardy , do you suppose Thacker could 
run another half against Price , who is perfectly fresh? " 
"Pratt, I'd think you fellows would be so 
ashamed of the dirt you've done Thacker 
that you'd go hide yourselves. I wont ask 
him, I'l l tell you, but " here the coach 
looked straight into Pratt's eyes, " I bet yo u 
he'll run, and mark my words, he'll beat 
Price , i f it kills him. Now, go ask him. " 
Pratt came back lookin g relieved. "Al l 
right, Hardy! " 
Carte r toed the mark against Steen, the 
first Gale runner. Crack"! went the pistol, 
off they sped. 
"Staunton, Thacke r takes the baton from 
you, " called Pratt. Staunton looked sullen. 
Down the home stretch came Carte r and 
Steen, Carte r givin g Prat t a good five-yard 
lead which he held and increased by five, and 
then Staunton took up the running . Arche r 
brought jo y to Gale as he cut down Staunton's lead yar d by yard . Then he tore down 
to give Pric e an eight-yard start. Thacker 
snatched the baton from Staunton and sped 
away on a seemingly impossible task. 
"Ca n he catch him:' Wil l lie hold out? " 
Thacker seemed to be oblivious to the fact 
(hat the heal was terrific, of everything in ­
deed, but the eight-yard lead he had to cut 
down. Wha t difference did it make that his 
throat was parched, his head was splitting, 
that Price was the fastest man in (lie East 
and this was his first year i n collegiate circles? He had to win. H e had to make 
good, even under handicaps. Starvard thundered encouragement as he tore after the 
Hying Price . Afte r the first hundred yards, 
he began a terrific pace. His feet seemed to 
barely touch the ground. Al l thoughts of 
his blood gone, Starvard cheered him on : 
"Kee p it up ! Thack, old boy, go it! Come 
on, old man !" 
H e heard nothing. H e thought he had cut 
down the lead by two yards. H e prayed for 
strength: "Oh , Lord , just let me catch him 
and I can pass him! " On and on they flew. 
N o cheering now, for the stands had settled 
down to watch a match between two strong 
men. The great stadium was silent save for 
the crunching of the cinders. Thacker was 
crawlin g up, foot by foot. Yar d after yard 
was covered at this murderous pace. Aroun d 
the last turn they sped, Pric e runnin g easily, 
Thacker glassy-eyed, hollow-cheeked hut still 
flying. One hundred yards to go—Thacker's breath was coming hot and fast, his 
knees felt as i f they must give way, yet he 
spurred his failin g strength for one last 
great sprint. H e again increased his speed, 
to the amazement of the stands. Half-wa y 
down he seemed almost gone. Fort y yards— 
two more yards to make up on Price , who, 
although tirin g was beginning a spurt. 
Twenty-five yards—he was just behind Pric e 
but his chin had dropped on his chest, his 
mouth hung open, and his eyes were blindeed 
with tears as he felt unable to pass Price , 
laboring at his side. Eigh t yards—he was 
growing weaker stride by stride, but Pric e 
had slipped an inch or so behind. Thacker 
no longer heard the heavy breathing of Pric e 
and raised his eves to see whether he was in 
front. Nothin g in front hut that hit of 
worsted which marked the finish. H e threw 
no his arms and Hard y caught him as he 
fell unconscious, breasting the tape, and 
breaking the color line. TH E LYNCHING INDUSTRY 
TH E C RISI S is interested to report that the 
standard America n industry of lynchin g 
colored men has flourished durin g the year 
1914. There is, of course, the usual difference of opinion as to the number of its vic ­
tims. Tuskegee reluctantly admits 52 ; the 
Chicago Tribune notes 54; TH E CRISI S finds 
74, of whom 69 were colored and 5 white. 
O f the 69, four were colored women. The 
following is a list of the lynehings and those 
starred are unrecorded i n the Chicago 
Tribune list; wit h regard to live of these of 
unknown name there is a bare possibility of 
duplication or mistake, but this does not 
seem probable : 
COLORE D ME N LYNCHE D I N 1914 
Jan.—Okla.—Dickerson , murder. 
N . C.—Wilson , murder. 
*Fla.—Peck , assault. 
*Fla.—James, assault. 
Tex.—Lee , assault, 
'(la.—Harris, murder. 
Feb.—Miss.—Petty , murder. 
Miss.—Johnson, murder. 
M arch—Mo.—Shields, murder. 
Tex—Williams, assault. 
"Miss.—Unknown , murder. 
Ala.—Young , rape. 
Okla.—Scott, murder. 
April—"Miss.—Turner, assault. 
'Miss.—Unknown , race riot. 
*Miss.—Unknown , race riot. 
*Tex.—Morgan , assault. 
May—La.—Washington , murder. 
*Ga.—Jones, theft. 
La.—Hamilton , rape. 
*Fla.—Woodsome , unlawful entry. 
June—Tex.—Robertson, murder.* 
"Miss.—Smith , robbery. 
*Miss.—Collins, resistance. 
July—Miss.—Bailey , theft. 
S. C.—Carson , murder. 
August—Okla.—Williams, murder. 
La.—Griffin , murder. 
La.- Hall , murder. 
La.—Holmes, murder. 
La.—Unknown , murder. 
La.—Romeo , murder. 
*Miss.—Robinson , murder. 
"Ala. — Unknown , "runnin g amuck. " 
Sept.—* Ala.—Baines, robbery. 
Ga.—Brown , murder. 
Oct.—Fla.—Junior, rape. 
Miss.—Miller , rape. 
Ark.—Davis, murder. 
*Ala.—Unknown , assault. 
*Ark.—Unknown , murder. 
*Ark.—Unknown , murder. 
Tex.—Durfee , murder. 
Nov.—Miss.—Burns, assault. 
Ky.—1 0 unknown Negroes by night-riders. 
Fla.—Evans, rape. 
Ky.—Allen , by night-riders. 
S. C.—Wilson , murder. 
Miss.—Sullivan , arson. 
Miss.—Sullivan , arson. 
Dec.—La.—McKnight , murder. 
La.—T . Lewis, murder. 
La.—Dirden , murder. 
La.—W . Lewis, murder. 
La.—Washington , murder. 
La.—Henderson , murder. 
Ala.—Jones, unlawfu l entry. 
S. C.—Green , intent to steal. 
S. C.—Seymour, rape. 
"Miss.—Williams, assault. 
Tota l 69 
NUMBE R B Y MONTH S 
Jan 6 Miss 1 5 
Fe b 2 L a 1 3 
Me n 5 K y 11 
Ap r 4 Fl a 5 
Ma y 4 Tex 5 
Jun e 3 Al a 5 
Jul y 2 S. C 4 
Au g S Ar k 3 
Sept 2 Okl a 3 
Oct 7 G a 3 
No v 16 N . C 1 
Dec i n M o 1 
NUMBE R B Y CRIME S 
Percentage 
Murde r 30 4 4 
B y rioters and nightriders 13 19 
Persona l assaults 10 1 4 
Rape , attempts to rape and presence i n women's rooms 8 11 % 
Robbery and theft 5] 
Arso n 2 J- 11 % 
Resistance to search.. . 1 'O say, can you see by the Dawn's early light, 
What so proudly we hailed at the Twilight's last gleaming!" 198 TH E CRISIS 
LYNCHE D B Y YEARS , 1885-1914 
188 5 7 8 190 0 10 7 
188 6 7 1 190 1 10 7 
188 7 8 0 190 2 8 6 
188 S 9 5 190 3 8 6 
188 9 9 5 190 4 S 3 
189 0 9 0 190 5 6 1 
189 1 12 1 190 0 6 4 
189 2 15 5 190 7 6 0 
189 3 15 4 190 8 9 3 
189 4 13 4 190 9 7 3 
189 5 11 2 191 0 6 5 
189 6 8 0 191 1 6 3 
189 7 12 2 191 2 6 3 
189 8 10 2 191 3 7 9 
189 9 8 4 191 4 6 9 
Total 2,73 2 
These lynchings produce the usual little 
pleasantries wit h which the America n nation 
is so familiar. Murder, for instance, sounds 
very awful and yet we must remember that 
one of those lynched for murder was killed 
in defence of a colored woman's honor. I n 
another ease a marshal had already shot a 
man whom he was about to arrest. The man 
then killed him and was promptl y lynched. 
In two Florid a cases proo f that the lynched 
men were innocent came after they were 
dead. P>lood hounds and posses have been 
responsible for desperate resistance on the 
part of men afterward lynched, and i n one 
case the man who had been respited on account of doubt of his guilt was promptl y 
killed by the mob. 
The so-called assaults were to a considerable extent fights where the white man was 
worsted. One constable received a flesh 
wound and his assailant was lynched, whereupon the constable promptl y recovered. An ­
other white man suffered the indignity of being struck by a hoe, and still another of 
having his chin bitten off. The assailants i n 
both eases were killed wit h great enthusiasm. 
Attacks on property are most irritating , 
and one boy who stole a pair of shoes suffered the same fate as a man who stole a 
couple of mules. Mule s are quite valuable 
in Mississippi . In the very recent lynchings 
in Louisian a it woul d seem that the search 
for a missing $50 0 was the chief motive. The 
burnin g of a barn i n Mississipp i resulted i n 
two lynchings. 
The chivalry of southern white manhood 
toward colored women has been particularly 
conspicuous this season. Two men raped a 
colored girl i n Oklahoma . One was killed by 
her brother and their friends thereupon 
lynched the girl! A Mississipp i mob killed 
a wife along wit h her husband, leaving a 
four-year-old child motherless, while i n another case a colored woman who had the impudence to refuse to allow her home to be 
searched was summaril y dealt with . 
On the other hand, white womanhood received its usual protection. A n impudent 
porter pushed a white woman off the sidewalk and was lynched. I n two cases colored 
men were found i n white women's rooms. 
They were immediately charged wit h "attempted" rape and killed . 
Huma n bonfires have been made i n three 
or four cases: one i n Georgia , one i n Mississippi, and one i n Louisiana . I n Louisiana 
the victim was a nice old man of the "uncle" 
type which the white South particularly 
loves. A theatrical company playin g "Potash and Perlmutter" . made an excursion to 
the entertainment and several society women 
were present. 
Al l this goes to show how peculiarly fitted 
the Unite d States is for mora l leadership of 
the world ; for puttin g to shame the dreadful 
people who are fighting i n Europ e and seem 
quite lost to decency. It is a fine thing to 
have under these circumstances the stern 
cool leadership of President Wilson , who 
has recently raised his finger and wit h a sad 
look on his benevolent face told the South 
"as a Southerner " that they must "know the 
needs of the Negr o and sympathetically help 
him i n every way that is possible for his 
good and for our good. " The President 
ende d with a charmin g story from Charles 
Lamb . 
A PILE OF BOOKS 
Willia m Stanle y Braithwaite —Antholog y o f Maga ­
zin e Vers e fo r 1914 . Publishe d b y th e author . $1.50 . 
Leo n Laviaux—Th e Ebo n Mus e an d Othe r Poems , 
Englishe d b y Joh n Myer s O'Hara . Smit h an d Sale . 
$2.00 . 
T . O . Steward—Th e Havtia n Revolution , 1791-1S0 4 
Thoma s Y . Crowel l Co . $1.25 . 
Georg e W . Ellis—Negr o Cultur e i n West Africa . 
Neal e Publishin g Co . $2.00. 
Charle s Alexander—Battle s an d Victorie s of Allen 
Allensworth . Sherman , Frenc h &• Co . $1.70. 
Charle s Edwar d Russell—Stor y o f Wendel l Phillips . 
Charle s H . Ker r & Co . 50 cents. 
Joh n H . Reed—Racia l Adjustments ^ i n th e Methodist Episcopa l Church . Neal e Publishin g Co . A PIL E O F BOOK S 199 
A. M . Trawick, Editor—The New Voice in Race 
Adjustment, Addresses and Reports presented at the 
Negro Christian Students' Conference. Atlanta, Ga.. 
May 14-18, 1914. Students' Volunteer Movement. 
George F. Bragg—Men of Maryland. Published by the author. 
Maurice X. Corbett—The Harp of Ethiopia. National Baptist Publishing Board. 
Sidney L. Gulick—The American-Japanese Problem. 
Charles Scribner's Sons. $1.75. 
W e have before us an interesting pile of 
books. First i n interest comes Mr . Braith -
waite's "Anthology. " TH E CRISI S has said 
before that the great gift of Negro blood to 
Americ a is not to be cotton or potatoes but 
a new gift of art and realization of beauty. 
Something of this has already come in the 
wonderful music of black folk and what may 
come i n the future is curiously evidenced by 
the fact That to-day a man of Negro blood 
is recognized as being the foremost criti c and 
expositor of America n poetry. It is a peculia r position, ful l of temptation and annoyances, but i n it Mr . Braithwait e keeps his 
singular poise and calm, his simple, judicia l 
sense. H e is doing a great wor k and he lets 
himself do it untrammelled by racia l lines 
or economic considerations; and wit h one accord the America n literary worl d yields him 
the palm i n his field. Curious, is it not, that 
this defense o f poetry among white folk 
should come and come so naturally from colored lips ? 
"The modern idea seems to be that poetry 
has no relation to life. Lif e i n the modern 
sense is action, progress, success. Poetry has 
been conceded special themes: it can deal 
with passion—the strange and unnatura l and 
unreal physica l attraction of the sexes—with 
nature, wit h the symbols o f mythology, and 
wit h the characteristic sentimental heroism 
of history and events. Wit h reality, it must 
have nothing to do. It is supposed, by the 
modern world of Anglo-Saxo n literalness, to 
create an atmosphere of illusion, which one 
must avoid to keep one's emotions from goin g astray i n a civilization that needs the 
hardest kin d o f commonsense. It is para ­
doxical that the English-speakin g people 
who have given the world the greatest poets, 
should take this false attitude while i n possession of the .greatest spiritua l and imagin ­
ative legacy of lif e and experience, bequeathed them from one generation to another durin g the last four hundred years." 
I n Mr . Braithwaite's bibliography he mentions "The Ebo n Muse " by Leo n Laviaux . 
The translator of these poems came across 
the book in New Orleans in 1008. It was 
written i n Creole-French patois by a quadroon twenty-two years of age, and a resident 
of Martinique . Mr . O'Har a has now translated these poems into English and by way 
of introduction he quotes those line words of 
Lafcadio Hearn : "Physically , the file de 
couleur [colored woman] may certainly be 
classed, as white Creole writers have not hesitated lo class her, with the most beautiful 
women of the human race." It. is to these 
women that Laviau x sings: 
" A hymn of racial beauty, rare and new, 
The riva l lure beneath the ebon hue; 
The radiance of the suns that triumph in 
The finer lustre of the golden skin ; 
Burnished as bronze or sable as the rise, 
Velvet and deep, of moonless midnight skies. 
This was the gift, my heritage, that she 
Gave with the kiss whose fire is memory; 
Whose freshness is of Heliconian dews, 
The consecration of the Ebo n Muse. " 
Turnin g from poetry we have two solid 
contributions to the history of the Negro race 
i n the books of Steward and Ellis. 
Chaplai n Steward has written a history 
of "The Haytia n Revolution " which, as he 
says, was "one of the most interesting movements of modern times." 
"The social foundations were destroyed 
and the whole social superstruction reduced 
to its origina l elements, and the State was 
organized while society was little more than 
chaos. 
"The Haytia n Revolution was accomplished on the one hand by slaves who were 
fighting primaril y for the right to own themselves; and on the other by men, half free, 
who were contending primaril y for the other 
half of freedom—their rights as Frenc h 
citizens. Bot h classes were without politica l 
training, and the most enlightened of the 
so-called free men had but the slightest theoretical knowledge of the duties and problems of government. These people, unlearned in state-craft, unskilled i n warfare, 
masses of them but recently from the wilds 
of Africa , arose i n their native might and 
resuming their primitive freedom overthrew 
the existing social order by force of arms 
and i n the end created a State." 
The book is well printed and illustrated. 
Mr . George W . Ellis, formerly Secretary 
of Legation in Liberia , has made an excellent 
contribution to Negro history i n his intensive 
monographic study of the Va i people of the 
West coast of Africa . H e shows, as all 200 TH E CRISI S 
serious students of Africa n life prove, the 
high culture and ability of these black people. Bot h these two histories ought to be i n 
every colored American's library . 
Charles Alexander's chronicle of the lif e 
of the late Col . Alle n Allenswort h is much 
longer and more detailed than the reader 
could wish, and yet the evident truth of the 
chronicle, particularly, that relating to Al -
lensworth's childhood and youth is of great 
interest. The part relating to his adult life 
is rather spoiled by a number of letters and 
documents and newspaper clipping s together 
with essays on the Negro problem and even 
poems. Man y readers wil l be attracted, 
nevertheless, to much of this record. 
Charles Edwar d Russell's little volume on 
Wendell Phillip s is a tremendously inspirin g 
thing and ought to be i n the hands of every 
America n child of all colors. A s Mr . Russell 
says: 
"Diligentl y the whole story of our civil 
war is perverted and distorted to the minds 
of the risin g generation. The glory for the 
abolition of slavery is bestowed upon men 
that had no feeling or conviction against the 
hateful institution and were no more than 
the passive instruments i n the bauds of an 
aroused publi c opinion . Bac k of all these, 
back of the militar y commanders whose 
statues rise now i n every square of the nationa l capital, back of the misread and misunderstood Emancipate d Proclamation , was 
the little band of Abolitionists steadily appealing to the nation's conscience. The real 
emancipators o f the slaves were Garrison, 
Phillips, Joh n Brow n and the few that 
standing wit h them upon the exalted ground 
of right, despised expediency and refused to 
compromise. " An d he adds trul y that Wendell Phillips, socialist and emancipator, has 
been perhaps most neglected of all. 
There is much i n "The New Voic e i n Race 
Adjustment " which wil l interest students of 
Negro problem, although the addresses and 
papers are of very uneven value and there 
is a certain smug religiosity about the whole 
thing which is not attractive. 
Negroes would do well to read Mr . Gulick's 
sympathetic study of the American-Japanese 
Problem. It is a broad statement of a race 
difficulty kindre d to ours on which we should 
be intelligent. 
Al l these books are for sale at this office. 
TH E HOWAR D FOOTBAL L TEA M (SEE PAG E 191) TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 20 1 
A Check That Made History 
Standard Lif e Insurance Company paid on January 4th, to Mrs. 
Arth a Caver, of Pine Bluff, Arkansas, Tw o Thousand Dollars, in full 
settlement of a policy in that Company on the life of her husband, Lync h 
F . Caver, a prominent young business man. 
Mr. Caver took this policy July 17th. 1914. 
He paid in premiums, S47.10. 
He was injured in a runaway accident, December 17th, 1914. 
He died as a result of his injuries, December 24th, 1914. 
Death proof papers were received by the Company January 4th. 19IS. 
Payment made January 4th, 1915. Same day. 
His wife received two thousand dollars. 
This is the largest payment ever made by a colored life insurance 
organization to a policy holder, and this check makes history. 
Mr . Caver was only 32 years old, in perfect health and had every 
reason to believe he would live for a long time. The accident which killed 
him came suddenly and without warning. Maybe you are in perfect 
health today. Yo u think you are going to live a long time too. But 
accidents are frequent. Wh o knows? 
Take that insurance today that you planned to take last year. Yo u 
know you need it and ought to have it. Delays are dangerous. Suppose 
Mr . Caver had delayed his application. 
Amon g the claims we paid last year were: 
Chas. H . Stroud, Atlanta , $1,000. Kille d in street car. A former 
letter carrier. 
Rev. I. S. Person, St. Louis, Mo. , $500.00. Heart failure. A prominent C. M . E . Minister. 
Chas. A . Shaw, Brunswick, Ga., $500.00. Gu n shot wound. Past 
Grand Chancellor Knights of Pythias. 
Le t us protect you as we protected the families of these men. N o 
matter where you live we can protect you. 
Ove r One Hundred Thousand Dollars on Deposit with 
the State of Georgia for the Protection of all policy 
holders. 
Mention TH E CUIU S 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
200 Auburn Avenue 
ATLANTA , :: :: GEORGI A 
Capital Fully Paid - - $100,000.00 
HEMA N E . PERRY , President 
HARR Y H . PACE , Secretary 
| Age 
Weigh t 
Occupation 
Name 
Address 
(C. Feb . 1915.) 
Please 
send me 
particulars 
about 
insurance. 
Amount % 
Sex 202 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
= TH E = 
Underwoo d 
i s th e machin e upo n whic h al l World' s 
Spee d an d Accurac y typewrite r record s 
hav e bee n established . 
TH E 
Underwoo d 
i s th e holde r o f th e Elliot t Cresso n Meda l 
fo r superiorit y o f mechanica l construction . 
UNDERWOO D 
"Th e Machin e Yo u Wil l Eventuall y Buy " 
UNDERWOO D BUILDIN G NE W YOR K 
Mention T H E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 203 
MILE S M . WEB B 
School of Practical Photography 
Al l branches of photography taught. 
Terms reasonable. Service efficient. 
Three courses: Amateur, intermediate, 
professional. REGISTE R NOW . 
3519 So. STAT E STREE T CHICAGO , III . 
Telephone Douglass 6688 
Made-to-Measure 
Expres s $2.7 5 
Prepai d fc= 
l*ants cut in the latest 
style. Made-to-your individual measure. Fit, 
workmanship and wear 
guaranteed. 
N o Extr a Charg e 
for peg tops, no matter how 
extreme you order them. 
Agent s Wante d 
A good live hustler in every 
town to take orders for our 
celebrate d made to measure clothes. Samples of all 
the latest materials FREE. 
W e Pa y Bi g Mone y 
to our agents everywhere. 
Turn your spare time into 
cash by taking orders for our 
stylish clothes. Write today 
for beautiful FREE outfit. 
THE PROGRESS TAILORING CO. 
Department 803 CHICAGO 
A Life of 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNE Y 
By 
MAU D CUNE Y HAR E 
(Hi s Daughter ) 
Woul d you like to read about a red-blooded man who was one 
of the great leaders of Negro Americans ? Woul d you like to inspire 
your children with the life of this "Tribune of the Black People"? 
250 pages. Postpaid, $1.50. Best terms to agents. 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue New York City 
Mention TH E CRISI S 204 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
SCHOO L O F BEAUT Y CULTUR E AN D HAI R DRESSIN G 
Kelsey's Hai r Dressing, Hai r Grower , Scalp Toni c and Fac e Lotion have no equal. Price , 50c. each. 
Guaranteed under Foo d and Dru g Act, June 30, 1906. 
Manicuring , Shampooing, Hai r Dressing, Marce l Waving. Facial and Bod y Massage, Hai r Making , Chiropody, 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimite d practice in parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summe r Course , $7.50 up. Send for 
booklet. Mme . A . Carte r Kelsey, Gen'l Instr.; Dr . Samuel 
A . Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen'l Manager . 
KELSEY'S 
Telephone, Morningside 8162 
143 West 131st St. 
NE W YOR K 
TI T A f 1 ¥ 1 IT1 U The new efficiency era calls 
IIJ^^IIIJUL J fo r th e modern way of 
•electing teachers, through a live agency that furnishes 
the connecting medium in a business way, saves time 
of school officials, relieves teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting and covers the whole country. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida , 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland , Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode 
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virgini a 
and West Virginia . 
Ou r list of teachers covers even a wider territory. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1335 T Street, N . W . Washington, D . C . 
Only 
$65.0 0 
No. 24 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A Value Unequaled. Sold on $1.00 
Front Margin 
Factory to User 
Writ e for prices 
an d other styles. 
Send for catalog 
C . R. PATTERSO N 
& SONS . 
Greenfield, Ohi o 
Largest Negro Carriage concern In the United States. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
Yo u can operate in your own home during spare 
time. Th e parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU . Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Wh y can't you? By our method you can 
start with $5 and up. W e offer you thirty live, 
money-making mail order plans. Yo u can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. W e furnish circulars, printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. D o 
it today— Now! 
MAI L DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
517 Dearborn Street Chicago, 111. 
PROFITABL E SPAR E TIM E WOR K 
Colored agents wanted to take orders for our high 
grade calling cards. Bi g demand everywhere. Ex ­
clusive territory. Writ e now for samples and terms. 
TH E HOUS E O F CHOWNING , Indianapolis. In d 
COLORE D ME N 
WANTE D T O PREPAR E A S 
SLEEPING-CA R AN D TRAI N 
PORTERS . 
N o experienc e necessary . Position s 
pa y $65 to $10 0 a month . Stead y 
work . Standar d roads . Passe s an d 
uniform s furnishe d whe n necessary . 
Writ e now . 
I. RY. C. I., Dept. 28, Indianapolis, Ind. 
Your Next Suit 
Han d Tailored — 
Class y Linings — 
Millionair e Trim ­
mings—Swel l Cut — 
Guarantee d Fit -
FREE 
Made to Your Measure 
$30 to $40 woul d not 
buy a better one , but you 
get it for nothing. Not a 
1
 rou t t o pay. Simply wea r 
it, tell your friends where 
you got it, and mak e 
$
10tos15aDay 
taking their orders. It __ 
dead easy. Yo n never saw a nobbier suit or a more stunning pat 
tern, cut in strictly Tan no style ( 
months ahead of the times). You 
choice of 60 patterns and a doze: 
different styles to choose from 
Drop us a postal card f or heavy 
pattern book, inside information 
about styles, Self-measuring, 
blanks, etc., etc. Don't wait 
Everything free—Wo pay ex 
pressage. Get ahead of the other 
fell'>ws—write this very minute 
A postal will do it. 
AMERICAN WOOLEN MILLS CO. 
Sept . 25 1 CHICAG O 
YOU CAN MAKE A FORTUNE 
with our formulas an d business propositions. 
Her e is a big offer. Wil l send you complete 
working formulas for Resisto Cement, mends 
everything; Crystal Soapaline, a liquid soap; 
Complexion Beautifier, a cosmetic; Sunburst 
Metal Polish; Klenso Washin g Compound, all 
for 50 cents. Send us your remittance and let 
us put you in touch with other dollar coining 
propositions. These formulas formerly sold 
for $5.00. Writ e now. 
REYNOLDS TRAD E SPECIALTIES 
3569 RHODE S AVENU E CHICAGO . ILL. 
REGALI A 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalog upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALIA CO. 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E. Corner 8th And Plum Streets, Cincinnati, Ohio 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E 205 CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
17 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY ATLANTA . GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
dear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAMES F. MORTON , JR. 
211 West 138th Street -:- New York, N. Y. 
$25.00 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, SO illustrations. Pric e $1.25 net. 
Address: E . A . JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street NE W YOR K 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS. Dignified work. 
70 Fifth Avenue , New York. 
THE BOOK OF TH E CENTURY 
A Pullman Porter s Memoirs 
By 
JAC K THORN E 
A collection of original Short Stories of 
Travel, written i n an entertaining and attractive style, covering a period of ten years in the 
Pullman Service. 
Cloth Bound $1.00 
Good Commission to Agents 
Address: ARTHU R A . SCHOMBURG , 63 
West 140th St., New Yor k City, or JOH N E . 
BRUC E (Grit), 146 Warburton Ave., Yonkers, 
N. Y . 
A NEW WAY 
To Get Your Clothes Free 
A NEW PLA N TO MAK E 
BIG MONEY DURING 
YOUR SPARE TIME 
Something different — better, 
bigger, more liberal than any 
offer ever made. Lower 
prices—better clothes— 
bigger cash profits—Express paid on everything. 
Double Pay 
FRE E clothes and cash profits 
besides. W e don't ask you 
to use your cash profits for 
your own clothes. Ours is a 
new and better plan. 
An Extra Present with every order. Not a prize 
scheme. . Choose what you want, work for it and get 
it besides your Cash Profits. Agent's Complete Outfit FREE, fifty-six stylish, real cloth 
samples — fifty Fashion Plates. Inside wholesale 
prices. Everything FREE. Ge t into the big 
money-making class. Just put your name on a 
post card and mail it to us today. 
SPENCER MEAD CO., Dept. 303, Chicago 
Pianos-PLAYER PIANOS 
Factory to Home 
B Y M Y PLA N 
o f sellin g direc t fro m factor y t o home . I ca n save yo u 
from $11 0 t o $20 0 o n m y celebrate d Evan s Artis t 
Mode l Pianos . 
TWO to Four Years to Pay 
Th e easiest kin d o f terms, weekly , monthly , quarterly o r yearl y payments t o suit you r convenience . 
Al l middlemen , jobbers, dealer s an d agents 
profits cut out. No charge fur salesroom expense fur m y 
office is in my factory. These are some of the reasons 
Why I can sell the Evan s Artist Mode l Pianos for such little 
money. Let mc send you the other reasons Writ e today. 
30 Days Free Trial A 
W e allo w al l freigh t charges, let yo u us e the 
beautiful Evan s Artist Mode l Pian o for thirty days 
free. If you are not entirety satisfied, we wil l take 
it hack without any cost to you—you are the sole X*/\o- $ 
judge to decide. If you want to keep it, you may 
do so on -our low factory wholesale price on A/cJ* 
most convenient terms. £ ^ 
Free Music LessonsySyr^tf 
T o the first customer i n each locality y<y0sJ*&' 
we will give a two years course of piano A y Cr 
Instruction free. Ask about our insurance 
plan and our method of saving 
>you money. Write today. t.*V 
F . O . Ev->is Pian o Co - <¥<f 
Mention TH E CRISI S 206 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
T .„.„_„ . f Central 104-W Telephones: { Mai n fil 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohio 
Office L . D . Telephone 3297 Marke t 
Residence L . D . Telephone 5277-M Marke t 
GEORG E A . DOUGLA S 
COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Marke t St., Cor . Washington, Newark, N . J . 
General Practice Notary Publi c 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis Minn . 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Thir d and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia Pa . 
Tel . 5437 For t Hil l Cable Addresa, Epben 
EDGA R P . BENJAMI N 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
34 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbi e Hawkins
 1 George W . F . McMeche n 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
ATTOR N EYS-AT-LA W 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md . 
Phones: Office, Bell 4059; New 420-M 
Residence, New 733-A 
THOS . E . GREENE , JR. 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
Maloney Block Youngstown, Ohio 
B. F . BOOT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
57 N . Second Street 
Memphis Tenn . 
T . L . SWEENE Y 
Lawyer and Notary Public 
FAYETTEVILL E WES T VIRGINI A 
R . D . E V A N S 
Attorne y an d Counselo r at Law . Secretar y Lon e Sta r 
Stat e Ba r Association . You r Texa s business solicited . 
Ca n handl e i n an y par t o f state . 
120 1-2 S. 3d STREE T Phone 19SS, New WACO , TEXA S 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUD E E . CURTI S 
SURGEON DENTIST 
188 W . -135th Street New Yor k City 
WILLIA M L . BEL L 
ARCHITEC T 
138J4 Aubur n Avenu e Atlanta, Ga. 
E . ALDAM A JACKSO N 
Graduate Institute of Musical Art, Organist and Director 
of Musi c St. Mark's M . E. Churc h 
Teacher of Theor y and Piano 
Theor y course embraces elementary and advanced 
Harmon y or Counterpoint. 
Private or Class Work 
Studio : 30 W . 132d STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements Jul y and August 
Box 25, Wilberforc e Universit y 
Wilberforce , O . 
AGENTS WANTED FOR 
W. T. McKissick & Co's. 
FAMOUS 9 0 DAYS TREATMENTS 
No . 1, No . 2 and No . 3 
For Scalp, Hair and Skin 
P . O . Bo x 102 , WILMINGTON , DEL . 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS. Dignified work. 
70 Fifth Avenue , New York. 
ADVANC E STYLE S 
FRE E 
Suits 
To Introduc e 
Her e we go again , breaking all records for new, 
nobby, ahead-of-the-time 
style s Be the first in your town 
to wear a suit that in ahead of the 
time. You can do it FREE . To 
introduce these style s quickly 
we wil l (rive you a complete suit 
free , and by your wearing it you 
$50 to $100 a Week 
Drop us a postal for your advance 
book, selec t the Btyle s you want 
and the cloth, and get 
Your Suit FRE E 
Don't wait. Don't delnv. Write 
right away . A postal w 1 do. Wo 
Send everythin g rhe day your 
request ia received. We pay express on everything. Get busv. 
Simply send ue n postal with 
your name and address on • t. 
Paragon Tailoring Co. 
Dept . 25 1 CHICAG O 
Wear Next 
Season's 
Style 
NO W 
Mention TH E CRISIS A Selected List of Book s 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HOUS E BEHIN D TH E CEDARS . (Charles W . Chesnutt) $1.50 
HAZEL . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) 1.00 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPH Y O F A N EX-COLORE D MAN . (Anonymous) 1.20 
LYRIC S O F LOWL Y LIFE . (Pau l Laurence Dunbar) 1.25 
TH E MARRO W O F TRADITION . (Charles W . Chesnutt) 1.50 
TH E SPOR T O F TH E GODS . (Pau l Laurence Dunbar) 1.50 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . (Mau d Cuney Hare ) 1.50 
A NARRATIV E OF TH E NEGRO . (Leil a Amo s Pendleton) 1.50 
SOUL S O F BLAC K FOLK . (W . E . B. D u Bois) 1.25 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . (Kell y Miller) '. 2.0 0 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . (B. G . Brawley) 1.25 
HAL F A MAN . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) 1.00 
MIN D O F PRIMITIV E MAN . (Franz Boas) 1.50 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
JOH N BROWN . (W . E . B . D U Bois) 1.25 
NEGR O I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W . Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W . Crawford). ? 1.00 
LIBERIA . (Frederick Starr) 1.00 
FACT S OF RECONSTRUCTION . (John R . Lynch ) 1.50 
STOR Y O F TH E NEGRO . 2 Volumes. (Booker T . Washington) 3.0 0 
MASTERPIECE S OF NEGR O ELOQUENCE . (Alic e Moor e Dunbar, Editor) 2.5 0 
POEM S O F PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.0 0 
TH E AFRICA N ABROAD . 2 Volumes. (William H . Ferris) 5.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T O F TH E HOUS E O F BONDAGE . (Kell y Miller) 1.50 
TH E COLORE D INVENTOR . (Henr y E . Baker) 15 
A CHILD' S STOR Y O F DUNBAR . (Julia L . Henderson) 25 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: New York City 
Mention TH E CRISI S Attention, Masons! 
A New Book of Interest to You 
Prince Hall and His Followers 
A carefull y argued defense of the legitimacy of Negro Masonry in the 
United Stales, with notes and documents, by 
GEORG E W . CRAWFORD , 32° 
A graduate of Tuskegee, Talladega and Yale , formerly clerk of the 
Probate Court of Ne w Haven and now a practicing lawyer there. Mr . 
Crawford is one of the best informed Masons in the country. 
COMMENT S 
From James F. Rikards, 33°, Most Puissant Sovereign Grand Commander, 
A . & A . Scottish Rite: 
"'Princ e Hal l an d Hi s Followers, ' writte n by a scholarl y Afro-American , pre ­
sents tip the Masoni c worl d a treatis e o n the legitimac y o f Negr o Masonr y tha t 
shoul d he in the hand s o f ever y Maso n seekin g fo r Truth . Th e informatio n 
containe d in the chapte r devote d to Princ e Hal l is alon e wort h to the youn g 
Maso n the pric e o f the hook . Brothe r Crawford' s easy an d pleasin g styl e 
creates in the reade r a desir e to complet e the volum e befor e puttin g the boo k 
ou t o f his hands. " 
From Henry A . Spencer, 33°, Grand Master and Grand Commander of 
Knights Templar of New York : 
"Th e boo k fills a long-fel t wan t amon g intelligen t Mason s o f ou r Race . 
T o kno w that we are right, an d to substantiat e that fact by intelligen t researc h 
an d logica l statements, is wort h mor e to us tha n wha t the othe r fello w ma y 
say. This is wha t Brothe r Crawford's boo k does; an d it shoul d be i n the hand s 
o f ever y Maso n o f ou r Race. " 
From Jose H . Sherwood, 33°, Past Grand Master of Minnesota and 
Deputy Imperial Potentate of Shriners : 
" A ver y stron g brief, settin g fort h plainl y the legitimac y o f Princ e Hal l 
Masonry , and , as well , a ste m cal l to al l Negroe s to assume ful l prid e i n the 
happ y possessio n o f a Rit e whic h ca n sho w suc h clea r proofs o f its contentions. " 
From William H . Grimshaw, 33°, Past Grand Master of the District of 
Columbia and author of " A History of Colored Freemasonry" : 
" I have read wit h great pleasur e 'Princ e Hal l an d Hi s Followers. ' Th e boo k 
is wel l written , containin g clea r an d convincin g diction . Th e impartia l accuracy 
wit h whic h the fad s are marshalle d make s the boo k a ver y valuabl e asset 
to .Masons. " 
Price One Dollar. Postage Extra. 
ORDE R NO W AGENT S WANTE D 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: : : New Yor k 
Mention TH E CRISI S 