TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Volume Three MARCH , 1912 Numbe r Five 
John Henry Adams 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y Publishers' Chat with Readers 
ENLARGEMEN T 
Ou r advertising is encroaching on our readin g matter to such an 
extent that some enlargement of our space is necessary. Beginnin g wit h 
the Easte r number, therefore, TH E CRISI S wil l be 48 instead of 44 pages. 
TH E CRISIS FO R APRI L 
The Easte r numbe r wil l be the best numbe r we have ever issued, and 
that is sayin g a good deal. The cover wil l be a reproduction i n the 
origina l colors of an exquisite water color by Richard Brown, the new 
youn g colored artist, protégé of the N . A . A . C. P. , who has been pronounced 
b y a great Englis h criti c "on e of the two best artists i n America. " Mr . 
Brow n is paintin g this pictur e especially for TH E CRISIS . 
Beside this we are gla d to announce one of the literar y events of 
the year, a new short story, "The Doll," by Charles W. Chesnutt. 
This is Mr . Chesnutt's only published wor k since "Th e Colonel's 
Dream, " and is done i n his usua l inimitabl e style. 
NE W DRESS—Simultaneously wit h our enlargement wil l come some changes i n 
typography—a wide r column, some decorative initials and many minor matters to 
increase the comfort of the reader. I n fact, we propose to have the best-printed 
magazine i n Americ a before we are satisfied. 
BOOKS—Whe n our advertising man wanted to open a department for the sale of 
books we were a bit doubtful. No w that he has already sold over $200 worth we are 
convinced. H e is prepared to-day to execute all your book orders at the lowest rates. 
We handle all published books on any subject. Tr y us. 
PICTURES—We sell pictures. Imagine, for instance, the head of our cover girl 
on heavy tinted paper for framing! Onl y 15 cents. Then there's Douglass, Joh n 
Brown , anybody, at a very reasonable rate. Writ e us. 
CIRCULATION—Ou r business man says we shall have to print 20,000 copies for 
Easter. W e ran out last month and had to disappoint several agents. 
ADVERTISING—We consider ourselves fortunate i n havin g reached that stage 
where we may point wit h pride to a list of satisfied advertisers, who, b y their 
expressions of confidence i n our wort h as an advertising medium, have made us such 
a factor i n the business worl d as to warrant our asking a higher price for advertising 
space. 
„ First and foremost wit h us is the desire to gain and retain the confidence of 
our readers and advertisers. To this end we have kept our standard high b y offering 
the most reliable advertisements, and this policy wil l be strictly followed. 
Beginnin g Ma y 1, 1912, the advertising rates wil l be advanced to 10 cents per 
line, agate measurement (14 lines to the inch), but all contracts made prior to that 
date wil l be honored at the present low rate until the date of their expiration. 
To those to whose support and encouragement we owe the existence of TH E 
CRISI S we promise that our most sincere efforts wil l be made to brin g together the 
best representatives of the world's commercial highway, wit h a tempting variet y of 
luxuries and necessities, makin g our advertising department a real department store 
where each member of the famil y may shop "b y the fireside." 
The following excerpts from letters may be of interest to our readers 
and advertisers: 
"Th e result s t o dat e hav e bee n ver y satisfac ­
tor y t o us ; th e replie s receive d indicatin g tha t 
you r magazin e , ha s a goo d circulatio n amon g 
mail-orde r buyers . 
' 'W e hav e advertise d i n a numbe r o f maga ­
zine s an d hav e pai d a s hig h a s $ 7 pe r lin e fo r 
space , an d i n man y case s th e result s wer e no t 
equa l t o thos e receive d fro m you r magazin e i n 
whic h th e rate s ar e ver y muc h lower. " 
" I a m please d t o infor m yo u tha t m y adver ­
tisemen t i n TH E CRISI S ha s brough t satis ­
factor y results . Thi s morning' s mai l bring s m e 
a lette r fro m Pennsylvani a an d on e fro m 
Kansas. ' ' 
"Pleas e fin d enclose d chec k fo r $ 8 t o settl e 
ou r account . W e ha d a fe w importan t inquirie s 
fro m you r man y reader s an d wil l cal l o n yo u 
again. ' ' TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RAGE S 
Published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 
20 Vesey Street, New York City. 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS . Editor OSWAL D GARRISO N V1LLAR D 
M.D. MaClean, Managing Editor Contributing Editors J. Max Barber Charles Edward Russell FRAN K M . TURNER , Circulation Manager W S BRA1THWA1T E 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY . Advertising Manager KELL Y MILLE R 
Subscription: $1.00 a year ; 50 cents for six months. Foreign subscriptions, 25 cents extra. 
CONTENT S FOR MARCH , 1912 
COVE R PICTURE . By John Henry Adams. 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 183 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 190 
OPINIO N 192 
EDITORIA L 197 
TH E DRAM A I N COLORE D AMERICA— I 198 
NATIONAL . ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 203 
A FEDERA L REMED Y FO R LYNCHING . By the Hon. A. E . Pillsbury.... 205 
TH E BURDE N 209 
HISTORI C DAY S I N MARCH . By L . M . Hershaw 210 
WHA T T O READ . By Jessie Fauset 211 
WELCOM E WORD S 
I am writing to congratulate you upon the editorial, "The Gall of Bitterness,' and upon securing for T H E C RISI S the picture "The Social L,ife 
of Colored America." Both will make particularly 
f
ood impression upon the readers of T H E C RISIS . 
he editorial is simply perfect; could not be improved upon. We have received several letters 
from our subscribers who have received the two 
recent issues of T H E C RISI S expressing their 
thanks and praise for the publication. 
Your s faithfully, 
N . F . Moss ELL , 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Ma y I take this opportunity to congratulate you 
on the excellent magazine you are publishing and 
on the splendid success of the same ? Sincerely 
wishing you a continuance of all this, I am, 
Your s for the race, 
IDA WELL S BARNETT , 
Chicago, 111. 
Fo r the past year the country at large has read 
with increasing interest and instruction your splendid publication, T H E C RISIS . It is no doubt the 
ablest and most timely publication of the day dealing with the problems of the darker races. Splendidly arranged, unrivaled in the force and power 
of its editorship, difficult to be surpassed in literary form, T H E C RISI S is the most potent and 
convincing voice pleading to a prejudiced world 
for the liberty, equality and justice to colored 
peoples. I have enjoyed and learned much from 
it and I believe that its appearance has increased 
the inspiration of the darker peoples and strengthened their determination in the United States and 
elsewhere to continue the struggle for justice and 
freedom to the very end. A s an evidence that it 
may continue and prosper I have done for it what 
I do not do for anybody—ask for subscriptions. 
G EORG E W. E LLIS , 
Agents wanted who can furnish references. 
Entere d as second-class matter i n the post office at New Yor k City. 180 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SON OFF T O 
Wilberforce University 
Th e only school in the country for 
Negro Yout h which has a Militar y De -
partment equipped by the National 
Goverament, and commanded by a detailed 
Unite d States Arm y Officer. 
DEPARTMENTS 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L TECHNICA L 
COMMERCIA L THEOLOGICA L 
CLASSICA L MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Bankin g taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank . Twelve 
Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, 
Te n Buildings. Healthful surroundings, 
exceptional community. Maintained in 
par t by the State of Ohio which supplies 
facilities for the thorough training of 
teachers. 
Fal l term began September 19th, 1911. 
Writ e for Catalog. 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH. President 
WM . A . JOINER , Superintendent, C. N . 
I. Department. 
Address all communications to 
BO X 36 WILBERFORCE , OHI O 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School, Norma l School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth, Smith 
and Welle s ley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r furthe r information address 
President EDWARD T. WARE 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, Hig h School, Gramma r 
School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expense s very reasonable. 
Opportunit y for Self-help. 
Fall Term Opened Sept. 27, 1911. 
Fo r information address 
President R. W. McGranahan 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND, VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required i n the best theological 
seminaries. 
A n Academy, with manual training , firin g 
a preparation for life or for college. 
Th e positive mora l and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of 
class work, its fine new buildings and wellequipped laboratories and library, prepar e a 
faithful student for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY . President 
MAYERS ' INDUSTRIA L SCHOO L 
BOARDIN G AN D DA Y SCHOO L 
Fo r the Industrial, literary, moral and religious 
training of the Negro youth. 
Terms reasonable. 
Fo r particular s address 
FLOR A E . MAYERS , Principa l 
606 Payne Street Knoxville , Tenn . 
Les t yo u forget , w e remin d 
yo u tha t th e Easte r CRISIS 
wil l b e brimfu l o f goo d 
thing s fo r ever y membe r 
o f th e family . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 181 
A Social Study of the Negro in New York 
"HAL F A MAN " 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a Foreword by Dr. Franz Boas, of Columbia University 
This book is the result of years of careful study and personal acquaintance with actual conditions in Ne w York . 
<J Its truths being applicable to all communities where the two races live 
together, it must be considered one of the best social studies of recent years. 
Price . $1.00 ; by mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
This book is for sale in the Boo k Department of TH E CRISIS, 2 0 
Vesey St., Ne w York . 
The 
Quest 
o f th e 
Silver 
Fleece 
A Novel 
by 
W . E . BURG H ARD T 
D U BOIS 
Drawings by 
H. S. DE LA Y 
Here is a story of the darker world 
in the South and in Washington, D. G. 
It is dramatic in style and absorbing 
in interest and expresses the feeling 
of colored people about themselves 
and their own problems; at the same 
time it shows how both black folk 
and white are caught in the power of 
• King Cotton. 
A T AL L BOOKSTORES 
PRIC E $1.35 NE T 
A . G . McGLUR G & CO . 
New Yor k Chicago San Francisco 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
15 Monographs. Bold Separately. 
Address: 
A. G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
PUBLICATION S 
A . M . E . Book Concern Philadelphia, Pa. 
TH E POEM S O F PHILLIS WHEATLEY . 
Reprint of first edition 1773; a valuable book. 
Price , $1.00. 
TH E NEGR O PROBLEM . A n analysis: Wha t 
It Is Not an d Wha t It Is; by B . B . Wright, Jr . 
In pamphlet form. 16 cents. 
TH E COLORE D REGULARS . B y T . G . 
Steward, Chaplain U . S. A. , retired. Pric e $1.50. 
EVOLUTIO N AN D LIFE . B y Algernon B . 
Jackson, Surgeon-in-chief Merc y Hospital. Price , 
75 cents. 
TH E NEGR O I N PENNSYLVANIA . A Study 
in Economi c History ; B y B . B . Wright, Jr. , 
Sometime Besearch Fellow in Sociology in the 
University of Pennsylvania. Price , Paper , $2.00; 
Cloth, $2.50. 
Address 
A . M . E . BOO K CONCER N 
631 Pin e Street, Philadelphia, Pa . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 182 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
The Testing Fir e 
By ALEXANDE R CORKE Y 
Autho r of ''Th e Victor y of Alla n Rutledge " 
Is the Sanest Story Ever Written on the 
Race Problem 
It is the first story ever written on the race question, by a white man, that is not antagonistic to the 
colored race. 
EVER Y FREEDMAN SHOULD READ IT 
Throug h its pages runs a sweet romance, but it 
is more than a love story. It is a novel of uplift, 
accomplishment and promise. 
No One Interested in the Race Question Should Miss It 
Pric e $1.25 net; postage 10 cents extra. 
The H . K . FL Y COMPANY , Publishers 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
This book is for sale in the book department of TH E CRISIS, 
2 0 Vese y Street, Ne w York . 
TH E LIF E AN D WORK S O F 
Paul Laurence Dunbar 
Containing his complete poetical works, his best short 
stories, numerous anecdotes and a complete biography of 
the famous poet. 
EXTRAC T FRO M INTRODUCTION . 
I think I should scarcely trouble the reader with a special appeal 
in behalf of this book If it had not specially appealed to me for 
reasons apart from the author's race, origin and condition. Th e 
world is too old now and I find myself too much of its mood to care 
for the work of a poet because he is black; because his father and 
mother were slaves; because he was, before and after he began to 
write poems, an elevator boy. Thes e facts would certainly attract 
me to hi m as a man if I knew hi m to have a literary ambition, but 
when it came to his literary art, I must judge it irrespective of these 
facts, and enjoy or endure it for what it was in itself. 
—Willia m Dean Howells. 
Profusely illustrated with over half a hundred full-page 
photo and half-tone engravings. 
Clot h $ 2 Hal f Morocc o $2.7 5 Ful l Morocc o $3.7 5 
SALE S AGEN T 
J . G . GUILE S 
214A St. Antoine Street Montreal, Can. 
Mention The CRISIS . TH E CRISI S 
Volume Three MARCH , 1912 Number Five 
ALON G 
COLO R LIN E 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
Th e project for a Negro exposition 
in commemoration of the fiftiet h anniversary of emancipation has not been 
given up by R. R. Wrigh t of Savannah, 
Ga., wh o originally proposed it. 
A delegation of colored men appeared 
before a senate committee on expositions lately and it looks as though a 
bill appropriating $250,000 might pass 
through Congress. 
Th e State of Pennsylvani a has appropriated $20,000 for an exposition in 
Philadelphia . H . W . Bass, the colored 
membe r of the Pennsylvani a Legisla ­
ture, is at the head of the work, but his 
efforts are being hampered by the white 
politicians, wh o are determined to use 
the appropriation as a bribery fund. 
Th e fight is being watched with considerable interest. 
Th e State of Ne w Yor k is contemplatin g a simila r appropriation for the Phila ­
delphia celebration. 
<I Th e Harrie t Tubma n Hom e of 
Auburn , N . Y. , is still in need of about 
$15 a month to pay its expenses. Con ­
tributions sent to Rev. A . E . Brook s 
wil l be acknowledged. 
<| Th e Philadelphi a Association for the 
Protection of Colore d Wome n reports 
that it cared for 900 girls during the last 
year. 
tj In Virgini a eighteen counties observed Colore d Tuberculosis Day, Feb ­
ruary 12. 
tj Mrs. Emelin e Reavy of Newark, N . J., 
has left bequests to a colored church 
in Orange and to the Ol d Folks' Hom e 
at Irvington. 
IJ The officers of the Nationa l Guar d 
Association and others connected wit h 
the Ne w Yor k militi a are still fighting 
vigorously the proposal to organize a 
Negro regiment. 
<I Howar d E . Primus, a colored boy, 
won the $10 gold prize "at Camden, 
N . J., for an oration in a contest between 
high-school seniors. 
<J Th e Socialist Nationa l Convention, 
which may meet at Oklahoma Cit y in 
May . wil l take up the Negr o question 
in all probability. Th e last time that 
the Socialists touched the question was 
in the convention of 1901. when they 
passed resolutions which contained the 
followin g passages: 
"Resolved, Tha t we. the Socialists of 
America , in national convention assembled, do hereby assure our Negr o 
fellow worke r of our sympathy with 
him in his subjection to lawlessness and 
oppression, and also assure him of the 
fellowship of the workers wh o suffer 
from the lawlessness and exploitation of 
capital in every nation or tribe of the 
world. 
"Resolved, Tha t we. the America n 
Socialist party, invite the Negr o to membership and fellowship with us in the 
worl d movement for economic emancipation, by which equal liberty and opportunity shall be secured to every man and 
fraternity become the order of the 
world. " 
<] Th e latest census records relating to 
the colored population in the various 
divisions of the Unite d States as compared with 1900 are as follows: 184 THE CRISIS 
Pe r cent. Increase, 
Number. of total. 1910- 1900. 
Divisio n and State. < " 1 < A » ' " 1 
1910. 1900. 1910. 1900. Number. Percent. 
Unite d States—Total... . 9,828,294 
Geographi c Divisions: 
Ne w Englan d 66,294 
Middl e Atlanti c 417,849 
East Nort h Central . 300,779 
West Nort h Central. 243,241 
South Atlanti c 4,112,487 
East South Central. 2,652,506 
West South Central. 1,984,397 
Mountai n 21,519 
Pacific 29,222 
8,833,994 10.7 11.6 994,300 11.3 
59,099 1.0 1.1 7,195 12.2 
325.921 2.2 2fl 91,928 28.2 
257.842 1.6 16 42,937 16.7 
237,909 2.1 2.3 5,332 2.2 
3,729,017 33.7 35.7 383,470 10.3 
2,499,886 31.5 33.1 152,620 6.1 
1,694,066 22.6 25.9 290,331 17.1 
15,590 0.8 0.9 5,929 38.0 
14,664 0.7 0.6 14,558 99.3 
<I Th e colored people of Vancouver, 
B. C , have organized the Negr o Christian Allianc e for the purpose of championin g the rights of colored people and 
raising their general status. Mr . Milto n 
P. Fulle r is president. The y have 
bought a lot and wil l erect a hall for 
meetings. Th e organization is incorporated under the Benevolent Societies Ac t 
of Britis h Columbia . 
<J Wood's directory, 1912, of Ne w 
Orleans shows the remarkable organiza ­
tion of the colored population of that 
city. The y have six asylums and homes, 
thirty-nine churches, six clubs, three hospitals, sixteen schools and one theatre. 
Ther e are 230 benevolent organizations 
and twenty-two trades unions. Ther e 
are listed in the trade directory six 
bands, thirty-five contractors and builders, six dentists, nineteen physicians, 
seven druggists, three hotels, two 
industrial insurance companies, five lawyers, thirty-nine midwive s and trained 
nurses, twenty-four music teachers, 
twenty-one painters and paperhangers. 
three photographers, eleven printers and 
binders, eight tailors and eight undertakers. 
<J In Greenville , Miss. , there are five colored physicians, an insurance society 
wit h assets of over $70,000; a grocery 
store, a bank, a pharmacy, three lawyers, 
a dozen churches and four public schools. 
Most of the mechanics and employees in 
the oil mills are colored and the leading 
contractor, Mr . George Braddock, is 
colored. 
<J A theatre designed exclusively for 
Negroes, at which only Negr o talent wil l 
be employed, has just been opened in 
Chattanooga and is the only one of its 
kind in the State. Th e new theatre has 
a seating capacity of about 700, with six 
boxes on each side. Th e stage is equipped 
with every feature to be found in a firstclass vaudeville house and good performances are promised. 
•J Th e "Flyin g Squadron, " whic h is the 
name of the youn g women's auxiliary to 
the N . A . A . C. P., is holdin g a series 
of private entertainments preparatory to 
a larger affair in the spring. Th e first 
was held at the home of Miss Dor a 
TH E CAPTAI N Of TH E DRIL L 
Cole . Th e Utopi a Neighborhoo d Club of 
Ne w York , which is a simila r organiza ­
tion for aiding and establishing a delinquent home for colored girls, has given a 
carnival, in whic h Miss M . G. Alliso n was 
captain of the drill . ALONC THE COLOR LINE 185 
Q Francis L . Holmes, the colored jumper 
of Chicago, competed at the athletic 
meet held in Ne w Yor k February 22. 
H e may be chosen to make the trip to 
Stockholm in June. 
Th e fourth annual convention of 
the Alph a Ph i Alph a Fraternit y was 
held at An n Arbor, Mich . This is a 
colored Greek-letter fraternity, which 
has twelve active chapters in the best 
universities of the country. Charles H . 
Garvi n of Howar d was elected president. 
POLITICAL . 
Great activity has become manifest in 
Washingto n to secure the Negr o vote. 
Th e colored officeholders are engaged 
i n minimizin g Mr . Taft's wholesale dismissal of colored officers from the Unite d 
States service. 
Tw o lon g conferences wit h these officeholders have been held at the Whit e 
Hous e when the proposed Hoo k appointment and the President's policy in the 
South were discussed. 
<| Th e Negroe s of Boley, Okla. , have 
formed an Independent Voters' League, 
and declared they wil l vote in future 
regardless of politica l parties. 
<I A curious story comes from Wash ­
ington wit h man y earmarks of credibility : Th e recorder of deeds, H . L . 
Johnson, was appointed through the influence of Secretary Hitchcock . Secretary Hitchcoc k is now leaning toward 
the Roosevelt faction and has broken 
wit h Johnson. Johnson hastened to the 
Whit e Hous e and was received into the 
Taft camp, and is now promotin g the 
election of Taft delegates in Georgia . 
<J A t the Republican dollar dinner held 
at Wheeling , W . Va. , a colored man, 
Mr . E . J. Graham, Jr., was present and 
spoke. 
«J Mr . A . P. Priolea u of South Caro ­
lina is again contesting the seat of G. S. 
Legar e in the Hous e of Representatives 
at Washington . 
<J Th e Democrats of Delaware are vig ­
orously denyin g that they have been 
promotin g a Negr o Democrati c Club . 
TH E GHETTO . 
A bill has been presented to the 
legislature of Virgini a to empowe r and 
authorize every county and city council 
i n the State to prescribe the bounds for 
residential purposes of blacks and 
whites. Ther e are penalties for viola ­
tion of the law. 
<J Th e mayo r of Cincinnati has closed 
one of the prosperous colored theatres 
for reasons not clear to the colored 
people. 
<J Dr. E . P. Roberts has been made 
physica l examiner in the New Yor k public schools. A few patrons of the 
school have made a faint protest, whic h 
has been ignored. 
•J Ben. Salter, a colored man of Pensacola, Fla. , has entered suits for $70,000 
damages in the Federa l Court at Montgomery against seven prominent white 
farmers of Crenshaw county, Alabama , 
alleging that they were members of a 
mob which , in December, 1910, drove 
him and his family from their farm in 
Crenshaw county, burned Salter's dwelling house, destroyed and carried off 
property to the value ;of $2,500 and 
forced Salter to leave the State. 
Salter alleges that he was beaten by 
the mob and taken into custody by the 
sheriff of the county to save his life, 
and that after liberation he moved from 
Alabama to protect his life. 
(& Mrs. Lil y Hill , of Washingto n county, 
Tenn., has been pardoned by Governor 
Hooper. She was convicted last Octo ­
ber and sentenced to eleven years and 
twenty-nine days in jail. Th e pardon 
record says: "It appears from the statement of the attorney-general that this 
colored woma n is a respectable and 
well-behaved married woma n and had 
been previously molested by the prosecuting witness in the case, and that 
she was assaulted by said prosecutor in 
a public street because she resented his 
attentions a second time, and, when 
she was pressed by him, drew a pistol 
from a handbag and shot him in the 
arm. " 
<J Th e Baltimor e & Ohi o Railroa d tried 
to establish a Jim Cro w waiting room 
in Baltimore . Th e colored people compelled it to give up the project. 
f& A colored attorney of Detroit has presented a protest to Governo r Osbor n 
of Michiga n against the refusal of the 
State School at Coldwate r to admit colored children. Th e governor promises 
to investigate. 
EDUCATION . 
Th e Wester n Universit y for Negroes 
at Quindaro, Kan. , has erected a monument to Joh n Brow n at a cost of $2,000. 
Th e money was subscribed by colored 
people throughout the Unite d States in 
small amounts. 
<J Miss Urnestine Bell , a graduate of 
the norma l department of Atlant a Uni ­
versity in the class of 1910, received the 
highest grade of any teacher, white or 
colored, in Atlanta , in the examination 
for teacher's certificate. 18 6 THE CRISIS 
*J Morris Brow n College of Atlant a has 
purchased several hundred acres of land 
in East Macon , Ga . Th e whol e institution may be move d there. 
«J A t Belcher, La. , the colored people 
have donated twelve acres of land as a 
site for an agricultura l school. 
f$ Thre e colored wome n have been reappointed by Governo r Hadle y of Missouri as members of the board of managers of the State Industria l School for 
Negr o Girls. Th e general assembly has 
appropriated $6,500 for purchasing necessary ground. 
G The colored schools of Washingto n 
sold S137 wort h of Re d Cross stamps. 
tj A t Norfolk , Va. , a new colored school 
building, to contain sixteen rooms and 
to cost S32.500, has been started. It 
wil l seat 800 pupils. 
<J Judge Pritchar d and Genera l Julian 
S. Carr have been speaking in the Nort h 
in support of the colored religious 
training school at Durham, N . C. 
<J Faustin S. Delaney, a colored teacher 
of Louisville , lately deceased, has left 
$500 to Wilberforc e Universit y toward 
maintaining a chair in the science 
department. 
<J Th e Secretary of the Interior, in his 
annual report, says of Howar d Uni ­
versity, among other things: 
"Th e science hall is well equipped for 
efficient wor k in the several departments 
of physics, chemistry and biology. Th e 
eager response of the student body to 
the new facilities offered is seen in the 
fact that more than 600 students are 
regularly instructed in these several 
branches, wit h practical laboratory wor k 
offered in each department of study. 
Instead of one professor and one 
instructor, wh o gave their entire time 
to the sciences, the wor k now requires 
three professors, one assistant professor, 
three regular instructors, and seven 
student assistants, givin g their time to 
the wor K of scientific instruction. 
"It has been often said that whil e colored students were proficient in the languages, history, etc., they showed no 
adaptation to the exact sciences. Bu t 
the eager response of this great body of 
colored students to the opportunities 
here for the first time offered in any 
large way for advanced laboratory wor k 
in the exact sciences, marks an era in 
the educational life of the Negr o race. 
Th e possible application of the practical 
instruction here received must have an 
important bearing on the future welfare 
of the race." 
<J Ne w Orleans has raised the wages of 
her white teachers, but refused to make 
any change in the salaries of the colored teachers. Th e average wages i n 
the State before the change were : 
Whites, $56.16 per month ; colored, 
$29.87. 
CHURCH . 
St. Thoma s Church , Philadelphia , the 
oldest colored Episcopa l church i n the 
Unite d States, and one of the oldest 
churches in the country, is about to sell 
its Twelft h Street property in Philadelphia, and move nearer the new centers 
of colored residence. 
«H Th e Rev. Lev i N . Powers, D . D. . of 
Haverhill , Mass., in a recent discussion 
of lynching , announced that "If a Negr o 
committed an atrocious crime against 
any member of my family I woul d go 
out and help lync h him. " 
«3 Th e Methodist Episcopa l Churc h is 
still discussing the question of erecting 
its colored membership in a separate 
and independent body. 
*J Thirt y years ago, i n the Lancaste r 
hills of Pennsylvania , lived a number 
of lawless gangs of white and colored 
desperadoes. Th e Rev. Melfor d H . 
Haggler, a colored preacher, settled 
among them, and, after years of hard 
work, has succeeded in transforming the 
character of the neighborhood. 
•5 Th e Catholic s of Atlanta , Ga., have 
purchased property on whic h they propose to erect a Negr o church. Indigna ­
tion is expressed by the neighboring 
white property owners and the bishop 
is being asked to withdraw. 
<| Th e committee of the Episcopa l 
council of South Carolin a has recommended a Negr o suffragan bishop. 
ECONOMICS . 
Th e Lo s Angele s Examine r publishes 
a letter from a porter, whic h says that 
Pullma n porters "must furnish the best 
references, keep neat and clean, be 
polite, and perform their duties faithfully. The y are held strictly responsible 
for shortage or losses of car equipment, 
such as blankets, pillows, bed linen, 
towels, combs, brushes, etc. Ever y 
month ninety per cent, of the 7,000 
porters have deducted from their wages 
from twenty-five cents to $1.50. Pull ­
man conductors get from $70 to $90 per 
month, according to seniority or time 
they have been in the service; but the 
porter, wh o has served from five to forty 
years, only received $25 per month, until 
last year, when their salaries were in ­
creased ten per cent., makin g $27.50 now. 
H e gets no credit for seniority, and 
receives no mor e pay or consideration 
than the new man wh o has only worke d 
a month. " ALONG THE COLOR LINE 187 
A South America n correspondent of 
the Richmon d Planet says: "Th e 
Negroe s were only freed in Brazi l in 
1888, and here yo u can find Negr o professors teaching white and black alike, 
Yo u can find Negroes filling all grades 
of office in the army and navy; yo u can 
find Negroes in all branches of politica l 
or public service from the president 
down to a commo n soldier or policeman 
or sailor. Yo u find here the Negroes 
are captains of ships, pilots, mates, 
engineers of both ships and trains, conductors, motormen, baggagemasters, ma ­
chinists and every other thing that they 
are capable of doing. " 
<| Th e large business interests of Atlant a 
are securing the enforcement of an 
obsolete law which taxes peddlers $50 
a year. It is drivin g the small colored 
peddlers out of business, and they are 
protesting against it. 
Q Th e Indianapolis Colore d Youn g 
Men's Christian Association has purchased a site for its building at a cost 
of $6,000. 
*J N . E . Barnes, a colored inventor of 
Willis, Tex., has invented a station 
indicator and an improved bulletin board 
for street cars. 
•J Lucia n Headen. a colored aviator o f 
Ne w York , has been awarded a gold 
medal and has patented an equalizer, 
whic h prevents airships from tilting 
when falling. 
PERSONAL . 
Davi d Hazleton , a veteran porter in 
the office of the president of the Baltimore & Ohi o Railroad, has recently died. 
H e entered the service of the railroad in 
1874, and for more than thirty years has 
been in charge of the official cars of the 
railroad's presidents. 
Durin g that time he crossed the continent hundreds of times in charge of 
special parties and wit h officials of the 
railroad. H e has ridden over practically every mile of railroad track in Nort h 
America , from the Isthmus of Panama 
to the northernmost lines in Canada. 
H e was six feet tall and made a striking 
appearance in his uniform of roya l blue 
trimme d in gold and cap slightly tilted. 
Hazleto n had charge of presidential 
parties from Genera l Grant down t o Mc -
Kinle y and Roosevelt. General Grant 
was numbered as one of his favorite 
guests. President Cleveland also frequently traveled wit h him. Whe n he 
started on his honeymoon he made a 
special request that Hazleto n be placed 
in charge of his car. 
ij Fred . S. Stone, a colored musician and 
composer, is dead. 
<] Miss Ida Lee , a colored girl of Ken ­
tucky, has received a bequest of $3,000 
for saving the life of a wealthy woman 
in a runaway in 1909. 
•J John Walker, a colored drayman, of 
Madison , Ga., has a bronze medal and 
$500 for saving the life of his employers 
in a runaway. 
<J Th e census shows that the oldest man 
in the country is an Indian Negr o of 
Colorado, known as Cherokee Bill . H e 
is reported to be 114 years of age and 
is wort h $80,000. 
• J In the January CRISIS we published 
the picture of Edwar d Wilmo t Blyden , 
the "Gran d Ol d Man " of West Africa . 
Dr. Blyde n died February 8 at the age 
of 79. H e had had many honors 
bestowed upon him. In 1863, after the 
publication of his wor k on Liberia , 
he received the honorary degree of 
A . M . from Hamilto n College . Lafayette 
College conferred the degree of D . D. 
upon him in 1870. and in 1874 he 
was made an LL . D . by Lincol n Uni ­
versity. In 1882 he was elected corresponding and honorary member of the 
Society of Sciences and Letters of Ben ­
gal, and he was also a member of the 
Athenaeum Clu b of London . 
*J Th e funeral of the late Bishop Gaines 
was a very elaborate service. There 
were seven bishops present and many 
distinguished ministers. H e was interred 
at Atlanta , Ga . 
»} Matthew A . Henso n is still lecturing 
on his trip to the Nort h Pole. H e 
recently appeared before the Negr o 
Society for Historica l Research at 
Yonkers. 
MEETINGS . 
President Joh n D . Hammond , of Paine 
College, Augusta , Ga., held a conference 
on "The Relation of the Negr o Problem 
to the Whit e People in the South. " 
Whe n it was announced that Dr. Ha -
mill, a Southern white pastor, woul d succeed the late George W . Walker, also a 
white man, as head of Payne Institute, 
for colored youths, in Augusta . Ga,, a 
portion of his congregation at the fashionable McKendre e Church, Nashville , 
Tenn., got up and filed out of the morning service. 
*J Mr . W . E . B. D u Bois has been lecturing in Ne w Englan d before the Twen ­
tieth Century Club of Boston, the 
People's Foru m of Braintree, and clubs 
at Newport, Providenc e and Brockton . 
<J A protest against lynchin g has been 
held in Faneuil Hall , Boston. One of 
the speakers, the Rev. R. C. Ransom, 18 8 THE CRISIS 
said: "Negroe s themselves are largely to 
blame for the contempt i n whic h - they 
are held and the impunit y wit h whic h 
their liberties and their lives may be 
invaded. Sheriffs, mayors, courts, governors wil l not take seriously the interests of a people wh o have lost or surrendered the right to retaliate or call 
them to account at the ballot box. Mob s 
do not quail when there is no fear that 
their wil d brutalities wil l be answered 
by a volley of bullets. 
"I am unwillingl y but slowl y comin g 
to the conclusion that the only way for 
the Negr o in particular, and the darkskinned people in general, to wi n and 
hold the respect of white people is to 
mete out to .them a white man's measure 
in all the relations of life. " 
ART . 
A very successful recital was given in 
Bosto n by Clarence Camero n White , 
violinist, and Mrs. Mau d Cune y Hare , 
pianist. O n the program was Bruch's 
"Concert o i n G Minor " and Coleridge 
Taylor's "Africa n Danc e No . 1." Mr . 
Rowlan d Haye s sang. 
•J I n the mont h of Decembe r the 
Wellingto n Musica l Unio n of Australi a 
gave their third subscription concert. 
Th e patrons were his excellency, the 
governor of Ne w Zealand, Lor d Isling ­
ton, and the right honorable, the premier, 
Sir Joseph G. Ward . 
Th e wor k performed was Gounod's 
"Faust " in "oratorio" form. Mr . Hamil ­
ton Hodges, baritone, of Aucklan d Ne w 
Zealand, sang the part of Mephistopheles. 
Accordin g to the reviewers, "Mr . 
Hodge s was quite the best of the 
soloists. H e gave a fine rendering of 
the role and was effective and convincing. " 
Mr . Hodge s is a colored American , 
having been born in Boston , Mass. Fo r 
many years he has made his home in 
Auckland , Ne w Zealand, where he main ­
tains a studio and engages in concert 
performances. Upo n his return last year 
from an extended visit to this country, 
he was warml y welcome d by the 
audiences, before who m he presented 
an exacting programme , singing groups 
of Italian, German , Frenc h and Englis h 
songs. Th e Ne w Zealand Heral d says 
of this singer: "Th e programme was 
one whic h no vocalist, unless absolutely 
certain of the fullest possession of his 
powers, would have had the temerity to 
present to a critica l audience—his singing entirely justified his self-confidence." 
<J A music-study club of Washington , 
D . C , has been organized. Its membership is composed of musicians wh o 
have studied the highe r forms of musi c 
composition and analysis. Its object is 
personal development. Mr . Henr y L . 
Grant is the secretary. 
<J O n January 26 the Washingto n Con ­
servatory of Music , Washington , D . C , 
gave the second of the series of artists' 
recitals, presenting the new director of 
the voca l department, Mr . Harr y A . 
Williams, tenor, wh o was assisted by 
Mr . Leonar d Jeter, violoncellist, and 
Mr . Henr y L . Grant, pianist. 
Mr . William s sang modern songs, in ­
cluding a group of Frenc h songs, and 
one of his own compositions, "If I Wer e 
King. " 
C| Illness prevented Lando n Ronal d 
from conducting the Ne w Symphon y 
Orchestr a at their recent concert given 
at Queen's Hall , London . Th e conducting was carried out by Sir Edwar d 
Elga r and Mr . Samue l Coleridge-Taylor, 
the latter directing Hayd n symphon y i n 
G and the orchestra l accompaniment to 
Saint-Saens' G mino r pianoforte concerto. 
<J Mr . S. Coleridge-Taylo r has lately 
been chosen conductor of the Stock Ex ­
change Orchestra l Society, and the first 
concert under his directorship was given 
Decembe r 7 at Queen's Hall . 
<J Mr . Harriso n Emanuel , violinist, gave 
a recital on January 29 at Kimbal l 
Hall , Chicago, 111. H e was assisted by 
Mrs. Mari e Burton-Hyram , soprano. 
Mr . Emanue l presented a very fine programme , whic h included Wieniawski's 
Concerto No . 2 and Kreisler's Capric e 
Viennous. 
<J Th e Roya l College of Music , London , 
Eng. , presented this season a successful 
and interesting novelty in the form of 
Mr . Dougla s Taylor's orchestral fantasy, 
"Uncl e Remus, " whic h was directed by 
the composer. "Uncl e Remus " stories 
are based upon traditiona l Negr o folklore, and the moo d of the piece shows 
the suggestion of the subject. 
<J Mr . George Chadwick's new symphonic suite was played on Februar y 2 
by Mr . Damrosch's orchestra for the 
first time in Ne w York . Th e Ne w Yor k 
Sun says of the work : "Th e salient characteristic of the entire composition is 
the frankness of its melodi c style. This 
suite betrays the awful fact that Mr . 
Chadwic k has been bitten by the 
Dvora k America n music insect. H e has 
not hesitated to writ e intellectual ragtime, such as the Bohemia n put into' 
his America n symphony . No r has the 
distinguished head of the Ne w Englan d 
Conservatory shrunk from openly imitating the melodi c line of the Negr o 
tunes. O n the whole , the composition is 
well made and well orchestrated." ALONG THE COLOR LINE 189 
CRIME . 
Since our last record there have been 
eight lynchings of colored people: 
A t Hamilton , Ga., three men and a 
girl were kille d for the alleged murder 
of a white man. Th e sheriff from whom 
the prisoners were taken is said to be 
the uncle of the dead man. One despatch 
says: 
"Hadle y was an unmarried planter, 
and it is said he was infatuated wit h the 
girl . Berth a Hathaway . H e had been 
pursuing the girl and had been warned 
to keep away from her. H e disregarded 
the warning, however, and Sunday afternoon went to the girl's home and tried to 
get her to come out wit h him. Whil e 
Hadle y was at the girl's home he was 
shot, but no one knows by whom. 
Henr y Anderson , one of the Negroes 
lynched, is said to have wanted to marry 
the girl, and it is possible that he shot 
the youn g planter. Th e first reports 
stated that Hadle y was kille d at his own 
house, but this was incorrect. Th e girl 
was twenty years old.!' 
A t Cordele , Ga., a colored man was 
lynched. H e was accused of felonious 
assault upon a white woman . 
I n Bessemer, Ala. , a colored man, 
accused of murder, was shot to death by 
Italians. 
I n Vidalia , Ga., a colored man was 
lynched for murder. Th e lynchers are 
said to have been Negroes. 
In Macon , Ga., a colored man, accused 
of assaulting and robbing a white woman, 
was lynched and his body burned. 
<J I n Hickman , Ky. , the poor whites are 
determined to run Negr o laborers away, 
whil e the rich planters are striving to 
preserve cheap labor. A short time ago 
two white men tried to kil l a Negro, but 
he succeeded in killin g them. Late r a 
group of white men shot two Negr o 
boys, woundin g them seriously. Ther e 
have been no arrests. 
<J Fifteen colored women have been 
kille d in Atlant a during the last year, and 
the guilty parties have not been found. 
<J A white schoolboy i n Indianapolis 
deliberately shot an eleven-year-old colored boy, wh o probably wil l not live. 
Ther e is some evidence of renewed 
effort at Coatesville i n ferreting out the 
lynchers after a period of quiescence. 
Thre e accused men are in jail and the 
attorney-general is asking for a change 
of venue. 
COURTS . 
A bil l has been introduced into the 
Marylan d Legislatur e against lynching, 
wit h severe penalties. 
<J Harr y Foste r Dean has been granted 
a judgment of $300 in his suit against 
the Chicago & Ne w Yor k Wester n Railway because he was refused admission 
to an elevator in the railroad station on 
account of his color. 
<J Th e Knights of Pythia s of Tennessee 
have succeeded in getting a final court 
decision, restraining the colored Knights 
of Pythia s from operating in the State. 
•J Th e Supreme Court of Louisian a has 
decided that the Negr o has a right to 
a seat in the portion of a car set aside 
for white people provided there is no 
space left in the colored portion of the 
car. Th e case was that of Joseph Anderson against the Ne w Orleans Railway s 
&: Ligh t Company. Anderso n was 
awarded $250 damages. 
<J A case of the greatest interest, involving the whole question of the color line, 
is being argued before the South 
Africa n Appea l Court, consisting of Lor d 
De Villiers, the chief justice, and the 
four other judges of appeal. Th e suit 
is brought by a European landowner, 
Mr . Moller, livin g in the Keimoe s district, in the northwest of Cape Colony . 
H e recently applied to the Cape Pro ­
vincia l Court for an order compelling 
the loca l school authorities to admit his 
two children to school. Th e contention 
is that Mr . Moller's wife is "off-colored," 
and on this account his children were 
expelled from school, owin g to the objections of the parents of other scholars. 
Th e judge in the Cape Provincia l Court 
refused the application. Mr . Molle r then 
appealed to the full bench of the Cape 
Provincia l division, and his appeal was 
dismissed. Th e matter now comes before the- highest tribunal in the land. 
«3 Attorneys Hawkin s & McMeche n wo n 
their first motion against the segregation 
ordinance of Baltimor e when they succeeded in blockin g a motion to interfere with a colored church whic h is on a 
"white " street. 
*J A banquet was tendered Captain 
Charles Youn g as he passed through 
Ne w Yor k on his way to Liberia . 
Eighteen men sat at table. Th e bill 
of fare was in the form of an army 
commission and the favors were swords. 
Amon g the after-dinner speakers were 
Bisho p Walters, Collector Anderso n and 
the guest of honor. Captain Youn g 
wil l have three commissioned officers 
under him in Liberia , and wil l have 
unusual powers of administration in 
formin g a constabulary. 
q Th e Y . W . C. A . of Philadelphia , after 
increasing its membership to 375 and 
raising funds sufficient to employ a secretary and pay all expenses for one 
year, has become a branch of the main 
association of that city and wil l be 
included in the $500,000 building campaign which is to be begun early next 
fall. ME N O F TH E 
MONT H 
A COMPOSER . 
Twic e this year a colored composer 
has led a white orchestra in a prominent 
Ne w Yor k playhouse. -In another land 
and in another age this woul d be but 
J . ROSAMON D JOHNSO N 
natural, for J. Rosamon d Johnson, notwithstanding his Negr o blood, is a composer whose music is know n everywhere. "Unde r the Bambo o Tree, " 
"Laz y Moon, " the "Cong o Lov e Song " 
—all these and many more songs are 
his. Johnson was born in Jacksonville , 
Fla. , in 1873; studied at the New Eng ­
land Conservatory of Music , and then 
came to Ne w York . H e has developed 
a new and distinct school of Negr o 
music, has written light opera for Kla w 
& Erlanger, songs for Ma y Irwin , 
Lillia n Russell and Ann a Held , and set 
Dunba r to rare music. His long partnership wit h the gifted Bo b Col e is 
well known . Al l things considered, he 
stands as the most versatile composer 
of colored Americ a and one of the 
striking musical geniuses of the land. 
TW O TEACHERS . 
W e present this mont h the pictures of 
two teachers, Harrie t E . Clifford and 
Bessie B. Bruington . Th e first was 
white and from Maine , in the extreme 
East. Th e second is colored and work s 
in the extreme West, California . 
Harrie t Clifford was a Ne w Englan d 
teacher, wh o gave her life to Negr o 
education in Georgi a and died of tuberculosis last summer. She was an accomplished musician, and gave the best 
years of her life to Atlant a University ; 
not simply as a teacher, but as the 
friend and companion of her hundreds 
of pupils. 
Miss Bruingto n is a graduate of the 
Lo s Angele s State Norma l School. In 
the examination for teachers she stood 
seventh in a total of 300 persons examined, and was appointed to teach in the 
Fifty-first Street public school. He r 
four fellow teachers are white and her 
pupils are of both races. 
MIS S BESSI E B. BRUINGTO N TH E LAT E DOCTO R SAL E 
TW O LOS T LEADERS . 
In the passing of Wesle y John Gaines, 
sixteenth bishop of the Africa n M . E . 
Church , the Negr o race has lost a 
strikin g and powerful figure. Bishop 
Gaines was a blood relative of Robert 
Toomb s and was born in slavery in 
1840. H e had no opportunity for education, but became a . shrewd leader, and 
latterly the most active constructive 
force in his church. 
In the same city with Bishop Gaines 
lived for many years Dr. George E . 
TH E LAT E BISHO P GAINE S 
Sale, as president of the Atlant a Baptist 
College and later as superintendent of 
Baptist institutions for colored people 
throughout the South. H e was a white 
Canadian, a friend of both races in the 
South, and far more successful than is 
usual in maintaining pleasant and helpful social relations with both. His premature death is a great loss to the 
statesmanship of the day. 
A PRIZ E • WINNER . 
R. W . Overton, a sixteen-year-old 
student of the Stuyvesant Hig h School, 
has recently won the long-distance 
record for model aeroplanes over twenty 
competitors from all the high schools of 
Greater Ne w Yor k and vicinity. 
TH E LAT E MIS S CLIFFOR D REGINAL D W . OVERTO N TH E TERRORISTS . 
Th e continued reign of the lynchin g 
terror has brought some strong editorials even in the South. Th e Galveston 
News says: "Really , the record furnished 
by the Tribune , noting the number of 
people murdered and the number of executions, reads like a grim and scandalous joke. Ther e is no other enlightened country i n whic h any such conditions woul d be deemed tolerable. Ou r 
scheme of preserving order and standin g up for the law woul d seem to be 
based upon a most vicious and insupportable pretense. Th e record proves 
that we as a people do not mean what 
we say; that we do not stand for law 
and order at all. " 
Th e Atlant a Constitution adds: "Al ­
most as if foreseeing the indefensible 
quadruple lynchin g near Hamilton , in 
Harris county, is the followin g comment 
from the Maco n Telegraph upon the 
evil eminence occupied by Georgi a wit h 
respect to mob violence : 
"'T o Georgi a belongs the uenviable 
distinction of contributing nineteen, or 
more than one-fourth, of the seventy-one 
lynching s in 1911. Such, at least, is 
the showin g of the figures collected by 
the Chicago Tribune , whic h performs 
this service every year, and readers of 
the daily dispatches are at any rate well 
aware that illega l executions i n this 
State during the past twelve months 
were shockingly frequent. * * * It 
is gratifying to kno w that in spite of 
the deplorable increase of lynching s in 
Georgia , there was a considerable falling 
off in the country as a whole. Th e total 
of seventy-one in 1911 was the smallest 
since the beginning of the record in 
1885, in whic h year there were 184. Th e 
largest total was 255 in 1892.' 
"Th e Constitution heartily agrees wit h 
the Telegraph that Georgia's record in 
this connection is 'deplorable.' Espe ­
cially aggravated is the instance in 
Harris county. Th e four Negroe s upon 
whom the mob wreaked its fury had 
been arrested and held merely as suspects. Proo f to convict had not been 
secured. Judge Pric e Gilbert, having 
jurisdiction over the circuit in whic h the 
crime was committed, had agreed to 
hold a special session of court to try 
the accused. Beyon d a doubt the 
accused woul d have been given fair 
trial, and, their guilt even reasonably 
established, lega l execution woul d 
quickly have followed. 
"Upo n top of the statistics indictin g 
Georgia , in face of the grotesque 
libels placarding this State i n the North ­
ern and foreign press, this exhibition of 
extra-legal vengeance can offer nothing 
of excuse or palliation. Eve n the crime 
that supplied the provocation was of 
such nature that testimony concerning 
it could have been presented in open 
court without embarrassment or censorship. 
"Nightmar e chapters like the Harris 
county affair are as so many blots upon 
the fair name of Georgia . Unti l they 
are met by stern rebuke from the controllin g sentiment of the State, we shall 
never rise to that development and that 
worl d esteem to whic h our resources 
and the innate respect for law of the 
majority of Georgians entitle us. 
"Th e hands of defense are tied when 
the wantonness of the deed is itself 
the accuser." 
Th e Savannah News adds: "Fo r shame, 
Georgians! This is not the wa y to treat 
people wh o are under our protection. 
Amon g the victims were two women, 
and we cannot be silent in the face of 
such a tragedy. W e cannot escape from 
the belief that the prompt and vigorous 
prosecution of all the Harris county 
murderers woul d be an incalculable benefit throughout the South. " 
Th e Talladeg a (Ala.) Reporte r calls 
the lynchin g at Bessemer: " A disgrace to 
the State, and another evidence that 
human life is too cheap, and that people 
must be taught that the penalty of murder is death. Th e State and country 
must arise in their might and put down 
such crimes, if it takes hanging to do it." 
Th e Wilmingto n (Del.) News declares 
that: "It is no worse for a Negr o to 
force his attentions upon a white girl 
than it is for a white man to force his 
attentions upon a Negr o girl . Ther e 
are good Negr o girls as wel l as good 
white girls. Ever y girl, no matter what 
may be her color or socia l standing, is 
the proper war d of all goo d men. Ther e 
was no warrant whatever for a Negr o 
to shoot and kil l the 'very popular' OPINION 193 
farmer. Tha t offence was murder. Ther e 
was no warrant for lynchin g the three 
Negr o men and the Negr o girl. Tha t 
crime was murder, emphasized at this 
time in view of the allegation that at 
least three of the party were innocent." 
Norther n papers are represented by 
the Philadelphi a Publi c Ledger, whic h 
says concerning Coatesville : "Despite 
the utmost endeavors of the authorities, the previous trials have been 
without effect, and the present step is 
an earnest effort by the prosecution to 
avail itself of the last chance to do justice. It is to be hoped that the Supreme 
Court wil l grant the petition and that 
the cases wil l be pushed wit h promptitude and vigor. It is quite futile for 
the white population of the Nort h to 
preach doctrines founded on morality 
and the necessity for conserving law 
and order to Negroe s just 'up from 
slavery' when at the same time the 
very heart of civilization displays a 
savagery that woul d disgrace Dahomey. 
* » * * * 
"It is all very well for American s to 
express horror at Russian brutality and 
barbarity, to evince amazement and disgust wit h Santo Dominica n or Haitie n 
cruelty and bloodthirstiness, or to pretend that Americ a has reached a plane 
so high that it may arrogate to ^itself a 
proud eminence in civilization ; but that 
is all vain glory as long as American s 
permit shocking acts of savagery, such 
as the Coatesville burning and the Baltimore lynching. " 
A new suggestion comes from a correspondent in the Weekl y Witness: 
"Sinc e President Taft has shown such 
a disposition to reform public evils, I 
woul d suggest to him that he send a 
message to Congress recommending that 
a law be enacted that a sum of money, 
ranging from $5,000 up to $15,000, be paid 
to the heirs of each and every person who 
has been lynched by a mob, the amount 
to be regulated according to the guiltiness or innocence of the person lynched; 
this money to be paid at once by the 
Federa l government, whic h shall collect 
it from the State in whic h the crime 
was perpetrated. Th e State is then to . 
collect the sum from the local municipality or from each and every individua l 
membe r of the guilty mob. " 
Th e Ne w Yor k Sun comments characteristically on the "Referendum in 
Wester n Georgia" : "Accordin g to the 
Sun's despatches from the scene of this 
notable referendum, at least two and 
probably three of the persons so neatly 
suspended and leaded were innocent; 
there is 'no convincin g evidence' against 
the fourth. 
"Asid e from cold considerations of evidence, how much more piquant and enjoyabl e participation in such a referendum must be than in a stupid case, where 
the crimina l is caught in the act and 
no demand is made upon the imagina ­
tion of the referees. Ho w can the 
referees be induced to take part in the 
hemp referendum if it is not made 
attractive?" 
Some Southern papers, however, draw 
other lessons. Th e Chattanooga Times, 
for instance: "Th e attention of colored leaders and educators is called 
to the story from Cordele, Ga., 
reciting the fiendish act of one of 
their race toward an unprotected 
white lady. W e know what the white 
people are going to do about it if 
they catch the offender, but what are 
the Negr o leaders and teachers going to 
do about it? It is about time they were 
givin g this question profound consideration. Th e whites have obviously made 
up their minds as to what they wil l do 
in all such cases." 
Th e Southwestern Christian Advocate , 
a colored paper, writes: "If the Southern 
white youth is not lawless, it wil l not 
be because they have not had sufficient 
encouragement to be. Ther e are open 
examples on every hand that make for 
disrespect of law and order and the 
demoralization of the youth of the South. 
"Recently we were on a train which 
was headed for the city of Ne w Orleans. 
W e boarded it about 2 a. m. In the 
car allotted to the colored people was 
a youn g white lad, not more than ten 
or twelve years of age. It was an open 
violation of the law, to start with, for 
him to be in this part of the train. But 
what difference did it make? La w was 
not made for him,' and he was learning 
the lesson. This lad had a cap pistol and 
was bursting caps every now and then, 
saying very audibly: 'I got him, I got 
him, I shot a Nigge r in the head.' H e 
woul d then load up his toy gun and fire 
away again at some supposed black man, 
who had not wronged him in the least, 
and repeat again: 'I got him, I got him, 
I shot a Nigge r in the head.' It turned 
out to be that this lad was the son of 
the conductor. A s soon as he had a 
chance, the conductor, who was the custodian of the law, came into the colored 
compartment, took a seat and deliberately 
began to smoke a cigar. In the coach 
there were colored women, neatly attired, 
calm in their demeanor, evidently women 
wh o had come out of good homes. Wha t 
did this conductor care? Wa s he not 
of a superior race, superior to law, superior to decent treatment of a humble 
folk? " 
A Southern white woma n writes in a 
Southern Georgi a paper, the Advocate : 
"Deepe r than physica l fear must the blow 
be struck. Loo k at the hordes of mulatto 
children swarmin g in the cities, the towns 
and even the country, and say how far 
is the white man responsible for conditions. If he stoops to the black man's 194 THE CRISIS 
woman , what then when the black man 
dares to lift lustful eyes to the white 
man's woman ? Can the Anglo-Saxo n 
exterminate the children of his own 
blood, half-breed though they be? 
" 'Le t him wh o is without a blemish 
cast the first stone.' " 
Her e is a new note in a Negr o paper, 
whic h perhaps answers the Southern 
lady : "It seems that a few weeks ago 
several white apple peddlers visited 
Boley, Okla. , and remained over night. 
One of the white men made himself very friendly and familiar after nightfall with several of Boley's Negr o citizens, and finally suggested that a colored 
girl be brought to entertain him. H e was 
promptly knocked down by the Negr o 
young men and thoroughly thrashed. H e 
ran from Bole y and took refuge at Oke -
mah, a white town nearby. H e got sympathy by telling the officers he had been 
beaten and robbed by Negroes at Boley. 
The white officers went to arrest the 
Boleyites and their treatment was magnified by the Okema h Ledger, a white 
journal, into a race riot." 
Th e colored paper, the Bole y Progress, 
says: "An y white gentleman who comes 
to Bole y wil l be given courteous treatment, whether he comes on business or 
sightseeing. 
"Th e citizens of Bole y realize that the 
white people of the country have helped 
them and are yet helping them, and we 
are not ingrates, neither are we all criminals, but we are not fools. 
"Th e low-down , insignificant night-riding jackasses, wh o seem to be a cross 
between a hyena and a coyote, and wh o 
would lynch a Negr o man in the daytime 
and woul d hunt for Negr o women at 
night, might as well understand that 
Bole y doesn't give a corrugated whoop 
in hell for their presence, and this atmosphere won't produce the woman they are 
lookin g for." 
••J Th e followin g communication may be 
a joke, but it is a grim one: 
"Whereas, the United States of 
Americ a is the only country in which 
human beings are burned at the stake; 
"And , whereas, the President of the 
Unite d States has thus far declined to 
use, in any way, the influence and 
power of his great office to suppress 
this horrible practice of primitive 
barbarism and savagery: 
"Be it, therefore, resolved, that the 
Cosmopolita n Society of Americ a petition, and it hereby does petition, His 
Imperia l Majesty, the Cza r of Russia, 
the organizer of the Hague Peace Con ­
ference, to use his good offices with 
the government at Washington , to urge 
upon the President and the Congress 
the human necessity of discouraging 
and suppressing, if need be, by federal 
legislation, the burnin g of men, women 
and children at the stake. 
"An d be it further resolved, that this 
resolution be forwarded to the Russian 
Ambassado r at Washington , and that a 
copy thereof be furnished the Associate d 
Press. " . 
WHE N THIEVE S FAL L OUT . 
Some interesting side lights on 
democracy in the South have come to 
hand. Th e Ne w Orleans Picayune publishes this broadside to reassure its 
supporters in a factional fight: 
WHITE Voters Will Be 
Guaranteed Full Rights 
in the Primaries 
La w Intende d t o Giv e FRANCHIS E 
t o EVER Y WHIT E MA N 
i n th e Stat e 
TH E GOVERNOR' S ANNOUNCEMEN T 
"Ne w Orleans, La. , Jan. 20, 1912. 
"A s there is a conflict between the 
attorney-general of the State and the 
district attorney of the Paris h of 
Orleans as to the law on the question 
of the right of voters to call for assistance in fixing their ballot, I desire to 
announce that, as governor of the State, 
I concur in the opinion of the attorneygeneral. 
"I kno w that the purpose of the registration sections of the constitution is 
to give the right of franchise to all 
white men in the State. 
" I kno w that the intention of the 
primary election law is to allow any 
white man to call for assistance if he 
desires same. 
"Th e general election law provides an 
emblem for the voter; the primar y law 
provides none; the general election law 
provides that only those suffering from 
physica l disability can ask for assistance; the primary election law specially omitted the words 'Physica l Disability,' and permits any voter, whether 
registered under the educational qualification or otherwise, to call for assistance, if he states that he is unable to 
fix his ballot. Th e voter is the sole 
judge of his ability to fix his ballot. " 
Th e August a Chronicle , in a similar 
factional fight, makes this unbelievable 
accusation against white voters: 
"Tha t hundreds, if not thousands, of 
dollars are being put up, by somebody, 
to pay the taxes of a certain element of 
voters in this community, for the purpose of votin g them against commission 
government, is being daily demonstrated. OPINION 195 
"It is being done so openly that any 
citizen may drop in at the court house 
and witness it for himself at any hour 
of the day. Th e 'heelers' are there wit h 
the money, and the taxes are being 
paid openly—shamelessly. 
"Now , the question naturally arises, 
wh o is so interested in the defeat, of 
commission government as to put up all 
this money—and why? " 
Th e Times-Despatc h of Richmond , 
Va. , completes this picture by showing 
the beneficent effect of disfranchisement 
on colored people: 
"Tha t the city council has not dealt 
fairly wit h the Negr o since his elimina ­
tion from politics was tacitly admitted 
by a special council committee last 
night, when it began a general discussion of the housing problems of the 
Negr o race, in their bearing, not only 
on health and morality, but their effect 
on the city generally. 
"Th e special committee was appointed 
as a result -of the passage last year of 
the segregation ordinance—an effort on 
the part of the council to prevent 
Negroe s from encroaching on Cla y 
Street. 
"Twent y or more of the representative leaders of the Negr o race appeared 
before the committee last night showing, that whil e annexations have been 
made in all directions, and large sections 
improved for the homes of white people, 
there has been no addition to the Negr o 
quarter of the city in a generation; 
that rows of houses have been standing 
in the city limits for forty years without 
water or sewerage; that there is neither 
curbing, paving nor street cleaning 
through the poorer sections; that contaminated wells are used by hundreds 
of families wh o are unable to secure city 
water, both because of the unwillingness 
of the city to extend its mains and because of the conduct of property owners 
and agents, who. even where such mains 
are provided, wil l not supply plumbin g 
for their properties until compelled to 
do so by the Boar d of Health. " 
Th e Housto n (Tex.) Post adds an 
illuminatin g wor d to this symposium, in 
a reference to President Taft's recent 
remark: "In Texa s we used to have 
liberal election laws, and the elections 
were participated in by most of the 
potential voters. It is not the case now. 
Th e poll-tax qualification, whic h was 
adopted principally to suppress the 
Negr o vote, has had the effect of barring 
two white men to every Negr o delinquent. Ther e are men in Texa s at the 
present time seeking a further suppression of the voters. A s the poll-tax 
qualification bars most of the Negroes, 
these additional 'safeguards' are intended 
to take the ballot away from white 
men. " 
HECKLIN G TH E HECKLERS . 
The president of the Nationa l American Woma n Suffrage Association is timid 
on the Negr o problem and thinks 
Negroes oppose woman's suffrage. Celi a 
Parke r Woolse y answers her in the 
Public : "W e are told that 'all Negroes 
are opposed to woman suffrage,' an 
astonishing statement, which wil l not 
bear examination, I have worked with 
and among colored people for many 
years. In the institution with which I 
am connected, the Frederick Douglass 
Center, the subject of woma n suffrage 
is a familiar and welcome theme. Suffrage meetings have been held in our 
assembly room, where the subject was 
discussed by white and black. I have 
yet to hear a serious argument on the 
negative side from a colored speaker. 
"Th e feeling of the most thoughtful 
Negroes on this subject is one that does 
equal credit to heart and understanding. 'I know what disfranchisement 
means,' said one of these in my hearing. 
'I have suffered from it, my race suffers from it still. I should be ashamed 
to impose such a wron g on any other 
class.' Compar e this to the rallyin g 
cry, 'D o not touch the Negr o problem!' 
"It may be well in this connection to 
tell the story of one of Miss Anthony's 
very early visits to Chicago, her first, I 
believe. She had come in the hope of 
securing a chance to speak her gospel 
word. Churc h after church was solicited 
from the white clergy and invariably 
refused. It so happened that the friend 
with whom Miss Anthon y was stopping 
lived near the color district and was on 
friendly terms with her dusky-skinned 
neighbors. She called on the pastor 
of Quin n Chapel, the oldest and largest 
colored church in the city, whose use 
was promptly granted. Thus, it was 
from a colored pulpit, and in the main to 
a colored audience, that our Susan addressed her first argument in the city 
of the lakes. 
"Woma n suffrage has no more loyal 
friend than Frederick Douglass. Doubtless he injured himself in many more 
cautious minds by thus openly allyin g 
himself with a cause which was in those 
days far more unpopular than the black 
man's. Di d anyone say to him, 'Le t 
the woma n question alone?' One can 
easily imagine the reply he would have 
made, he who said: 'I know no race 
problem; there is a human problem.' 
His last public act was to attend a meeting of the Nationa l Association, where 
Miss Anthon y spoke words of gratitude 
and praise to him, pinning a flower in 
his buttonhole. H e went to his home, 
and an hour later was dead." 196 THE CRISIS 
This reminds us of a little correspondence of our own, whic h we subjoin: 
"Chairman , Resolutions Committee , 
"Nationa l America n Woma n Suffrage 
Association , 
"Louisville , Kentucky . 
"Wil l yo u submit the followin g resolution to the convention for consideration : 
"Resolved , that the wome n wh o are 
tryin g to lift themselves out of the class 
of the disfranchised, the class of the 
insane and criminal, express their sympathv wit h the black men and wome n 
wh o are fighting the same battle and 
recognize that it is as unjust and as 
undemocratic to disfranchise human 
beings on the ground of color as on 
the ground of sex. 
'•'(Signed) MARTH A GRUENING. " 
"M y dear Dr. D u Bois: 
" I am requested to convey to yo u a 
message that in the opinion of the 
majority of the resolutions committee at 
the recent convention of our association 
in Louisville , it was not deemed advisable to include the resolution presented 
by your association among those to be 
presented to the convention. 
"Yours very truly, 
"(Signed) MAR Y WAR E DENNETT , 
"Correspondin g Secretary. " 
A prominent suffragist adds: 
"I cannot let the occasion go by with ­
out at least givin g myself the satisfaction of saying how very much I regret 
the action of the resolutions committee 
and that I am especially sorry that the 
matter did not come up at all so that 
any one outside the resolutions committee could even express an opinion on 
the subject whil e the convention was in 
session. I earnestly hope that a. simila r 
resolution wil l be presented at next 
year's convention, and that those of us 
who care about the subject can have 
the privilege of doing our best to put 
it through. " 
"A STRANGE R AN D Y E TOO K M E 
NO T IN." 
Th e Literar y Digest gives much space 
in its columns to a quotation from " A 
Blac k Man's Appea l to His Whit e 
Brothers, " by Dr. R. S. Lovingood , 
president of Samuel Housto n College , 
at Austin , Tex . H e writes: 
" I was in a Norther n city recently. I 
was a stranger. I was hungry. Ther e 
was food, food on every hand. I had 
money, arid finally I was compelled to 
feast on a box of crackers and a piece 
of cheese. I did not ask to eat wit h 
the white people, but I did ask to eat. 
" I was traveling. I got off at a station almost starved. I begged the keeper 
of a restaurant to sell me a lunch in a 
paper and hand it out of the window. 
H e refused, and I was compelled to 
ride a hundred mile s farther before I 
could get a sandwich. 
" I was in a white church on official 
-business. It was a cold, blowin g day, 
raining, sleeting, freezing. War m lunch 
was served in the basement to my whit e 
brothers. I could not sit in the corner 
of that church and eat a sandwich. I 
had to go nearly two miles i n the howlin g winds and sleet to get a lunch. 
" I have seen in the South whit e and 
black workingme n elbowin g each other, 
eating their lunches at noon and smoking the pipe of peace. Worldl y men give 
me a welcome in their stores. Th e Gov ­
ernment post office serves me without 
discrimination. But not so in that 
church run in the name of Jesus. 
" I could not- help but feel that Jesus, 
too, like me, an unwelcome visitor, was 
shivering in the cold, and could not find 
a place in that inn, and was saying : 
'I was an hungered and ye gave me no 
meat. I was thirsty and yo u gave me 
no drink.' Fo r Jesus was not an Anglo -
Saxon . 
" I went to a station to purchase my 
ticket. I was there thirty minutes before 
the ticket office was opened. Whe n the 
ticket office opened I at once appeared 
at the window. Whil e the agent served 
the white people at the other side I 
remained there beating the window until 
the train pulled out. I was compelled to 
jump on the train without my ticket and 
wir e back to have my trunk expressed 
to me. Considerin g the temper of the 
people, the separate-coach law may be 
the wisest plan for the conditions in the 
South, but the statement of 'equal accommodations' is all bosh and twaddle. 
I pay the same money, but I cannot 
have a chair car, or lavatory, and rarely 
a through car. I must crawl out all 
through the night in all kinds of weather 
and catche another dirty 'Jim Crow ' 
coach. This is not a request to ride wit h 
white people. It is a request for justice, 
for 'equal accommodations' for the 
same money. I made an attempt to 
purchase some cheap land in a frontier 
section. Th e agent told me that the 
settlers, most of who m were Northern ­
ers, woul d not tolerate a Negr o in 
that section. So I could not purchase it. 
I protest. 
" I rode through a small town in 
Southern Illinois. Whe n the train 
stopped I went to the car steps to take 
a view of the country. This is what 
greeted me : 'Loo k here, darkey, don't 
get off at this station.' I put my head 
out of the window at a certain small 
village in Texas, whose reputation was 
well know n to me. This greeted me : 
'Tak e your head back, nigger, or we 
wil l knoc k it off.' " EDITORIA L 
DIVIN E RIGHT . 
WE would like to know what 
rights the white people of 
this land are going to be 
able to retain? Step by step their 
dearest and most cherished prerogatives are being invaded, and TH E 
CRISIS wants to say right here and 
now that it does not countenance 
oppression of the downtrodden whites 
by arrogant black folk. A few years 
ago the right to kick a darky off the 
sidewalk was unquestioned in the most 
devout circles, and yet to-day they 
actually complain at being called by 
their front names. 
Everybody knows that for three 
hundred years the most jealously 
guarded right of white men in this 
land and others has been the right 
to seduce black women without legal, 
social or moral penalty. Man y white 
mothers and daughters of the best 
families have helped to maintain this 
ancient and honored custom by loading the victims of their fathers' and 
husbands' lust with every epithet of 
insult and degradation. Thus has the 
sweet cleanness of their own race 
virtue shone holier and higher. 
Ye t what do we see to-day? The 
black husbands and brothers are 
beginning to revolt. In three separate cases, in three consecutive 
months and in three localities of the 
southern South have these blind and 
ignorant fellows actually killed white 
men who were demanding these 
ancient rights, and have compelled 
the chivalry o f the land to rise and 
lynch the black defenders of defenceless virtue; also two strangely illogical black women have been simultaneously killed and a dark and whimpering little girl burned to a quivering 
crisp. 
Wha t does all this mean ? Does 
it portend an unthinkable time when 
the white man can only get his rights 
by lynching impudent black husbands 
and squeamish sweethearts? If so, 
then, by the Great Jehovah, we can 
depend on the best friends of the 
Negro to vindicate the ancient liberties of this land! Anglo-Saxon freedom seems safe at least in the hands 
of most leaders of Southern society, 
not to mention the blue blood of 
Pennsylvania. 
Meantime, dear colored brethren, 
we confess to the error of our ways. 
We have steadfastly opposed lynching 
on all occasions, but the South is converting us. W e acknowledge our 
fault. Hereafter we humbly pray that 
every man, black or white, who is 
anxious to defend women, will be 
willing to be lynched for his faith. 
Le t black men especially kill lecherous white invaders of their homes and 
then take their lynching gladly like 
men. 
It's worth it! 
OPTIMIS T AN D PESSIMIST. 
FEW people from without understand the inner currents of the 
darker world. Should they be 
told our "optimists" are largely pessimists, while our "pessimists" are 
optimists, many would be mystified. 
Ye t this is true. There is a large class 
of professional colored optimists. 
They are not optimists because they 
believe 
" God's in His heaven, 
All's right with the world. " 
O n the contrary, believing that the 
battle for Negro manhood in the 
United States is practically lost, they 
are whispering "Sauve qui peut" and 
"Spoil the Egyptians," and other The Drama in Colored America: 
198 THE CRISIS MARCH. 1912 
I. Atlanta University Students in "Twelfth Night' 
199 20 0 THE CRISIS 
phrase s indicativ e o f the fact that, not 
bein g able to wi n the greate r battle, 
they are goin g to get wha t the y ca n 
out o f the defeat. Amon g the accessible remain s ar e charit y an d offices. 
T o get charit y an d offices the influenc e 
o f whit e folk s is necessary. This in ­
fluence ca n best be gaine d b y a cheerful , sunn y attitude . It is, therefore , 
commo n amon g us to see a ma n wh o 
ha s not the slightest fait h i n the whit e 
race, o r i n the eventua l triump h o f 
justic e amon g men , tur n fro m his 
fran k counsels o f despair mad e to us 
to "Good-morning , sir ! Yes , sir ; al l 
is well ! If w e folk s d o ou r duty , 
sir, we kno w you'l l d o yours, sir ! 
Than k you , sir, " an d he pockets his 
substantia l check , remarking , "Opti ­
mis m pays! " 
O n the othe r hand , ther e is the 
colore d pessimist. H e is i n realit y 
n o pessimist at all . H e is a n optimist. H e believe s i n men , whit e an d 
black . H e believe s i n justice . H e 
says firmly: "Th e worl d that has con ­
quere d slaver y an d despotism ca n 
conque r wa r an d race prejudice. " H e 
insists that the ke y to this victor y is 
the Truth . He , therefore , insists o n 
the Truth , that the Trut h ma y make ' 
us free. H e finds himself greeted b y 
frown s an d shrugs. Hi s hearers are 
mad e uncomfortabl e by lynchin g statistic s an d figures; they shrin k at the 
burde n blac k fol k bear; they winc e 
at accusations o f prejudic e an d in ­
justice , an d whe n at last he demand s 
not alms but a friend , they shriek , 
"Socia l equality, " an d scampe r away , 
warnin g the worl d against this anarchisti c pessimist. Bu t he's n o pessimist. H e is so optimisti c that he even 
believe s i n these runaway s an d run s 
afte r them wit h the Truth . 
LEE . 
IN a recent revie w o f Mr . Thoma s 
Nelso n Page's lif e o f Rober t E . 
Le e i n the Ne w Yor k Time s we 
find the followin g sentence : "O f al l 
the figures i n history , it is he (Lee ) 
wh o most nearl y approache s Washing ­
to n ; i n fact, there is littl e o r nothin g 
to choos e between them except the fact 
that Le e failed. " 
Thi s statement is wort h notin g becaus e it expresse s a sentimen t no t 
uncommo n to-day . Her e ar e tw o gen ­
erals, bot h wel l born , scrupulousl y hon ­
orable , brav e an d efficient. Th e onl y 
differenc e betwee n the m is that one 
wa s victorious, whil e the othe r wa s 
oblige d i n the en d to surrender. On e 
won , the othe r lost ; tha t is all . 
I n Memoria l Hall , at Harvar d 
University , ar e the name s o f the col ­
lege graduate s wh o fel l i n battl e fo r 
the cause o f the Union . Agai n an d 
agai n has come the deman d tha t wit h 
these name s ther e be place d the 
name s o f the graduate s wh o fel l 
defendin g the Confederacy . Bot h 
wer e brav e youths, the argumen t goes, 
bot h fough t unselfishly . Wh y not 
giv e hono r to both , sinc e they onl y 
differe d i n that one lost an d the othe r 
wo n i n battle ? 
Now , wha t is the significanc e o f 
this doctrin e whic h man y American s 
believe shoul d be preache d i n litera ­
tur e an d histor y an d o n the walls o f 
a nobl e buildin g erected i n memor y 
o f the heroi c dead ? This, that i f the 
youth s wh o g o fort h int o the world , 
fight honorably ; i f they bea r defeat 
bravely , it makes no difference what 
side they take in the battle. The y 
ma y fight fo r the righ t o f the indi ­
vidua l to contro l the natura l resource s 
o f the earth, to destro y the forests, 
to impoveris h the land , o r they ma y 
fight fo r the conservatio n o f suc h 
resources; n o matter, so tha t the y 
fight well . Lik e Washington , their 
choic e ma y be to lea d the arm y o f 
republicanism, o r lik e Lee , they ma y 
choos e to lea d the aristocrac y to 
battle fo r the righ t o f one ma n to 
hol d anothe r as his chattel ; the wisdo m o f their choic e is o f n o importance ; "ther e is littl e o r nothin g to 
choos e betwee n the two; " bot h ar e 
singularl y alike , bot h ar e worth y o f 
equa l praise . 
A t this time o f year, whe n w e celebrat e the birthday s o f ou r tw o most 
famou s Americans, let us denounc e 
this philosoph y i n n o uncertai n terms. 
Th e choic e that a ma n make s is his 
life . Th e present crisis faces ever y 
youthfu l spirit, an d lif e fo r hi m is a EDITORIAL 201 
failur e o r a success as he choose s 
"'the goo d o r evi l side; " the side o f 
spiritual , huma n progress, o r the side 
o f material , bruta l enslavement. N o 
sentimen t ca n keep aliv e fo r lon g the 
name s o f those, howeve r honorable , 
wh o chose to fight wit h the force s o f 
darkness. I f they live , they liv e i n 
opprobrium . Washingto n live s an d 
Lincol n live s because each, at the 
crisis o f his life , chose the side o f 
progress an d civilization . Lincol n 
saw the "irrepressibl e conflict " an d 
stood fo r freedom ; otherwis e he 
woul d be as great a nonentit y as his 
rival , Stephe n A . Douglas. Washing ­
to n live s becaus e he believe d that 
taxatio n withou t representation wa s 
tyranny ; otherwis e he woul d have 
been forgotte n like—bu t wh o remembers the name o f one o f the gentle ­
me n wh o dre w their sword s fo r Kin g 
George ? 
HOMES . 
THE injustic e towar d colore d 
peopl e wh o wan t decent livin g 
condition s is almost unbeliev ­
able unless one come s face to face 
wit h the facts. Th e Ne w Yor k Times, 
whic h spares few opportunitie s to treat 
blac k fol k unjustly , says i n a n editoria l : 
"It is becomin g necessary i n the up ­
pe r resident part o f Ne w Yor k fo r 
the propert y owners i n neighborhood s 
to ente r int o agreements to prohibit 
the occupanc y o f their dwelling s by 
Negroes. This departur e is not due 
to race prejudic e o r hatre d fo r the 
Negr o but fo r the protectio n o f the 
neighborhoo d value s against designin g 
o r ugl y whit e men. " 
No t a wor d fo r the colore d famil y 
seekin g a decent home ; but i f that 
famil y liv e i n the slums an d purlieu s 
an d let the surrounding s teach their 
childre n crim e an d prostitution , then 
the hol y horro r o f the Time s an d its 
ilk ! I f blac k fol k rus h fo r decent 
home s at exorbitan t rents is there 
sense o r decency i n tryin g to stop this 
by franti c appeals to race prejudice ? 
I n othe r an d perfectl y paralle l cases 
the propert y owne r suffers the inevitable withou t though t o f appea l to 
huma n hatred . If propert y i n Fift h 
Avenu e become s mor e valuabl e fo r 
business tha n fo r dwelling s then the 
dwelling s must go. If peopl e indulg e 
i n senseless prejudic e against their 
A NEGR O HOM E I N TEXA S 20 2 THE CRISIS 
fellows an d fin d real-estate me n coin ­
in g this prejudic e int o gold , they hav e 
no righ t to blame the unhapp y victims 
o f their barbarism, but they must 
blame that barbaris m misname d race 
pride . 
A SOUTHER N NORTHERNER . 
M y Dea r Sir : 
I HAV E rea d carefull y the clippin g 
that yo u hav e sent me dealin g wit h 
the assault upo n a whit e woma n 
b y a Negro . It is needless to say that 
ever y norma l huma n bein g wh o reads 
o f suc h a n atrociou s crime must cr y 
ou t i n horro r an d condem n the crim e 
i n unmeasure d terms. Th e blac k 
crimina l wh o commits a crime o f this 
kin d is doubl y a crimina l i n that he 
not onl y injure s his victims but his 
entir e race. Unlik e a whit e man , a 
Negro's sins are ascribe d to his race, 
an d are sai d to be characteristi c o f 
his race. W e have frequent cases o f 
rape by whit e me n to dea l wit h i n 
Ne w Yor k Cit y an d i n ou r Norther n 
rura l communities, but someho w o r 
othe r we seldom hea r them spoke n o f 
as whit e fiends, no r has it eve r been 
foun d necessary to resort to lynchin g 
as a cur e fo r these fiends. Wit h all 
respect fo r you r poin t o f vie w as a 
Norther n ma n resident i n the South", 
an d you r belie f that unless "the fear 
o f lynchin g is hel d befor e these blac k 
fiends' ' suc h crime s "woul d be repeated constantl y i n the South, " we 
cannot believe that mo b murde r is a 
remed y fo r anythin g or even a deterrent. Latel y they have even been lynch ­
in g colore d wome n i n the South—i n 
Georgia , i n Oklahoma , i n Tennessee -
yet bestia l crime s such as yo u describe 
an d such as has recently happene d at 
Cordele , Ga. . take place. Doe s lynchin g 
eve r act as a deterrent against crime , 
whethe r the crimina l be blac k o r 
white , or does it help criminals to con ­
tro l their anima l passions ? A few 
years ago I spent some time i n a 
count v i n Alabam a whic h ha d ha d a 
recor d fo r lynching , beginnin g wit h a 
burning . Th e whit e sheriff himself 
tol d me how , afterwards, the Iynch ­
ings got so frequent o n an y excus e 
that he foun d it necessary to send to 
the chai n gan g a numbe r o f whit e me n 
wh o wer e thus dealin g out "justice " 
to the Negro . Th e Spanis h Inquisi ­
tio n wen t ou r America n lynching s on e 
better. The y inflicte d mor e torture s 
tha n eve n ou r America n mobs; bu t 
wa s it successfu l i n stoppin g wha t the 
Churc h o f Rom e deems heresy ? I f 
yo u hav e studie d the histor y o f Eng ­
lan d yo u wil l kno w tha t at the ver y 
time the severest punishments wer e i n 
vogu e ther e wa s mor e crim e tha n at 
an y othe r perio d i n its history . 
Th e simpl e fact remain s tha t lynch ­
in g cure s nothing , an d does incalcu ­
labl e har m because it make s a mur ­
dere r o f ever y ma n participatin g i n the 
mo b an d starts the bloo d lust agoin g 
i n the heart o f ever y perso n wh o participate s i n the crim e o r watche s it. 
This ma y be a subconsciou s influence , 
but it is there none the less, an d I 
woul d cal l you r attentio n to the fact 
that nowher e else i n the worl d is this 
procedur e tolerate d save i n this socalle d Christia n an d civilize d country , 
althoug h the crime o f rape is know n 
i n ever y countr y an d i n ever y age. 
Yo u speak o f the Negr o as bein g 
lazy , careless, indifferent, shiftless an d 
give n to theft ; no w i f this is the case, 
afte r fifty years o f managemen t o f the 
black s i n the Sout h by the whit e people, woul d it not seem to be wort h 
whil e to ask, i n a purel y scientific 
spirit, i f the polic y i n vogu e whic h 
has produce d these results ough t not 
to be change d fo r one whic h woul d 
recogniz e the self-respec t o f the colore d peopl e an d gran t them greate r 
social, industria l an d politica l freedom 
tha n they no w enjoy ? It is easy to 
say that the Negr o has faile d i n the 
Sout h sinc e emancipation , but is it not 
time to ask whethe r the whit e masters 
o f his destin y hav e not also failed ? 
W e woul d not hav e yo u misunderstan d ou r position . W e have the 
greatest sympath y fo r both white s an d 
black s i n the difficult an d tryin g positio n i n whic h they find themselves. 
Ou r realizatio n o f that has created ou r 
association , whic h desire s to hel p one 
rac e quit e as muc h as the other. 
Ver y truly . 
(Signed ) OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD . Th e fourth annual conference of the 
Nationa l Assoc iatio n for the Advance ­
ment of Colore d People wil l be held in 
Chicago, beginning Apri l 28 and continuing three days. This was determined at a meeting held at Hul l Hous e 
on January 15, at which time a committee on organization was formed, with 
Mr . Robert McMurd y as chairman. A t 
a subsequent meeting held at Hul l Hous e 
on January 27, the committee on organization adopted the followin g plan of 
arrangement: 
Th e conference shall be in charge of 
a general committee, to whic h all other 
committees shall report; to consist of 
the chairmen of all other committees; 
to have powe r to add to its membership. Such committee shall co-operate 
with the Nationa l Association. 
Th e honorary chairman of the general 
committee shall be Miss Jane Addams. 
The active chairman of the general committee shall be selected by the committee from its own membership, or 
otherwise. Th e secretary of the general 
committee may be a paid officer. 
Headquarters shall be provided in the 
Loop . v 
Ther e shall be a finance committee, 
chairman not named; a press committee, 
chairman, Mr . Charles T. Hallinan ; 
reception committee, chairman, Mrs. Ida 
Wells Barnett: committee on halls and 
speakers, chairman. Dr. Charles E . 
Bentley: entertainment committee, chairman. Miss S. P. Breckenridge ; advisory 
committee, chairman, Mrs. Celi a Parke r 
Woolley . 
Th e secretary and treasurer shall be 
Mr . T. W . Allinson . 
Wit h present information, Sunday, 
Apri l 28, is recommended as the openin g day of the assembly, provided that 
the speakers can be secured on the 
basis of that date. Sunday evening is 
recommended for the opening event, and 
it is further recommended that, as far 
as it can be brought about, all the pulpits 
of Chicago on that day take up the 
subject of lynching ; also, to that end, 
that a pamphlet on the subject be issued 
by the association to be used by the 
ministers in preparing their sermons. 
Th e impetus to the Chicago conference was given by Mr . Oswal d Garrison Villard , wh o spent January 11 in 
that city. Mr . Villar d was the guest 
of honor at a luncheon given by Mr. 
Julius Rosenwald and Miss Jane 
Addams, and attended by many prominent publicists and educators. Th e Cit y 
Club of Chicago entertained him at 
dinner, and he was the principa l speaker 
at a meeting held in the interests of the 
Nationa l Association in Hande l Hall . 
Commentin g on Mr. Villard's "sincere and powerful addresses" at these 
meetings, the Chicago Heral d said in 
part: 
"T o hear Mr . Villar d was to sympa ­
thize with .him and indorse his position 
fully. Th e association stands primarily 
for truth and knowledge, for simple justice to the colored population, for defense to the protection against lynchin g 
and outrage. The association renders 
legal aid to poor or threatened Negroes; 
it investigates and gives the public the 
real facts in cases of actual or supposed 
Negr o crime ; it enforces the law or sees 
that the authorities enforce it. 
"There is not a city of any size in the 
country which does not need a branch 
of this association. Th e branches should 
have their legal-aid features and should 
be liberally supported by men and 
women who really believe in the prin ­
ciples of the America n Republic . It 
cannot be doubted that such activities 
and education as the association is carryin g on wil l in the course of time 
change the whole atmosphere in the 
communities where the Negr o cannot 
obtain elementary justice or due process 
of law. " 
At a public meeting in Boston, 
on February 8, addressed by Prof. 
Spingarn of Ne w York , Mr . Moorfield 
Storey presiding, there was formed a 
branch of the Nationa l Association, with 
the followin g officers: 
President, Mr . Francis J. Garrison ; 
secretary, Mr . Butle r R. Wilson : 
treasurer, Mr . George G. Garrison ; members of the executive committee, Miss 
Mari a L . Baldwin . Dr. Horac e Bum -
stead, Mr . Joseph P. Loud , Mrs. Joseph 
P. Loud , Miss Adelene Moffat, Air. 
Clement G. Morgan . 
Th e Boston branch adopted a constitution, endorsed by the Nationa l Associa ­
tion, whic h should stand as a model 20 4 THE CRISIS 
for other branches and whic h may be 
obtained by application at the Ne w Yor k 
office. 
H Mr . Willia m Pickens, professor of 
Lati n at Talladega College , and a member of the advisory board of the 
Nationa l Associatio n for the Advance ­
ment of Colore d People, gave an admirable talk in Ne w Yor k at Bethe l Church , 
on Sunday afternoon, January 14. 
*I O n Lincoln's Birthda y the Ne w Yor k 
branch held a meeting at St. James' 
Presbyterian Church . Amon g the 
speakers were Judge Robert H . Terrel l 
of Washington , Dr. Joh n Lovejo y Elliot t 
of the Ethica l Culture School, Ne w 
York , and many prominent colored men 
of Ne w York . Th e subject discussed 
was "Th e Problem of Race Prejudice 
and Ho w to Comba t It." Prof. Spingarn 
presided. 
q Th e N . A . A . C. P. and the Ne w Yor k 
branch have now a flying squadron, a 
band of youn g wome n wh o have organized to help the wor k in Ne w Yor k 
and to help it quickly. Th e colored 
churches and societies of Greater Ne w 
Yor k are divided among them and can 
be swiftly circularized. Thre e of the 
members do circularizin g in Ne w Jersey. Th e members of the flying squadron usher at meetings, and they are now 
makin g plans for a benefit performance 
to be given in April . Eac h of the twenty 
members of the squadron is a "captain" 
and is gathering about her a group to 
aid in the work . Th e executive head is 
'Miss Dor a Cole , and the secretary Miss 
Lurlin e Saunders. 
•I Th e last piece of association news is 
one of the pleasantest and most encouraging TH E CRISIS has ever had to recount. 
Fo r some time it has been apparent 
that if the association was to do farreaching constructive work, if it hoped 
to attack the larger phases of segregation, lawlessness or disfranchisement, it 
must have a fund at its disposal. Such 
a fund should be called a fund for legal 
redress and its money should be appropriated under the direction of the board 
of directors and" the association's attorney. Mr . Julius Rosenwald, of Chicago, 
started this fund on Februar y 1 
by a gift of $2,000. Shortl y afterward, Mr . Samuel Fels, of Philadelphia , 
augmented it- by a gift of $500. This 
splendid beginning wil l make it possible 
for the association during the comin g 
year to carry on a much greater mass of 
important wor k than before, always providin g that it increases steadily in 
members. 
Forty-One persons joined the association in January, 1912, payin g $161 in 
memberships. 
<I Th e secretary of the association spoke 
in Detroit on January 18 before what it 
is hoped wil l soon be a new branch of 
the N . A . A . C. P . He r audience con ­
sisted of a group of twenty-five colored 
men, wh o have formed themselves into 
a vigilanc e committee and are combating with marked success the discrimina ­
tion whic h has crept into their city. 
Detroit has always stood for justice and 
liberality to the Negro , but recently 
the caste feeling that manifests itself 
in annoyin g ways in the Norther n cities 
has attempted to get a foothold in 
Detroit. Th e Detroit Negroes, however, have taken this at the beginning 
and have stopped discrimination on 
excursion boats, in parks, at moving -
picture shows, soda-water fountains and 
restaurants. I n this they have been 
aided by some of the best white lawyers 
in the city and by a strong civil-rights 
law upon the statute books. Th e wisdom displayed by the Detroit colored 
men in attacking race prejudice at its 
beginning cannot be too much commended. 
«J Throughou t the country colored men 
and colored organizations have been 
active in protesting against the appointment of Judge Hoo k to the Supreme 
Court of the Unite d States. Th e 
Nationa l Associatio n for the Advance ­
ment of Colore d People , through its 
membership, sent nearly a hundred letters of protest to the President, and 
on Februar y 6, by order of its board 
of directors, dispatched the followin g 
night telegram: 
"T o the President of the Unite d States: 
"Th e Nationa l Associatio n for the 
Advancemen t of Colore d Peopl e respectfully protests against the elevation 
of Judge Willia m C. Hoo k to the 
Supreme Court bench. 
"W e base our protest on his concurrence, without .expressed opinion of his 
own, in the case of McCab e vs. Atchi ­
son, Topek a & Santa F e Railroad , 186 
Fed., 966; not alone because that decision gave the sanction of law to a dreadful injustice to colored citizens, but because it did not deal wit h the principles 
involved in this decision wit h the constructive grasp whic h we have a right 
to expect from a judge of first rank. 
'"The opinion did not wor k out any 
principle of constitutional law, but, on 
the. contrary, established a precedent not 
only unjust and at variance wit h the law 
of the land, but one lackin g i n the 
principle of humanity. ' 
In reply to this telegram, the following letter was received at the office of 
the association: 
"T o Mr . Oswal d Garriso n Villard . 
"M y Dea r Sir: 
"Th e telegram of Februar y 6, signed 
by yo u and other members of the 
Nationa l Associatio n for the Advance -A FEDERAL REMEDY FOR LYNCHING 20 5 
ment of Colore d People, protesting 
against the appointment of Judge Hoo k 
to the Unite d States Supreme Court, has 
been received and promptl y brought to 
the attention of the President. 
"Ver y truly yours, 
"CHARLE S D . HILLES , 
"Secretary to the President." 
O n Februar y 8 the press announced 
the withdrawa l of Judge Hook's name, 
owin g to the opposition on the part of 
the colored citizens of the Unite d 
States. 
<J O n January 23 the vigilanc e committee of the Ne w Yor k branch wo n an 
important victor y in the conviction of 
Harr y A . Levy , assistant treasurer of 
the Lyri c Theatre, for refusing on Octo ­
ber 13, 1911, to permit a colored man, 
Louis F . Baldwin , and his companion 
to occupy orchestra seats. 
Th e case was a crimina l one and was 
decided by three judges of the Court of 
Special Sessions. Baldwin's testimony 
showed that he had purchased two 
orchestra tickets and, then, on the night 
of the performance, entered the theatre 
accompanied by a colored woma n and 
was turned back by the usher to whom 
he showed his seat stubs. This usher 
directed him to the box office. A t the 
bo x office Baldwi n found Levy , wh o told 
him that it was not the custom of the 
house to allow colored persons to sit in 
the orchestra, but that he could give 
him front-row balcony seats, or woul d 
return his money. Baldwi n refused both 
offers and left the theatre. 
Th e youn g woma n wh o accompanied 
Baldwin , gave corroborative testimony. 
Lev y and several of the employees of 
the house, including the manager, denied 
that there was any rule prohibiting 
Negroe s from sitting in any part of the 
house. "Hav e yo u ever refused any person admission to your theatre for the 
reason of color? " the manager was 
finally asked. 
"No , sir," was the answer. 
A t this point the prosecution called 
Prof. Spingarn, but some legal question 
was raised and he was barred as a witness in the case. Th e defendant having 
been proved guilty, the prosecution again 
asked that Prof. Spingarn be permitted 
to make a statement. This was granted, 
and Prof. Spingarn told how, several 
weeks after Mr . Baldwin's experience, 
having a desire to test the truth of it, 
he had gone personally to the Lyri c 
Theatre and asked for two orchestra 
seats, mentioning to the man in the box 
office that he desired to brin g a colored 
man wit h him and hoped that no objection woul d be made. 
" I am sorry,' the man in the box office 
said to me," Prof. Spingarn concluded, 
" 'but I cannot give yo u orchestra seats 
then. W e do not permit Negroe s to sit 
in the orchestra.' " 
Th e sentence imposed was a fine of 
$50. 
Th e success of the Baldwi n case was 
primaril y due to the energy and persistence of Mr . Gilchrist Stewart, chairman of the Ne w Yor k Vigilanc e Com ­
mittee, wh o first called it to the attention of the Distric t Attorney, and carried on the wor k despite many delays 
and disappointments. Credit is also due 
to Mr . Charles H . Studin, whose legal 
services, gratuitously given, were all the 
more valuable because of his former experience in the Distric t Attorney's office. 
District-Attorne y Whitma n took a personal interest in the case, whic h was 
ably conducted by two of his assistants, 
Mr . MacDouga l in the Magistrate's Court 
and Mr . James Smit h in the Court of 
Special Sessions. 
A Federal Remedy for Lynching 
By the Honorable ALBER T E . PILLSBURY , formerly Attorney-General 
of the State of Massachusetts 
[Reprinted by special permission from the Harvar d La w Review, Vol . XV. , No . 9.] 
Ha s the Unite d States powe r to protect the lives of its citizens, or the lives 
of resident aliens to whom it owes protection, against mob violence withi n the 
States, if the States fail to protect them? 
Probabl y a majority of public men and 
constitutional lawyers, "under prepossession of some abstract theory of the relations between the State and national 
governments, " as Mr . Justice Bradley 
once said in the Supreme Court, 1 wil l 
incline to answer this question offhand in the negative. 
A n offhand answer is not enough. 
Th e progress of mob law in many of 
• Ex parte Siebold, 100 U . S. 371, 383. 
the States invites, if it does not compel, 
a serious inquiry into the constitutional 
question of federal power to put an end 
to it. This is not a sectional question, 
nor is it to be approached in a narrow 
or sectional spirit. -The fact that the 
victims of lynchin g are usually of the 
colored race does not limit the importance or the object of the inquiry. It is 
not a race question, but one which affects 
the integrity of the government. Lync h 
law is actual and concrete anarchy; the 
one complete form in which anarchism 
appears in our midst. Th e Unite d States 
cannot afford to tolerate it within the 
national domain if the powe r of preven-20 6 THE CRISIS 
tion exists. It is idle to denounce 
anarchism in the abstract, or to punish 
by special laws the killin g of Presidents 
or other officers of government by anarchists, in a community where there is no 
system of laws adequate to protect the 
life of any and every person against mob 
violence. 
Th e demoralizing effect of lynchin g 
upon the public mora l sense is enough 
to compe l attention to the subject, if 
there were no other reason for it. The 
practice is steadily increasing, by 
methods of progressive barbarity. Whe n 
Hos e was burned at the stake in New ­
man some ten years ago, a cry of 
indignation went up from press and 
people in all parts of the country. 
Burnin g alive was comparatively a novelty, even in Judge Lynch's code of 
punishments. Since that occurrence 
many lynching s have been perpetrated 
by burning, and they have excited hardly 
a wor d of public comment. Such statistics as have been collected, probably not 
full nor entirely accurate, indicate that 
there were more murders by mob vio ­
lence within the States during the last 
year than in any year before, and that 
in but about one-tenth of these cases 
was there even a charge of the peculiar 
crime to which lynchin g is sometimes 
considered especially appropriate. 
A s a legal or politica l question, the 
character or degree of guilt on the part 
of the victim of the mob cannot enter 
into it. If the guiltier man is lynched 
to-day, the less guilty may be to-morrow, and the innocent man the next 
day. In fact, a substantial proportion 
of the victims are innocent of any 
offence. A mob cannot be trusted to 
determine this question, and often makes 
no attempt to determine it. It is less 
revolting if the mob kills the perpetrator of a heinous crime than if it 
kills for a trivia l offence or no offence 
at all. But one case involves as much 
danger to the politica l system as the 
other. N o civilized community can suffer vengeance to be wreaked or penalties to be visited upon any person by 
lawless violence. The possible consequences of tolerating such a practice do 
not need even to be suggested. 
It is not agreeable to reflect that 
lynching , as the Chinese minister has 
pointedly reminded us, is peculiarly an 
America n custom. It does not, and 
could not, exist under any other government in the worl d having any pretensions to be called civilized. Not in 
Spain, Russia, or even Turkey , are men 
and women burned at the stake by 
mobs, with or without charges of crime. 
Th e America n States enjoy a complete 
monopol y of this distinction. Th e 
weight of public sentiment in every State 
undoubtedly is against it. The better 
element of the people in every State 
woul d prevent it. Bu t for one reason or 
another the States do not prevent it, 
and it has generally been supposed that 
the federal government has no powe r 
to interfere. 
A bill some time ago was introduced in 
each house of Congress, designed to 
afford to citizens federal protection 
against lynching , in default of protection 
by the States.
 2 I n substance it provides, in section 1, that the putting to 
death of a citizen of the Unite d States 
by a mob in default of protection of 
such citizen by the State or its officers, 
shall be deemed a denial to the citizen 
by the State of the equal protection of 
the laws, and a violation of the peace 
of, and an offence against, the Unite d 
States; in section 2, that every person 
participating in such mob shall be 
deemed guilty of murde r and subject to 
prosecution therefor in the federal 
courts; in section 3, that the county in 
which a lynchin g occurs shall be subject 
to a pecuniary forfeiture, to be recovered by action prosecuted by and in the 
name of the Unite d States; in section 4, 
that State peace officers wh o omit all 
reasonable efforts to prevent a lynching , 
and prosecuting officers wh o omit all 
reasonable efforts to brin g the offenders 
to justice under the laws of the State, 
shall be deemed guilty of an offence 
against the Unite d States and be liable 
to prosecution and punishment therefor 
in the federal courts; and in section 5, 
that State officers having the custody of 
citizens of the Unite d States charged 
with crime, wh o suffer them to be taken 
from their custody by mobs for the 
purpose of lynching , shall be deemed 
guilty of an offence against the Unite d 
States and be liable to federal prosecution and punishment. Section 6 provides 
for the exclusion from juries, in such 
cases, of all persons whose character, 
conduct or opinions are such as to disqualify them, in the judgment of the 
court, lo r the impartial trial of the issue. 
Inquiry into the constitutional grounds 
for the exercise of such a power by 
the Unite d States may begin by taking 
an analogous case. Th e Unite d States, 
by international law and by treaty obligations, owes to foreign governments a 
duty of protecting their subjects resident 
withi n the States. So highl y is this duty 
regarded by the law of nations that 
breach of it may be casus belli. Withi n 
fifteen years, to go back no farther, 
the Unite d States has several times been 
called to account for the killin g of 
foreign subjects by mobs withi n the 
States; although the practice of the State 
Department has been, for prudential reasons, to disclaim any direct responsibility 
for these outrages. 
Ca n it be doubted that the Unite d 
States, having this duty of protection, 
and being answerable to the worl d for 
:
 57th Congress, 1st Session, Senate No . 1117, House No . 4572. A FEDERAL REMEDY FOR LYNCHING 20 7 
its performance, has powe r to perform 
it? Ther e can be but one answer to this 
question. 3 Whateve r preconceived notions may have been, whatever the practice of the government may be, the 
powers of the Unite d States are necessarily co-extensive with its lawful obligations. Wher e there is a recognized duty, 
there must be governmenta l power adequate to its discharge. An y other rule 
woul d make the government a name of 
reproach. 
Th e early theory that the Unite d 
States has no police power, so-called, or 
powe r to protect life or punish crimes 
of violence withi n the States, is already 
superseded by judicia l decision. It is 
now determined by the highest authority 
that the Unite d States has such power, 
when a federal right or duty is invaded 
or involved. This principle is neither 
new nor startling, though modern applications of it have attracted attention. 
Fo r example, it is now held that the 
Unite d States, by the hand of its marshal, may lawfully kil l one wh o assaults 
a federal judge traveling through a 
State in the course of his duty, and that 
the State cannot hold the marshal to 
account for such killing; 4 and that the 
Unite d States may punish, as for murder, 
one wh o kills a prisoner in the custody 
of a federal officer within a State. 5 Th e 
principle is that the persons so assailed 
are withi n the peace of the Unite d States; 
that the Unite d States owes them the 
duty of protection; and that the power 
of protection follows upon the duty. ' 
Th e equality clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendmen t forbids the States to deny 
to any person withi n their jurisdiction 
the equal protection of the laws. This 
clause is judicially held to confer immu ­
nity from any discrimination, as a federal 
right. Th e protection which the State 
extends to one person must be extended 
to all. It does not forbid discrimina ­
tion merely in the makin g of laws, 
but in the equal protection whic h 
the laws are designed to afford. 
Forbiddin g the State to deny equal protection is equivalent to requiring the 
State to provide it. Equa l protection is 
withheld if a State fails to provide it, 
and the guaranteed immunit y is infringed. 
Th e constitutional requirement may be 
violated by acts of omission, no less 
than by acts of commission. Th e omission of the proper officers of the State 
to furnish equal protection, in any case, 
is the omission of the State itself, since 
the State can act only by its officers. 0 
It woul d seem to follow that when a 
by a lawless mob, in default of the protection which the State is bound to provide for all alike, there is a denial of 
equal protection by the State, in the sense 
of the equality clause, which Congress 
may prevent or punish by legislation 
applying to any individuals who participate in or contribute to it, directly or 
indirectly. 
Th e citizenship clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, by express declaration, creates and confers citizenship of 
the Unite d States, as a federal right, 
upon all wh o are born or naturalized 
withi n and are subject to its jurisdiction. Formerly , citizenship of the Unite d 
States within the States was understood 
to follow only from State citizenship. 
The Fourteenth Amendmen t directly reversed the conditions. Citizenship of the 
United States is now the primary right 
and status, proceeding directly from the 
federal government; .while State citizenship is secondary and derivative from it. 
This effected a change in the relations 
between the Unite d States and its citizens whic h has received little direct judicial consideration. The power to protect 
the lives of its citizens or subjects is an 
inherent power of every government. It 
was never doubted that the Unite d States 
has this power, as a powe r necessarily 
implied, and may exercise it throughout 
the worl d outside the States. It is now 
judicially established, as above noted, 
that it may exercise such power within 
the States, for the vindication of federal 
rights or duties. The duty of a government to protect the lives of its citizens is 
correlative wit h the power. Th e citizen 
is entitled, as of right, to claim such 
protection. If the Unite d States cannot, 
exercise this power to its full exent 
within the States, it can be for no other 
reason than that it is reserved to the 
States, or to the people. In creating 
citizenship of the Unite d States by the 
Fourteenth Amendment, there is no express reservation of this power. Th e 
established rule of constitutional construction now is that the Unite d States 
has the powers commonl y incidental to 
sovereignty except the powers expressly denied or reserved to the States 
or people, and all implied powers properly incidental to the powers granted. 
The Fourteenth Amendmen t expressly 
authorizes Congress to enforce its provisions by appropriate legislation. Such 
legislation cannot, indeed, extend to 
establishing a complete code of laws. 
It must be limited to correction of the 
particular mischief resulting from vio ­
lation of the amendment. Legislation 
citizen or other person is put to death 
•Se e Baldwin v. Franks. 120 U . S. 678, 683. 
'In re Neagle, 135 U . S. 1. 
•Loga n v. United States, 144 U . S. 263. 
•Tenn . v. Davis, 100 U . S. 257, 266: Strauder v. W . Va. , 100 U . S. 303, 306, 310; Va . v 
Rives, 100 U . S. 313, 318; Ex parte Va. , 100 U . S. 339, 345; U . S. v. Harris, 106 U . S. 629, 639 
Civil Rights Cases, 109 U . S., 3, 13, 23, Ex parte Yarbrough, 110 U . S. 651, 660, et seq.; Yick W o v 
Hopkins, 118 U . S. 356, 373; Baldwin v. Franks, 120 U . S. 683 and (Harlan, J.) 700; In re Coy 
127 U . S. 731;' Carter v. Texas, 177 U . S. 442, 447. 20 8 THE CRISIS 
to protect citizens in their lives against 
mob violence, i n default of such protection by the States, apparently goes no 
farther than to correct the mischief resulting from the default. 
It is now held that there is, i n legal 
contemplation, a peace of the Unite d 
States, existing withi n and throughout 
the States. It seems to be judiciall y 
regarded as comprehending at least the 
existence, exercise and undisturbed enjoyment of the rights derived from or 
under the Unite d States. 7 If this can 
be taken as established, it woul d seem 
to follow that citizens of the Unite d 
States, whatever may be said of other 
persons, are entitled to live in its peace, 
and to have it preserved for the protection of their lives. If the Unite d States 
can legislate directly for the preservation of its peace withi n the States, the 
pending bil l appears to be withi n its 
powers. If the powe r and duty to preHON . ALBER T E . PILLSBUR Y 
serve the peace of the Unite d States 
withi n the States belong solely to the 
States, whic h it may not be wholl y safe 
to concede, and whic h seems to be inconsistent wit h principles already established, the failure of the States to preserve it is a breach of duty toward the 
Unite d States. In this view it may be 
contended that the Unite d States has 
powe r to deal wit h such a breach as 
an offence against itself, on the part of 
all individuals wh o contribute to it, 
directly or indirectly. 
Th e Unite d States has, as all governments have, a politica l and legal interest in the lives of its citizens. If it has 
not full powe r to protect them i n their 
lives, withi n the States as it has elsewhere, it can be, as already observed, 
only because that duty rests solely upon 
the States. If so, it is a duty owed to 
the Unite d States, as wel l as to individua l citizens. It woul d seem that 
open and notorious neglect or omission 
of this duty on the part of a State, bysuffering lawless mobs to murde r citizens for want of legal protection, may 
be declared an offence against the Unite d 
States, and if so, that the Unite d States 
may punish all persons wh o contribute 
to it. 
It may be said that if the Unite d 
States has powe r to protect the lives 
of its citizens withi n the States, it must 
have powe r to protect their other personal and property rights, and so to 
supersede State laws by a system of 
federal legislation, whic h is impossible. 
This does not follow. Ther e is no 
doubt that so far as the express provisions -of the Fourteenth Amendmen t 
extend, federal legislation for its enforcement may extend, whatever the 
consequences. Fo r example, if a State 
should omit to enact any legislation for 
the protection of a certain class of citizens against crimes of violence, forbidding and punishing such crimes only 
when committed against the other class 
or classes, it can hardly be doubted that 
Congress, under the enforcement clause, 
may supply the omission by direct legislation, or may perhaps annul the whol e 
system of discriminatin g laws, leaving 
the State to provide others whic h wil l 
conform to the requirement of equality. 
Th e consequences of the failure of a 
State to enforce laws made for protection against violence are no less disastrous to the unprotected class than 
the failure of the State to make any 
such laws'. It is difficult to perceive wh y 
the powe r and the duty of Congress to 
interfere, under the enforcement clause, 
are not as clear in the one case as in 
the other. 
Apart from the Fourteenth Amend ­
ment, it may well be that the Unite d 
States owes its citizens protection in 
their lives whil e not owin g them a complete system of laws for the protection 
of all personal and property rights, and 
that its powe r is coextensive wit h its 
duty, but extends no farther. 
Withou t attempting an exhaustive in ­
quiry into this delicate and difficult subject, it can safely be assumed that preconceived opinions are not conclusive of 
the question. In view of express constitutional provisions, and in the present 
state of judicia l decision, the existence 
or non-existence of this powe r in the 
federal government can be determined 
only by submitting a statute to the test 
of judicia l examination. 
' Ex parte Siebold, 100 U. S. 371; 394; In re Neagle, supra; Logan v, U . S., supra. COLORE D ME N LYNCHE D WITH ­
OU T TRIAL . 
1899. 
1900. 
1901. 
1902. 
1903. 
1904. 
1905. 
1906. 
1907. 
1908. 
1909. 
1910. 
1911. 
84 
107 
107 
86 
S6 
83 
61 
64 
60 
93 
73 
65 
63 
1885 78 
1886 71 
1887 80 
1888 95 
1889 95 
1890 90 
1891 121 
1892 155 
1893 154 
1894 134 
1895 112 
1896 80 
1897 122 
1898 102 
Tota l 1,521 
Th e alleged causes for 1911 were: 
Murde r 36 
Rape 7 
Attempte d rape 7 
Insulting women 4 
Assault to kil l 3 
"Prejudice " 2 
"Suspected rape" 1 
Threats 1 
"Desperado" 1 
Robber y 1 
63 
W e give the figures above from the 
Chicag o Tribune . TH E CRISIS believes 
that at least 100 colored people were 
lynched during the year 1911, and, therefore, we shall, in 1912, keep a careful 
list ourselves. 
<J Pal m Beach, Fla. , Februar y 3, 1912. 
Dea r : 
I am sending yo u a card, which so 
aroused me until I purchased the entire 
supply, wit h the purpose of enlisting 
you r aid in preventing the publication 
of such cards. I don't know how to 
begin this work, but with the co-operation of such men as you, we must 
accomplish something. Trustin g yo u 
wil l give this card and the letter serious consideration, I beg to remain, 
Ver y truly yours, 
A part of the card is reproduced here. 
It is printed in colors and marked 
"Mad e in Germany, No . 28,293, by the 
H . L . Co. " 
<J A large number of Negroes are being 
arrested as vagrants. A letter in the 
Savannah Tribun e asks: "Is it because 
there are no loafers among the other 
races? O r is it on account of the explicit order from the chief of police to 
arrest Negroe s only? A week or ten 
days ago 108 able-bodied men were arrested and detained in the barracks on 
suspicion—men who are workin g every 
day, or at least whenever an opportunity 
for wor k is offered. Th e 'milk in the 
cocoanut' is that the farmers want cotton pickers at starvation price and worst 
treatment, and at the same time there 
will be races with automobiles very soon 
—convict labor as opposed to free labor 
is required to further the money-makin g 
scheme of a body of enterprising citizens. Wh y not lease some of these convicts to the M . & M . T. Co . or O. S. 
So. Co. ? Th e county has no more in ­
terest in automobile races than handling 
of freight by the companies named. Mr . 
Editor, I believe the police department 
could find a number of white loiterers 
"whenever they are instructed to look up 
such." 
'LYNCHED* ' 21 0 THE CRISIS 
HISTORIC DAY S IN MARC H 
1. Sumner's Civi l "Rights Bil l signed, 
1875. 
2. Missouri Compromis e passed, 
. 1820. 
3. Freedmen's Bureau established, 
1865. • 
4. James Forten , Negr o anti-slavery 
worker, died, 1842. 
5. Crispus Attuck s fell in the Bosto n 
Massacre, 1770. 
7. Danie l Webster's 7th of Marc h 
Speech, 1850. 
8. Frederic k Douglass advocated an 
industrial college for the education of 
Negroes, 1853. 
9. Massachusetts ratified Fifteenth 
Amendment, 1869. 
12. Charles Sumner spoke against 
annexation of San Domingo , 1871. 
13. Unio n armies forbidden to return 
fugitive slaves, 1862. 
14. Meneli k became Negus of Abyssinia, 1889. 
15. President Lincol n urged the ballot "for some of the colored people," 
1864. 
17. Th e Republi c of Texa s prohibited 
Africa n slave trade, 1836. 
20. Ne w Yor k legalized enlistment of 
Negroes, Wa r of Revolution , 1781. 
23. Slavery abolished in Port o Rico , 
1873. 
24. Negr o troops mustered into Con ­
federate service, 1865. 
25. Britis h Parliament abolishes slave 
trade, 1807. 
26. Richar d Allen , first bishop of 
Africa n M . E . Church , died, 1831. 
28. Frenc h Nationa l Assembl y gave 
suffrage to free persons of color in 
San Domingo , 1790. 
29. Napoleon issued decree against 
slave trade, 1815. 
30. Thoma s Clarkson , Englis h abolitionist, born, 1760. 
Special message of President Grant on 
the ratification of the Fifteenth Amend ­
ment: 
"To the Senate and House of Representatives: 
"It is unusual to notify the two 
houses of Congress, by message, of the 
promulgation by proclamation of the 
Secretary of State, of the ratification of 
a constitutional amendment. In view, 
however, of the vast importance of the 
Fifteenth Amendmen t to the Constitu ­
tion, this day declared a part of that 
renewed instrument, I deem a departure 
from the usual custom justifiable. A 
measure which makes at once four millions of people voters, wh o were heretofore declared by the highest tribunal 
in the land not citizens of the Unite d 
States, nor eligible to become so ("with 
the assertion that, 'at the time of the 
Declaration of Independence, the opinion was fixed and universa l i n the civilized portion of the white race, regarded 
as an axiom in morals as wel l as in 
politics, that black men had no rights 
whic h the white man was bound to respect'), is indeed a measure of grander 
importance than any other one act of 
the kin d from the foundation of our free 
government to the present day. 
"Institutions like ours, in whic h all 
power is derived directly from the 
people, must depend mainl y upon their 
intelligence, patriotism and industry. I 
call the attention, therefore, of the 
newly enfranchised race to the importance of their striving in every honorable 
manner to make themselves worth y of 
their new 'privilege . T o the race more 
favored heretofore by our laws I would 
say, withhol d no legal privilege of advancement to the new citizen. Th e 
framers of our Constitution firmly believed that a Republica n government 
could not endure without intelligence 
and education generally diffused among 
the people. Th e 'Fathe r of His Country ' 
in his farewell address, used this language: 'Promot e then, as a matter of 
primary importance, institutions for the 
general diffusion of knowledge . In proportion as the structure of the government gives force to public opinion, it 
is essential that public opinion should 
be enlightened.' In his first annual 
message to Congress the same views 
are forcibly presented, and are again 
urged in his eighth message. 
"I repeat that the adoption of the Fifteenth Amendmen t to the Constitution 
completes the greatest civil change and 
constitutes the most important event 
that has occurred since the nation came 
into life. Th e change wil l be beneficial 
in proportion to the heed that is. given 
to the urgent recommendation of Wash ­
ington. If these recommendations were 
important then, wit h a population of 
but a few millions, how much more 
important now, wit h a population of 
forty millions, and increasing in a rapid 
ratio? 
"I would, therefore, call upon Con ­
gress to take all the means withi n their 
constitutional powers to promote and 
encourage popular education throughout 
the country, and upon the people everywhere to see to it that all wh o possess 
and exercise politica l rights shall have 
the opportunity to acquire the knowledge whic h wil l make their share in 
the government a blessing and not a 
danger. B y such means only can the 
benefits contemplated by this amendment to the Constitution be secured." 
L. M . HERSHAW . Conducted by JESSIE FAUSE T 
'O n the New-time Negro. " Mar y Whit e 
Ovingto n in the Century for January. 
1912. 
This is a sympathetic drawin g of a 
parallel between the old and the new 
Negro. Miss Ovingto n shows that it 
is only fair to suppose that the loyalty, 
the gentleness, the love for service, 
whic h were found in the Negr o in 
slavery times, are still to be found in 
him to-day. Onl y now they are turned 
toward his own race. Ar e his qualities then less admirable? 
"Th e Upbuildin g of Blac k Durham. 
N . C. " W . E . B. D u Bois, in The 
World's Wor k for January, 1912. 
Her e is an interesting account— 
hopeful and sane—dealing with the 
phenomenon of an ambitious, successful and tolerated group of Negroes in 
a Southern city. Her e one may rind a 
colored insurance company, a hosiery 
mill, a planing mil l and even a small 
bank, run, it is true, under "rather 
lenient banking laws." A number of 
citizens have built themselves comfortable homes, but there is no display—the only item of unusual expenditure is the sending of children 
away to school. But what a significant 
item! 
Most important of all, Durham is 
in the South and these people are only 
a few Negroes in the midst of many 
whites. Th e attitude of the latter, 
however, has not only been in a few 
cases actively helpful, but is, in the 
main, passively tolerant. The Negro 
has been given a chance. Surely this 
is the solution. 
Flowe r o' the Peach. " Perciva l Gib ­
bon. Th e Century- Co. 
So much that is favorable has been 
said of this book that it is unnecessary to dwell any further on its 
merits here. The significant thing is 
that at last a dispassionate presentation of color-prejudice—its baselessness and its shamefulness —has found 
its way into modern literature. And . 
behold! the book sells. 
O f course, there is the inevitable 
love-motif, but one is much more 
interested in the adventures of the 
Kaffir It is he who holds our interest next to and almost along with 
Miss Harding . Hardl y anyone can 
fail to wish that his path may be 
finally made straight. In a • word, 
whether Mr . Gibbon, who is very 
discreet, means it or not. the book 
comes as near having a black hero as 
HOSIER Y MIL L I N DURHAM , N . C. 21 2 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
$5 to $10 A Day 
One Good Hustling Agent Wanted 
in every community to take orders for 
our celebrate d made-to-measure 
clothes. You make big profits—$2.00 to 
$7.00 on every suit. _ Write us before 
we get an agent in your territory 
and you will receive an astonishing offer. No money, no experience necessary. 
WE START YOU FREE 
We furnish you with everything and place you in a business 
of your own that will mean 
from $1,500 to $3 ,00 0 a 
year to you. Easiest and 
most profitable business 
In the world. Everyman 
in your vicinity a possible 
customer. Our low prices 
and able assistance 
get the trade for you. 
5 0 
UP 
We Prepay Express 
4* ' Every garment cut 
and made to measure in latest city style, perfect fit 
guaranteed. Money refunded if goods are not satisfactory. Beautiful Sample Outfit, order blanks, 
tape line, FREE. With our complete instructions you 
can take measurements as accurately as any tailor. 
Write for your territory and outfit today. 
THE PROGRESS TAILORING CO., 185 Harrison Street, Chicago 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.0 0 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
To Colored People 
F
O B SALE—W e have houses from $1,000 to 
$30,000. Ou r city is the capital of Ohio 
and a great manufacturing center—plenty of 
work, a good place to locate for business. Can 
sell you a house for $50, $100 to $500 down, 
balance like rent. Fo r investment and speculating houses or business places, $1,000 to 
$5,000 down, balance on long time payment. 
Far m land prices from $1 000 to $10,000 np. 
An y of these are in good locations. Writ e for 
further information. 
THI S IS A COLORE D ENTERPRIS E 
EDWARD A. SHANKLIN 
Rea l Estat e 
1218 1/2 Mt. Verno n Ave . Columbus, Ohio 
a white heroine. It is an interesting 
book from cover to cover, and must 
have made mor e than one reader 
ashamed of his prejudice. On e ponders what wil l be the ultimate effect 
of books like this. Perhaps—but then 
it is a far cry from South Afric a to 
America . 
<J "I n 1689 the Spanish Crow n granted 
this pueblo a 'league' of land surroundin g their church, comprisin g 
17,368 acres. Th e title of this was 
confirmed by Ac t of Congress, De ­
cember 22, 1858, and is still held by the 
Indians, except some small tracts that 
they have sold from time to time, and 
some huge tracts that they have been 
juggled out of through the maladministration of the Unite d States Indian 
officials in Ne w Mexico . O f this, about 
eight thousand acres were stolen from 
the Indians in one deal. Eightee n years 
ago one Smit h induced the Santa Clar a 
Indians to sign what they supposed to 
be a right of way for a road through 
the land. Whe n the paper turned up 
for record, in later years, it prove d to be 
a deed to all of the Puebl o lands east 
of the Ri o Grande River, comprisin g 
about eight thousand acres. Smit h 
transferred the land to one Hobart, wh o 
claimed to be an 'innocent purchaser.' 
O n account of protests, Judge Willia m 
H . Pope , as attorney for the Indians, 
filed suit to set aside the deed. But 
Judge Pope was transferred to the Phil ­
ippines, and A . J. Abbot t was appointed 
as attorney for the Puebl o Indians in his 
stead. 
"Bu t A . J. Abbot t was the attorney 
for Hobart in the 8,000-acre land deal. 
This appointment was made under the 
administration of Clinto n J. Crandall, 
the present Indian Superintendent at 
Santa Fe . 
"Tha t suit for the Indians was allowed 
to go by default under Crandall's administration of affairs. 
"Fo r seven years the Santa Clar a Indians have clamored for the reopening 
of the suit. It was not until the complaints began to become public that 
F . S. Wilson , the present attorney for 
the Pueblo Indians, woul d consent to 
apply for the reopening of the case. 
An d when he did 'reopen' it be forgot 
to set up the only grounds upon which 
he could reasonably hope to win—the 
ground of 'fraud.' "—Fro m the "Stor y of 
Juan Cruz, " by Willia m E . Johnson. 
The Rev. Willia m Hayne Leavell, 
D . D. , LL . D. , a Mississipp i divine, is 
seeking to further the cause of Christianity by urgin g the repeal of the 
Fifteenth Amendment. Th e Negro , being 
an inferior being, must be kept down, 
and it is better for the mora l sense of 
the communit y that it should be done 
openly rather than by subterfuge. 
Mention TH E CRISI S THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 21 3 
S. A. KELSEY, Pres. DR. WM. J. CARTER, Chiropodist. MME. A. 0. KELSEY, GEN'L INSTR. 
The Kelsey School of Beauty Culture and Hair Dressing 
328 Leno x Avenue , Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Manicuring , Shampooing, Hai r Dressing, Beauty Culture, Hai r Makin g and 
Chiropod y scientifically taught. Da y and night sessions. Instructions given to 
pupils in their own homes if desired. Diploma s awarded. Send for bookletdirectory of recently graduated students. 
1/4 actual size 
Ladies 
W e want you to try a 
box of this delightfully 
perfumed Talcum Powder. Mailed, postpaid, 
upon receipt of 10c, 
silver or stamps. 
ALEXANDE R 
SPECIALTY CO. 
150 Nassau Street ' 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
BEAUTIFU L AR T EXHIBI T 
Miss Cor a Va n Schoick is conducting a sale 
and exhibit of unusual interest at the CLI O 
SCHOOL , 487 6th Avenue, between 29th and 30th 
Streets, New York . 
Ther e is on sale hand-painted china and pillow tops, hand-made opera bags, pin cushions and 
novelties. These hand creations are suggestive 
for gifts and interior decorations. 
Sunlight at Night 
Ou r new Inverted gas burner . 300-caodle -
power light, made of steel enameled white, 
with white crystal globe, burns 3% cubi c 
feet of gas per hour. Perfect combustion, 
never smokes if properly regulated. 
Als o our Sun-Ra y Kerosene Mantl e Burn ­
ers. 100-candle-power light. One quar t of 
kerosene lasts 16 hours. Mone y back if 
not as represented. Particular s free. 
Simple x Gaslight Co. , Dept. C , New Yor k 
ESTABLISHE D 1887 'Phone 4715 Mad . Sq. 
L. A . de TOSCAN O CO . 
OLDES T COLORE D REGALI A ESTABLISHMEN T I N TH E CIT Y 
Knights of Pythias 
Knights Templars 
And Patriarchs 
Equipments 
BADGES 
JEWEL S 
REGALIA 
'Paraphernalia 
and Supplies 
for All Societies 
Estimates Given 
Mme. B. E . de Toscano, Manager 
146 WES T 31st STREE T Bet. Sixt h and Seventh Avenue s NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Telephone 3253 Harle m 
CARPE T GLEANIN G 
Cleaners and Renovators 
Fo r Particula r Peopl e 
New York Careful Cleaning Bureau 
12 WES T 135th STREE T 
W e make a specialty of cleaning and renovating 
carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered furniture; 
we also vacuum clean in the home. W e are not 
the largest carpet cleaner in the world, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOIN G CARPET S AN D RUG S OU R 
SPECIALT Y 
0. Augustus Wright 
Attorney-in-Fact 
P. O. Box 121 Bedford City, Va. 
Practices before the Department of the 
Interior, and the several bureaus thereof 
at Washington , D . C. Prosecutes 
claims for pension, increase of pension and bounty land. 
Searches made of U . S. Patent Office 
records; assignments of patents prepared and filed. Trademark s and copyrights procured. 
Correspondence solicited. 
Approved : Bureau of Pensions, J. P. 
9-26-11. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 21 4 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
The Meeting Place of Business and Proficiency 
A professional man advertised in TH E CRISI S for a partner wit h capital. The 
profession is one that offers little encouragement to colored men and yet he writes: 
"Kindl y stop the advertisement in TH E CRISIS , as my want has 
been filled. We appreciate the very good results (from TH E CRISIS ) 
and wil l forward check on the loth. " 
A large corporation advertised in TH E CRISI S for a general manager wit h capital. 
The wording of their advertisement eliminated all inquirers save those wit h capital 
and experience. They write: 
"W e believe that one of the parties is really interested i n our 
proposition and wil l close with him i n a few days. 1' 
They "closed' ' with him and have since advertised for other high-grade help. 
There is our story in a nutshell. 
Those who require high-grade help should use our "Hel p Wanted' ' columns, and 
those who are trained or experienced as high-grade helpers should advertise their 
services where they may reach the largest number of possible employers. 
TH E CRISIS CLASSIFIE D ADVERTISIN G SERVIC E IS TH E 
MEETIN G PLAC E O F BUSINES S AN D PROFICIENC Y 
HEL P WANTE D 
WANTED— A man of character and ability to 
fill the position of Financia l Agent. Must be 
a good lecturer and a convincing talker. This 
will be a paying and permanent position. 
Investigate at once. 
Address TH E S., I. & E . CORPORATION , 
Moun d Bayou. Miss. 
WANTE D A T ONCE ! 
COLLECTOR S O F NAME S AN D ADDRESSE S 
WANTE D A T ONCE—On e person in every city 
in the Unite d States, who can write plainly, to 
send us names and addresses of lawyers, doctors, 
merchants, business men of all professions, sufferers of diseases, pensioners, and so forth. 
Spare-time work and profitable pay. Fo r further 
particulars send two-cent stamp. Address 
0. A . WRIGH T 
Bedford Cit y Virgini a 
'Phone ; Harlem , 6370 
Middlese x Employmen t Agenc y 
Offers you the benefit of its experience, gained 
by years of actual conduct of business and the 
prestige that comes from a large clientele of 
satisfied patrons. 
Our rigid investigation of references keeps our 
standard high. Mai l orders solicited. 
2229 Fift h Avenue, near 136th Street, 
New York . 
RELIABL E HEL P at all timet for the most 
discriminating employers. 
Out-of-town correspondence invited. 
References thoroughly investigated 
Address : 
MIS S I. L . MOORMA N 
463 Leno x Avenue New Yor k 
SITUATION S WANTE D 
YOUN G LADY , competent and experienced, 
desires position as typewriter, private secretary or office helper. References. Address 
F. L. , care of TH E CRISI S office. 
REA L ESTAT E 
Valuable Texas Lands 
For Sale 
Larg e tracts of farm land in the best localities of the State for sale at very flattering 
prices. Small tracts for good lands suitable for 
farming, truck, fruits and any domestic product. 
We have for sale a numbe r of large farms already in cultivation, good houses and barns, 
wells, and nice pasture lands, which can be 
obtained at reasonable rates. Cit y property a 
specialty. Business lots in the best part of 
the city, improved and unimproved. Larg e lots 
suitable for factory property with, switch 
facilities. 
No investment can be more valuable than an 
investment in Texa s real estate. Lands are becoming so valuable that they are doubling 
themselves in value in less than a year's time. 
Fo r any investment in Texas property, write 
T. B . Madiso n Rea l Estat e Company, 2415 El m 
Street, Dallas, Texas. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 21 5 
AGENTS WANTE D 
$25.00 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling ' 'Histor y of Negro Soldiers in SpanishAmerican War " combined with "Histor y of the 
Negro Race. " 40 0 pages, 5 0 illustrations. 
Pric e $1.2 5 net. Address 
E A . 
15 4 Nassau Street 
JOHNSO N 
New Yor k 
AGENTS—$6 0 IN 6 DAY S 
This Is the report of Mr . 
Edw.. Carney , one of our 
Agents. Yo u can do as 
well selling our Dais y 
Safety Razor. Sampl e by 
mai l 25 cents. Pe r dozen 
$2.00—12 New Shar p Kee n 
Blade s 35 cents. Al l postpaid. Guaranteed. Mone y 
back if not as represented. Territor y going fast. Star t 
at once. Othe r money maker s as well. Particular s free. 
BUSSING-WHEAT0 N CO. , Inc., Dept. C 
23 Par k Row New Yor k 
ME N AN D WOME N WANTE D 
to sell beautiful Art Pictures of Negro 
subjects. Our agents are coining money 
on these pictures. 
Three sample pictures by mail, 35 cents. 
Ten sample postcards by mail, 6 cents. 
Address: JACO B GRIFFIT H 
252 W. 53d Street New York 
MUSIC 
HELE N ELIS E SMIT H 
CONCER T PIANIS T 
Post-Graduate of the Institute of Musica l Ar t 
Pupi l of Sigismund Stojowaki 
Teache r of Piano, Theory , Ear-training , ate. 
22 4 EAS T 86T H STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
REGALIA 
A RAC E ENTERPRIS E 
Manufacturing Badges, Banners and 
Supplies for all Fraternal and Church 
Societies. Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L . Jones, Pres. 
N. E . Cor. 8th and Plum Streets 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
PATENTS 
L . H . LATIME R 
MECHANICA L AN D ELECTRICA L ENGINEE R 
and 
SOLICITO R O F PATENT S 
66 Joh n Street New Yor k 
Inventions Perfected, Models and Experimental Machine s Designed and Constructed. 
Technical Translations. 
Telephone 313 Joh n Room 604 
FURRIER 
Seventeen Years' Experienc e 
WOR K TURNE D OU T PROMPTL Y 
MRS . G. B. NEEDLE S 
Lat e with Broadwa y houses 
PRACTICA L FURRIE R 
Al l kinds of furs remodelled, repaired and relined. White furs cleaned, equal to new. Coats 
guaranteed to fit. Price s reasonable. 
2 4 WES T 1S6T H STREE T NE W YOR K 
SCHOOLS 
Our Normal Preparatory Course 
includes a thorough review of Arithmetic , Grammar, Geography, U . S. History , Physiology, 
Reading, Spelling, Penmanship, Drawing , Civil 
Government and Theory and Ar t of Teaching. 
Just the thing to prepare you for a teachers' 
examination. Address 
AFRO-AMERICA N CORRESPONDENC E 
SCHOO L 
280 8 St. An n Street New Orleans. La . 
BOOKS 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
JAME S F . MORTON , Ja. , A.M. , Author and Publisher 
Forceful, rational, comprehensive. A n arsenal 
of facta and unanswerable arguments, invaluabl e 
for propaganda. Read the chapter on "Th e Bug ­
bear of Social Equality, " which is a veritable 
eye-opener. Thousands already sold. Agents 
wanted everywhere. 
PRIC E 25 CENT S 
Address the Autho r at 244 West 143d Street, 
New York , N . Y . 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
S Beekman Street (Temple Court) 
New Yor k City 
Tel. 622 2 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
FREDERIC K L . McGHE E 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
Union Block, Fourth and Cedar Streets 
S t Paul, Minn . 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR - AT-LA W 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
Real Estate and Probate Matters a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
Office: Room 502 , Eberly Block Columbus, O. 
B. S. SMIT H 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LAW . 
Offices: Suite 610 , Sykes Block 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W. MITCHEL L 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
90 8 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 21 6 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
COMFORT—Large , airy rooms, offering genuine home comforts plus the 
conveniences and privileges of a modern hotel. 
SERVICE—I n the hotel and dining room the "Marshall" service is an exceptional feature, which assures comfort and pleasure for our patrons. 
Restaurant open all night Cuisine to satisfy the most discriminating 
VOCA L AN D INSTRUMENTA L MUSI C EVER Y EVENIN G 
Breakfast, 7:30 to 12:30, 30c. Luncheon, 12:30 to 3, 30c. Dinner, 6 to 8, 35c. 
Special Course Dinner Every Sunday and Holidays, 50c. 
Telephones 1693 - 1691 Columbus J- L . MARSHALL , Proprietor 
TH E SOUTHER N RESTAURAN T 
2229 Fifth Avenue 
Bet. 135th and 136th Sts. 
Real HomeCooking;Meal s Served at Al l Hours. 
REASONABL E RATE S EXCELLEN T SERVIC E 
Home-made Rolls Served Ho t 
'Phone 2877 Leno x 
WHIT E ROS E WORKIN G GIRLS ' 
HOM E 
217 East 86th Street 
Bet. Second and Thir d Avenue s 
Pleasant temporary lodgings for workin g girls, 
with privileges, at reasonable rates. The Home 
solicits orders for working dresses, aprons, ate. 
Address: 
MBS . FRANCE S R. KEYSER , Supt. 
NORTH CAROLINA 
SANDERS ' HOTE L 
301 S. Caldwell Street, Charlotte, N . C . 
Ideal location for transient and permanent 
boarders. Al l modern conveniences and comforts 
of home life. 
J. T. SANDER S 
Proprieto r 
'Phone 681 Ho t and Cold Baths 
WARRE N HOTE L 
MIS S BETTI E DUNCAN , Proprietress 
First-class accommodations. Meals at all hours. 
RATE S REASONABL E 
COB . RAMSE Y AN D PROCTO R STREET S 
Thre e Blocks from Unio n Station 
DURHAM , N . C . 
Mutual Teachers' Agency 
(A Bureau for Colored Teachers) 
Recommends teachers for schools; secures employment for 
teachers. Now is the time to register. Blanks and information furnished free on application. Local and longdistance telephone, North 1625. 
S. M . KENDRICK , Secretary 
1335 T STREET , N . W . WASHINGTON , D . G . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 
GOO D COMMISSIO N PAI D T O 
ORGANIZERS . JOI N NOW ! 
HOM E OFFICE : 
110 1/2 Colfax Ave. , South Bend, Ind. 
Too, Too! Too, Too! Too, Too! 
SOMETHIN G NE W 
The Afro-American 
Order of Orioles 
Wit h a Graduated Scale of Endowment 
Fo r particulars write G . W . BLAND , H . S. P. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
THE 
BOOKS 
217 
THE 
MAGAZIN 4ZINE I 
STUDENT S O F TH E NEGR O PROBLE M 
The Souls of Black Folk, DuBois 
History or the Negro • Washington 
John Brown • • DuBois 
up From Slavery • • Washington 
Poems of Paul Laurence 
Dunbar 
Poems of W. S. Braith= 
waite 
Race Adjustment - Miller 
Negro In the New World, Johnston 
Following the Color Line, Baker 
Works of Charles W. 
Chestnutt 
Allanta. University Studies 
Negro and the Nation • Merriam 
Negro In the South i Washington 
' DuBois 
Sinclair 
Ovington 
Aftermath of Slavery • 
Half a Man 
Life of Harriet Beecher 
Stowe • • • • Stowe 
Mind of Primitive Man, Boaz 
Race Prejudice • • Finot 
Curse of Race Prejudice, Morton 
Quest of the Silver Fleece, 
a novel - - - DuBois 
Through Afro-America , Archer 
Southern South • • Hart 
Inter-Racial Problems, Official Record 
of the Universal Races Congress 
An d general readers will 
find this list embraces the 
most popular and comprehensive studies of the Negro 
question. They are the 
best books by the best 
writers and thinkers. By 
special arrangements with 
the publishers of the books 
we are in position to make 
combination offers at remarkably low prices. This 
offer is good for a limited 
time only and is made to 
increase the subscription 
list of 
TH E CRISI S 
(he magazine edited by 
W . E. B. DuBois with the cooperation of Oswald Garrison 
Villard . Charles. Edward Russell. Kelly Mille r and 
others. Th e Crisis is the organ of the National Association For the Advancement of Colored People / 
T o the 
Publishers 
of the CRISIS , 
2 0 Vese y Street. 
OU R OFFER : / Ne w Yor k City . 
\vt I . i L , Gentlemen: 
W e have made special combinations 
, , , , . , L a %9 Please send, 
with these books in sets of five, ten, fif- «£* . , 
without any cost to 
teen and twenty, together with a A .. . 
me, your descriptive 
year's subscription to the Crisi s
 v i * , 
* circular offering these 
and will be clad to have the »*\ t i I .t_ 
& sets of books on the 
names and addresses of all / M.«-- , P.„kl„ ™ J 
Negro problem and a 
year's subscription to the 
CRISIS . 
Name 
Address . _ ' 
Cit y 
State 
and is a record of every important happening and 
movement in the world which bears on the great 
problems of inter-racial relations and especially 
those which affect the Negro American. 
who find themselves 
interested in the, 
greates t of 
problems 
Mention T H E CR ISIS , 218 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
A limited numbe r of 
free beds maintained 
for the worthy poor. 
Other ward patients 
maintained at $7.00 
pe r week. 
Privat e rooms can 
be secured from 
$12.00 to $30.00 per 
week. 
The training school 
for nurses maintains 
a two years* course. 
A high school certificate, or an education sufficient to 
be considered an 
equivalent, necessary 
for admission. 
Fiv e thousand dollars endows a free 
bed. 
Andrew F. Stevens, 
President. 
Nathan F. MOSSELL. M.D. 
Medical Director and 
Superintendent. 
Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital and Training School. Philadelphia, Pa. 
Underwood 
Standard Typewriter 
The UNDERWOO D 13 designed on 
correct mechanical principles, is made of 
the best material and is unequalled in 
speed, accuracy, ease of operation and 
durability. UNDERWOO D sales 
exceed those of any other machine. 
"TH E MACHIN E YO U WIL L 
EVENTUALL Y BUY " 
Underwood Typewriter Co., 
INCORPORATE D 
Underwoo d Buildin g Ne w Yor k 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 
PAMPHLET S 
Published by 
The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
1. Disfranchisement: A powerful argument by the Rev. John Haynes Holmes. 
Price 5 cents. 
2. Education In the South: Facts about 
the discrimination against the Negro. By 
the Rev. Horace Bumstead, former president of Atlanta University. Price 5 cents. 
3. The Real Race Problem: A scientific 
comparison of the black and the white man 
by America's foremost anthropologist, 
Prof. Boas, of Columbia University. Price 
5 cents. 
4. Social Control: By Jane Addams, of 
Hull House. Price 1 cent. 
5. The Negro as a Soldier: By Brigadier-General Burt, U. S. A. Price 5 cents. 
6. Leaving It to the South: An experience and some conclusions by Charles 
Edward Russell. Price 5 cents. 
7. Views of a Southern Woman: By 
Adelene Moffat. Price 2 cents. 
Address 
The Crisis Book Department 
20 VESE Y STREET NE W YORK TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION for the 
ADVANCEMENT , of COLORED PEOPLE 
OFFICES : Suite 311 , 2 0 Vese y Street, Ne w York . Incorporated Ma y 25 , 1911 
OBJECT.—Th e Nationa l Associatio n 
for the Advancemen t of Colore d Peopl e 
is an organization of persons wh o believe 
that the present prejudice against colored 
races, an d particularly the denia l of rights 
an d opportunities to ten millio n American s 
of Negr o descent, is not only unjust an d 
a menace to our free institutions, but also 
is a direct hindrance to Worl d Peac e an d 
the realization of Huma n Brotherhood. 
METHODS.—Th e wor k is carried 
on b y four bureaus : 1. Lectur e Bureau . 
2 . Burea u of Lega l Assistance . 3. 
Burea u of Information. 4 . Burea u of 
Publicit y an d Research. 
Th e organ of the association is THE . 
CRISIS . 
ORGANIZATION.—Membershi p is 
open to all . Th e annua l fee varies from 
$1 to $1 00 . Lif e memberships are $500 . 
Th e expenses of the association for the 
last twelve months were $9,000 . 
W e need $ 1 4,00 0 for the coming year. 
OFFICER S 
Nationa l President — Mr . Moorfiel d 
Storey, Boston, Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Rev . Joh n Hayne s Holmes, Ne w York . 
Mr . Joh n E . Milholland , Ne w York . 
Bisho p Alexande r Walters, Ne w York . 
Rev . Garne t R . Waller , Baltimore , 
Md . 
Chairma n of the Executiv e Committee— 
Mr . Oswal d Garriso n Villard , Ne w 
York . 
Treasurer—Mr . Walte r E . Sachs, Ne w 
York . 
Directo r of Publicit y an d Research— 
Dr . W . Ε. B . D u Bois, Ne w York . 
Secretary—Miss Mar y W . Ovington , 
Brooklyn , Ν . Y . 
Assistant Secretary —- Miss Marth a 
Gruening , Ne w York . 
BOAR D O F DIRECTOR S 
Term s Expir e 1913 
Mr . Georg e W . Crawford , Ne w Have n 
Mr , Thoma s Ewing , Jr. , Ne w Yor k 
Mr . Pau l Kennaday , Ne w Yor k 
Mr . Josep h P . Loud , Bosto n 
Mr . Roya l .Freema n Nash , Brookly n 
Bey . A . Clayto n Powell , Ne w Yor k 
Rev . Josep h Silverman , Ne w Yor k 
Dr . Willia m A . Sinclair , Philadelphi a 
Mis s Lillia n D . Wald , New . Yor k 
Rev . G . R . Waller , Baltimor e 
Term s Expir e 1914 
Mis s Jan e Addams , Chicag o 
Dr . C . E . Bentley , Chicag o 
Rev . W . H . Brooks , Ne w Yor k 
Dr . W . Ε . B . D u Bois , Ne w Yor k 
Mrs . Florenc e Kelley , Ne w Yor k 
Mrs . F . R . Keyser , Ne w Yor k 
Dr . N . F . Mossell , Philadelphi a 
Mis s Mar y Whit e Ovington , Brookly n 
Mr . Charle s Edwar d Russell , Ne w Yor k 
Mrs . M . C . Terrell , Washington , D . C . 
Term s Expir e 1915 
Rev . Joh n Hayne s . Holmes , Ne w Yor k 
Mrs . M . D . Maclean , Ne w Yor k 
Mr . Joh n E . Milholland , Ne w Yor k 
Mr . Walte r E . Sachs , Ne w Yor k 
Mr . Joe l E . Spingarn , Ne w Yor k 
Mr . Moorflel d Storey , Bosto n 
Mr . Oswal d Garriso n Villard , Ne w Yor k 
Dr . Ο . M . Waller , Brookly n 
Mr . Willia m Englis h Walling , Ne w Yor k 
Bisho p Alexande r Walters , Ne w Yor k 
ADVISOR Y COMMITTE E 
Hon . Wm . S . Bennet , Ne w Yor k 
Mis s France s Blascoer , Ne w Yor k 
Mr . W . L . Bulkley , Ne w Yor k 
Prof . Joh n Dewey , Ne w Yor k 
Dr . Joh n Lovejo y Elliott , Ne w Yor k 
Mr . Hamilto n Holt , Ne w Yor k 
Mis s Mau d R . Ingersoll , Ne w Yor k 
Mrs . Ma s Morgenthau , Jr. , Ne w Yor k 
Mr . Jame s F . Morton , Jr. , Ne w Yor k 
Mr . Henr y Moskowitz , Ne w Yor k 
Mis s Leonor a O'Reilly , Ne w Yor k 
Mr . Jaco b H . Schiff , Ne w Yor k 
Prof . E . R . A . Seligman , Ne w Yor k 
Mrs . Ann a Garli n Spencer , Ne w Yor k 
Mrs . Henr y Villard , Ne w Yor k 
Dr . Stephe n S . Wise , Ne w Yor k 
Mr , D . Maco n Webster , Brookly n 
Mr . Geo . E . Wibecan , Jr. , Brookly n 
Hon . Thoma s M . Osborne , Auburn , Ν . Y . 
Mis s Mari a Baldwin , Boston , Mass . 
Mr . Franci s J . Garrison , Boston , Mass . 
Mr . Archibal d H . Grimke , Boston , Mass . 
' Mis s Adelen e Moffat , Boston , Mass . 
Hon . Alber t E . Pillsbury , Boston , Mass . 
Mr . Wm . Munro e Trotter , Boston , Mass . 
Dr . Horac e Bumstead , Brookline , Mass . 
Mis s Elizabet h ,-Clc. Carter , Ne w Bedford , Mass . 
Prest . Chaf.ijii k hwing, Cleveland , 0 . 
Mr . Chas . f Chesnutt , Cleveland , O . 
Hon . Harr y Ό*Λ Smith , Cleveland , O . 
Prest . H . C . King , Oberlin , O . 
Prest . W . S . Scarborough , Wilberforce , 0 . 
Mrs . Id a B . Well s Barnett , Chicago , Ill. 
Mis s S . P . Breckenridge , Chicago , Ill. 
Mr . Clarenc e Darrow , Chicago , Ill. 
Mr . Juliu s Rosenwald , Chicago , Ill. 
Mrs . Celi a Parke r Woolley , Chicago , Ill. 
Mr . F . L . McGhee , St . Paul , Minn . 
Mis s France s Bartholomew , Philadelphia , Pa . 
Mis s Susa n Wharton , Philadelphia , Pa . 
Mr . R . R . Wright , Jr. , Philadelphia , Pa . 
Mr . W . Justi n Carter , Harrisburg , Pa . 
Rev . Harve y Johnson , Baltimore , Md . 
Mrs . Carri e W . Clifford , Washington , D . C . 
Mr . L . M . Hershaw , Washington , D , C . 
Prof . Kell y Miller , Washington , D . C . 
Prof . L . B . Moore , Washington , D . C . ' 
Justic e W , P . Stafford , Washington , D . C . 
Rev . J . Milto n Waldron , Washington , D . C . 
Prest . Joh n Hope , Atlanta , Ga . 
Mr . Lesli e P . Hill , Manassas , Va . 
Mr . Willia m Pickens , Talladega , Ala . Mak e You r Spare Moments Profitable 
Cfl Th e continued growth of TH E CRISI S necessitates the extension of our 
field force, and we need representatives in al l cities to establish sub-agencies 
an d look after renewals. 
^ If yo u can spare a few hours each month to look after our interests 
i n you r city, we can make yo u a proposition that wil l interest you . Th e 
wor k is dignified as wel l as profitable. 
Address, an d send references to 
FRAN K M . TURNER , Circulation Manager 
2 0 VESE Y STREE T NE W YOR K 
A Person of Discriminating Taste 
appreciates th e careful 
attention to every detail 
which we exercise in the 
production of things from 
our print shop, as is evidenced by the letter herewith from Prof. J . Ε. 
Spingarn, formerl y of 
Columbia University. 
Let us make an estimate on your work. 
J. E . SPINGAR N 
9 WES T 73D STREE T 
NE W YOR K 
December 6, 1911. 
MR . ROBER T N . WOOD , 
202 East 99th Street, · City. 
M y dear Mr . Wood : 
I enclose my cheque for $561.72, in full 
payment of the balance of my account in 
connection with the printing and distribution of my pamphlet, " A Question, of 
Academic Freedom. " I have not yet verified the completeness of the distribution 
by the mailing company which you 
employed, but so far as your work as 
a printer is concerned, I take pleasure in 
saying that you attended to every detail 
i n the most efficient and conscientious 
manner possible, and that I owe you cordial 
appreciation for the interest and care you 
have taken in this whole matter. Yo u may 
use this letter i n any way you please, and 
may refer to me any prospective client who 
is anxious to obtain the services of a firstclass printer. 
Ver y truly yours, 
(Signed) J . E . SPINGARN . 
ROBER T N . WOO D 202 EAS T 99th ST., NE W YOR K 
'PHON E LENO X 6667 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 