The Crisis 
March 1914 Ten Cents a Copy The National Religious Training School 
I T IS MOR E THA N A MER E SCHOO L 
I T IS A COMMUNIT Y O F SERVIC E AN D UPLIF T 
Its influence is destined to be felt i n all sections of the countr y i n improve d 
Negr o communit y life whereve r our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign missio n fields, 
Y . M . C. A . and Y . W . C. A . secretaries and district nurses receive a compre ­
hensive grasp of their studies under a Wellesle y graduate and experienced 
co-workers and actual every-day practice throug h the school's SOCIA L 
SERVIC E DEPARTMENT . 
W e aim also to create a better qualified ministry . 
Industria l training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten moder n buildings; healthful location. 
W e can accommodate a few mor e earnest, ambitious students. 
Communitie s requiring social workers should writ e us. 
Fo r catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDEN T JAME S E . SHEPAR D 
Nationa l Religious Trainin g Schoo l ---- - Durham, N . C. 
Th e school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearl y maintenance 
fund of $15,000 for runnin g expenses. Won' t yo u help us this year ? 
Provident Hospital and Training School 
for Colored Nurses 
Aim : T o keep its technic equal to the best 
Founded 1891 
The first training school for colored 
nurses in this country, Freednian 's 
excepted. 
Comprises a training school for 
nurses, hospital, dispensary, and 
thoroughly equipped children's depart 
ment; when funds are ample, postgraduate work may be undertaken. 
The hospital is open to all. The 
races co-operate in the board of 
trustees, in the medical staff and in 
administration; the institution is the 
only one of its kind in which a colored 
man may act as interne. 
Cost of buildings and equipment, 
$100,000; free from debt. Endowment, 
$50,000, contributed mostly by wills 
made by colored men. Additional 
endowment needed, $50,000. 
The nurses' course covers three 
years; training and instruction given 
by both races, according to the highest 
modern standards. 36th and Dearborn Sts., Chicago, III. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
"I cordially commen d the school's interest and needs to all wh o believe 
in the Negr o race and in our obligation to help promot e its intellectual, 
mora l and religious uplift." 
—REV . DR. CHARLES H . PARKHURST, Xe w Yor k City. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF 
COLORED PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY 
Conducted by 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, Business Manager 
Contents copyrighted, 1914, by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for March, 1914 
PICTURES 
COVER . "The Mother." Photograph from life. Page 
MRS . MAU D CUNE Y HAR E 216 
70 FIFT H AVENU E , 218 
TH E SOCIA L LIF E O F COLORE D AMERIC A 234 
ARTICLES 
UNIVERSA L BROTHERHOOD . A Poem. By Margaret von Seydewitz 226 
O N SEGREGATION . A Poem. By Arthur Tunnell 226 
TH E ASSOCIATIO N O F NEGR O SECONDAR Y AN D INDUSTRIA L 
SCHOOLS . By Leslie Pinckney Hill 242 
TH E STRUGGLE . A Story. By Samuel H . Bishop 244 
TH E SMITH-LEVE R BIL L AN D OTHE R WOR K O F TH E 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 247 
TH E CIVI L RIGHT S ACT . By Justice Wendell Phillips Stafford 251 
DEPARTMENTS 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 215 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 223 
OPINIO N 227 
EDITORIA L 238 
SOM E MOR E BOCK S 253 
TE N CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIV E CENTS EXTR A 
RENEWALS : When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your 
subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the 
wrapper. 
CHANG E OF ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 212 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, Ga. 
The courses of study include High School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Among the teachers are 
graduates of Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-two years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduates are almost 
universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fall Term Began September, 1913. 
For information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN. 
The Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
Maintained by the governments of North Carolina and of 
the United States. Open all the 
year round. Fo r males only. 
Spring term begins March 2, 
1914. Board, lodging and tuition, 
$7 per month. Best opportunities 
for Negro youth. Night school 
for indigent but ambitious young 
men. Fo r catalog or further 
information, address 
PRESIDEN T DUDLE Y 
A . & M . College Greensboro, N . C . 
LINCOLN INSTITUTE 
Jefferson City , Missouri 
Founde d by the Negr o soldiers of 
the 64th and 65th Regiments. Supported by the State of Missouri . 
On e of the best-equipped schools 
in the country for the education of 
Negr o boys and girls. Normal , 
Collegiate , Agricultura l and Industria l Courses. Norma l diploma s 
carryin g wit h them the degree B. Pd . 
are life certificates to teach in the 
public schools of Missouri . Th e 
degree A . B. conferred upon those 
wh o complete the collegiate course. 
Fou r teachers of Music : Voic e Cul ­
ture, Piano , Violin , Ban d and 
Orchestr a Practice . Elocutio n and 
Athletics. 
Board $9.50 a month. Tuition $3.00 the 
year to Missouri students. All others pay 
$13.00 a yeer. Catalog free. 
B. F. ALLEN , A. M. , LL . D. 
President. 
Morehouse College 
(Formerl y Atlant a Baptist College ) 
ATLANTA , GA . 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
A n institution famous withi n recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manl y 
development—the onl y institution in the far 
South devoted solely to the education of 
Negr o youn g men. 
Graduates given high rankin g by 
greatest Norther n universities. Debating , 
Y . M . C. A. , athletics, all live features. 
Fo r information address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
A n Episcopa l boardin g and day school 
for girls, under the direction of the Sisters 
of St. Mary . Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
611 N. 43d St. W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
CARNEGI E COLLEGE-HOM E STUD Y 
"60 PAG E BULLETI N FREE " 
COURSE S B Y MAI L 
Grammar School Agricultural 
High School Poultry 
Norma Domestic Science 
Professiona Civil Service 
Penmanship Engineering 
Type-writing Drawing 
Short-hand English 
Book-keeping Language 
Law Real Estate 
Reduced rates of tuition to first 
applicants. For "Free Bulletin" 
and "Special Scholarship," apply 
CARNEGI E COLLEG E 
Pres. GALBREATH No- 19D St., ROGERS. Ohio. 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 213 
Ther e is a field and a future 
for the expert stenographer, typewriter and secretary. 
Take a course in the 
Mottley Commercial 
Institute 
526 LENO X AVENU E ' 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
(Telephone 3655 Audubon) 
Lessons §5 per month or $50 for 
a complete course in 
SHORTHAN D 
TYPEWRITIN G 
ARITHMETI C 
ENGLIS H 
Students prepared for civil 
service examinations. 
F . WALTE R MOTTLEY , Principal 
BIG OFFER 
VERY SPECIAL! 
Y
OU'LL, be surprised 
when you get our 
offer of a suit of 
swellest style and wonder—"How can 
they do it!" It 
is all explained 
i n a personal 
lette r to you. 
New, libera l 
plan. No trouble 
— n o expense. 
Every garment 
made to meas-( 
ure. You pick 
the styl e and 
fabric. Expre s s 
prepaid —on everything — not a cent 
to pay. Agents coining money. Send no 
money but write 
quick while special 
offer lasts, for Bis 
Wonderful Offe r 
and heavy sample 
outfit-all FREE ! 
America n Woole n Mill s 
Dept-251 CHICAGO. ILL. 
Atlant a University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
17 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address: 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY CONFERENC E 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M . 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon 
champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity 
for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. 
Belongs in the library of every friend of social 
justice. Price 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAME S F. 
244 West 143d Street 
MORTON , JR. 
- New York, N. 
"HEAVE N AN D HELL " 
Swedenborg's great work; 400 pages; 15 cents, 
postpaid. Pastor Landenberger, Windsor Place, 
St. Louis, Mo. 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
wh o can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PE R MONT H acting as 
AGENT S for the sale of our properties in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . 
Th e real comin g country where there are 
opportunities and openings for all. Write 
us to-day, givin g your age and experience, 
and we wil l offer yo u a FIN E PROPOSI ­
TIO N WHIC H WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVES REALT Y CO. 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ames Bldg. Muskogee, Okla. 
D O YO U ADVERTISE ? 
If yo u want to brin g you r business to the 
attention of 150,000 discriminatin g readers 
advertise in TH E CRISIS. Advertisin g 
rate cards wil l be sent on application. 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue - - New York 
A COLORE D DOLL Y FO R TH E CHIL D 
Buy a beautiful colored doll, with lifelike features, long hair, jointed limbs and sleeping 
eyes. The right plaything for your child. A big attraction at church fairs and bazaars. 
Endorsed by leading clergymen and educators. Send for catalog. Agents wanted. Novelty 
souvenirs and favors. 
E . M . S. NOVELT Y COMPANY , Dept. A. , JAMAICA , N . Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS 214 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OF INTEREST TO VOCAL STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMEN T 
Points explained, viz.: Breath 
in Singing, Trying the Voice, the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto, Tenor Leggiero or High 
Tenor, the Baritone, the Bass, 
Parts of the Vocal Apparatus, the 
Mouth, the Tongue, Position When 
Practising, Position When Singing, 
How to Practice, Good Eules for 
Singing. 
Comment from the world-renowned conductor of 
the Paulist Choir of Chicago, 111., whose choir has 
just received the first prize awarded at the Singing Contest held in Paris on May 25, 1912: 
"Dear Mr. Tlnaley: 
"I take great pleaBUre in commending your Tery useful and 
succinctly written booh on 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development.' Tour own appreciation of the psychology of singing 
and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly 
reduced to a simple system. Cordially yours, 
"Father WILLIAM J. FINN, C. S . P., 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N. T.: "A very practical little 
book Is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' by Pedro T. 
Tinsley. It contains some very excellent material and vocal 
exercises, an d should be In the hands of all vocal Students. " 
From "Music News," Chicago, 111.: "Accordingly his 
'Practical Method of Singing' Is a most concise and practical 
little manual, containing many valuable vocal exercises. It 
cannot fall to be helpful to all ambitious vocal students." 
HELPE D HI M GREATL Y 
"Since I practised your exercises of 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' my voice is more resonant 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a new voice.'' Prof. John T. Layton, 
Director Coleridge-Taylor Musical Society, 1722 10th 
St., N. W., Washington, D. C. 
PRICE 51.00 
Address the publisher: PEDRO T. TINS LE T 
6448 Drexel Avenue CHICAGO, ILL. 
LEARN TO READ MUSIC AT SIGHT „ 
FOR $1.00 
Anyon e i n the "Brass Band " or "Stringed Orchestra " may 
learn In a few hours to master the Instrument he loves with 
our "Sigh t Render " an d "Sigh t Reade r Positions. " 
$1 (cash). Address 
WILLIA M D . SMIT H 
1636 Clario n Stree t Philadelphia , Pa . 
Agents Are Making $10.00 Per Day 
and more selling our famous Negro picture, ' 'A 
Joyful Welcome Into Heaven,'' the finest painting 
ever produced with the Negro as a subject. Semireligious. Sells at sight. Send 15 cents in stamps 
or coin for 50-cent sample and agent's terms. 
TH E DOUGLAS SPECIALTIES COMPANY 
3548 Vernon Ave, Dept. K Chicago, 111. 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS . Dignified 
work. Address: 70 Fifth Avenue, 
New York. 
Facts of Reconstruction 
By MAJO R JOH N R. LYNC H 
In this book Major Lynch presents the 
readers and thinkers of the present generation with accurate, reliable and impartial 
information, based upon his knowledge and 
experience, about Reconstruction, the most 
important and eventful epoch in our country's 
history. 
Major Lynch has been prominently before 
the public during the last forty years. He 
was a member of Congress in 1876-7 and 
was an active participant in the decision of 
the closely contested election between Hayes 
and Tilden for the Presidency of the United 
States. Many interesting points in that contest not heretofore published will be found 
in this book. 
As a member of Congress, member of the 
National Republican Committee, auditor for 
the Navy Department, a member of many 
National Republican Conventions, over one of 
which he presided as temporary chairman, 
Major Lynch was brought in contact with 
many of the most prominent and influential 
men of the country. The chapters giving an 
account of his interviews with Presidents 
Grant and Cleveland, and with Messrs. Blaine, 
Lamar and Gresham, are both interesting and 
instructive. The book ought to be in the 
library of every home. 
Price, net $1.50. By mail, $1.65. 
Address: 
MAJOR JOHN R. LYNC H 
4321 Forestville Ave. Chicago, 111. 
$10 A Day 
for your SPARE TIME 
AGENTS WANTED 
Hundreds of our agents are making $1© a da y in 
their spare time. Many are beating that and are 
getting their own clothe s FREE . We are dead 
sure yo u can do it. Such a thing as failure is 
utterly impossible with our new and complete 
outfit which we send you—all charge s prepaid . 
Our fine line of stylish, well made, carefully finished clothes, guaranteed fit—beats everythin g 
ever offered. Lowest prices. Ou r Outfi t ismagniflcent—our styles and fashions simply wonderful 
Strong selling plans that brin g th e order s and 
Bi g Mone y for you every week, in hard cash. 
Pants $2S | Suits $9° ° 
Can you beat it? Be a PROGRESS agent. Ear n 
$ 5 t o $!O a da y Bn you r spar e tim e while doing 
other work. Send no money. Everything is FREE . 
No experience necessary. Get the Outfit, order 
blanks, stationery, tape-line and everythingneces=ary 
to start you in a Bi g Mone y Makin g Busines s of 
your own. Write today. Be ready for the largest , 
bpring business ever known. Land the early * 
orders in bunches. * 
Progres s Tailorin g Co. , Dept. £82 .Chicago 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISI S 
Vol. 7—No. 5 MARCH , 1914 Whole No. 41 
EDUCATION. 
IN publi c school No . 3, Brooklyn , N . Y. , 
Miss Ros a Taylor, a colored girl , completed the course i n six and one-half years (a 
thing which has not been done since the 
foundin g of the school 250 years ago), and 
took the bronze medal i n the spelling bee. 
I n the same school Miss Mario n Allen , 
a daughter of Mrs. Willia m Trotman , took 
the silve r medal for proficiency i n German 
at the midyea r promotion. There were 108 
pupils i n the class and eighteen of them 
were of Germa n descent. The silver medal 
was the highest honor and was given by 
the German-America n Nationa l Bund . The 
Germa n gentleman who presented the medal 
nearly lost his breath when he saw the 
little colored girl of 14 years who took it. 
These two were the only prizes offered and 
they were taken by the only two colored 
pupils i n the class. The audience of 5,000 
roared i n applause. 
q The Wak e (N . C.) county board of 
publi c instruction has appropriated $6,000 
for a trainin g school for colored teachers 
to be located at Method, N . C. 
*I A complete system of student government 
has been established at Walde n Universit y 
in Nashville , Tenn. 
1$ The Negro Teachers' Association and 
School Improvement League of Virgini a 
collects each yea r statistics o f money raised 
for school improvement i n various counties. 
I n 1912 the colored people themselves 
raised more than $15,000 and i n 1913 the 
amount raised was almost $25,000. 
The students of Rust Universit y i n New 
Orleans raised $1,050 as a jubilee offering 
fo r the Freedmen's Ai d Society. 
*I A twenty-one-room public-school buildin g 
worth $50,000 is being erected i n Savannah, 
Ga. , fo r colored children. 
* l Leonar d Medica l School i n Raleigh, N . C., 
wil l soon have a new modern laboratory 
to take the place of the one which burned 
recently. 
^ Hampto n Universit y teachers and students celebrated Founder's Da y on Febru ­
ary 1. Dr. Stephen S. Wise , the rabbi of 
the Fre e Synagogue i n Ne w Yor k City , 
made the address i n commemoration of 
Gen. Samuel Chapma n Armstrong . 
MUSIC AN D ART. 
THE splendid art of Mr . Harr y T. 
Burleig h is again revealed i n the 
arrangement of sixteen-' of the Afro -
America n folksongs which Mr . Henr y E . 
Krehbiel, the well-known music critic of 
New York , uses as illustrations i n his new 
wor k on nationa l music, "Afro-America n 
Folksongs. " Mr . Krehbie l declares that 
the Negro folksongs are beautiful and, as 
shown by Dvorak , they can furnish the 
inspiration to the composer who knows how 
to employ them. H e adds that it was the 
singing of the jubilee singers of Fis k Uni ­
versity which introduced him to the subject 
and caused him to begin his observations 
forty years ago. 
*I A number of the folksongs have been 
arranged for men's voices and performed 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE MRS. MAU D CUNEY HARE. PIANIST, AUTHOR AND EDITOR OF TH E CRISIS MUSIC NOTES. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 217 
by the Mendelssohn Glee Clu b of New Yor k 
under the direction of the distinguished 
choral conductor, Arthu r Mees. 
Musical America states that "Rolan d 
Hayes, tenor, and Ann e Cambridge, soprano, 
both pupils of the Hubbar d Studio of 
Boston, sang wit h splendid success i n a 
recent performance of 'Gallia ' and 'The 
Seven Last Word s of Christ,' at North -
field, Mass. Mr . Haye s was again heard 
i n a recital i n Boston on Januar y 29— 
his farewell appearance before a winter 
concert tour. " 
*I Miss Jessie E . Muse , the youn g lyri c 
soprano of New Haven , Conn., who graduated wit h honors from the Yal e Conservatory of Music , made her first concert appearance i n Boston, Mass., at Steinert Hall , on 
Januar y 30. Miss Mus e showed high 
musical sensibility i n the use of her voice, 
which is well trained and of a beautiful 
quality. She was assisted by Mr . W . H . 
Richardson, baritone, and Mr . Frederick 
White , pianist and accompanist. Miss Muse , 
a talented youn g student of piano, accompanied her sister. Fo r over twenty years 
Mr . Whit e has held the position of organist 
at Trinit y M . E . Church, one of the large 
white churches of Charleston, Mass. 
•I The Washingto n Concert Orchestra (Mr . 
Harr y A . Williams, conductor) gave its 
initia l concert i n Januar y at Howar d Theatre, Washington , D . C. The program was 
one of unusual excellence. 
*I Mr . R . Augustus Lawson , distinguished 
pianist and teacher, of Hartford , Conn., 
gave a piano recital under the direction 
of the music department of Fis k University, 
Nashville , Tenn., on Januar y 2. 
<I Mr . Joseph Douglass, violinist of Wash ­
ington, D . C , was heard i n a recital at 
Fis k Memoria l Chape l on Januar y 30. Mr . 
Donglass is on a concert tour, which includes 
a number of principa l cities of the South. 
^ The colored pupils of the high school of 
Temple , Tex., have by their own efforts 
recently purchased a set of band instruments fo r the use of the school brass band. 
1 On Januar y 10, at Springfield, Mass., 
St. John's Congregational Church gave their 
first concert fo r the benefit of the pipe -
organ fund, at which time they presented 
Mrs. Mau d Cuney Hare , pianist, and Mr . 
W . H . Richardson, baritone, o f Boston, 
Mass. O f the recital the Springfield Republican said : "The church was so packed 
that it was necessary to throw open the 
room at the side of the main auditorium. 
• » » The singin g of Mr . Richardson 
and the piano selections by Mrs. Har e were 
both of the highest quality and drew forth 
the repeated applause of one of the most 
discriminating audiences that has ever 
assembled i n the church. " 
*I On December 17 a symphony concert was 
given by the Victoria n Concert Band , conducted by Clarence Cameron White . Mr . 
Charles H. . Sullivan , the organizer and 
manager, formed this orchestra i n 1906, with 
only six members, and now the orchestra 
numbers thirty. The Metronome says: 
"The program presented at the above occasion was a very ambitious one and the 
manner i n which it was rendered would 
have been a credit to any orchestral organization. " A second concert wil l be given i n 
April . 
<I The musical director of the publi c schools 
of Providence, R . I., has appointed a colored girl , Rut h Harrison , to pla y the piano 
at the regular music period i n the Englis h 
high school. The eight other contestants 
were white girls. 
PERSONAL. 
VAN J . DAVIS , a colored physician, has 
been appointed assistant city physician i n Paducah, Ky . 
^ Willia m J . Williams, a colored man, has 
been elected chairman of the board o f 
aldermen of Chelsea, Mass. 
*I So fa r as is known, Joh n D . Jones, 
assistant ticket agent at Readville , Mass., is 
the only colored man holding such a position. 
H e began i n the company's employ as a 
porter. 
«I Col . John R. Marshall, of the Eight h 
Infantry of the Illinois Nationa l Guard , has 
resigned. Majo r Frankli n A . Dennison 
succeeds him. 
n R. H . Beck y and R. L . Carroll , of Wash ­
ington, D . C , who were formerly patrolmen, have been appointed detectives. 
*I A young colored woman, Miss Agne s 
Halsell, has been appointed organist of a 
white church i n Salem, Ore. 
•J Joh n Bryce , a private i n the Tenth 
Negro Cavalry , was seriously wounded i n 
Texas by Mexicans. 218 TH E CRISIS 
<J The offices of the Nationa l Association for 
the Advancement of Colored Peopl e and of 
TH E CRISI S are now at 70 Fift h Avenue ; 
this is a cut of the building. W e are on the 
fifth floor, suites 518 and 521. 
SOCIAL UPLIFT. 
THE Framing-ton (Mass.) Historica l and 
Natura l Histor y Society wil l erect a 
tablet to mar k the speakers' stand on the 
forme r site of old Harmon y Grove , where 
so many abolitionists pleaded fo r the freedom of the slaves. 
^ Miss Lun a M . Scott, a colored business 
woman of Milwaukee , Wis. , is the first 
woman i n the State to be commissioned by 
the governor as a notary public . 
*I Mrs. Susie Brighter, a white woman of 
Atlanti c City , N . J. , bequeathed $200,000 to 
Lev i A . Taylor, a colored farme r of Newark, Del. , who was for some time i n her 
employ. It is said that Mr . Taylo r wil l 
establish a home for colored boys near 
Wilmington . 
•J The Frederic k Douglass Home for Age d 
Colored Me n i n Providence, R . I., was 
opened on Januar y 20. The home accommodates about ten inmates. 
<I The Knights of Pythia s wil l erect a 
more modern bathhouse and sanatorium i n 
Ho t Springs, Ark. , on the site of the old 
one which was destroyed by the recent fire. 
*I Colored publications wil l be on exhibition at the international exhibition for the 
book industry and the graphi c arts to take 
place this year i n Leipzig , Germany 
<I Yeassus Pope , a youn g colored man, 
made the highest average of any applicant 
i n the State of Minnesot a i n a recent examination i n Minneapolis fo r the railwa y mail 
service. 
Pullma n porters who are 70 years old 
and have been i n the service as lon g as 
twenty years wil l be pensioned. The minimum pension wil l be $15 per month. 
<J The Negro Farmer, a journa l for the use 
of colored farmers, published at Tuskegee, 
Ala. , has sent out the first issue. 
•J Negro physicians, pharmacists and dentists of Omaha, Neb., have organized a 
medical society. Whe n a colored physician 
i n Omaha has a colored patient who must 
be treated i n a hospital he must tur n the 
patient over to a white doctor because he 
is excluded from practice i n the hospitals. 
70 FIFT H AVENUE . ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 
The medical association wil l attempt to 
remedy this and other injustices. 
Recently the State of Virgini a appropriated to the Virgini a School for Colored 
Dea f and Blin d $28,000 and $4,600 yearly 
fo r improvements. 
*J Ernest Chambers, a graduate of the West 
Virgini a Colored Institute, wo n the priz e 
o f $100 for the best acre of corn grown i n 
1913 i n the State corn-growing contest of 
Missouri . 
<I A new Y . M . C. A . buildin g for colored 
people i n Philadelphi a has recently been 
finished. 
*! Preston Taylor, a colored minister of 
Nashville , Tenn., has pledged $5,000 to 
build a hospital i n Liberia . 
*& The Provident Hospita l of St. Louis, 
Mo. , is carryin g on a campaign to raise 
$30,000 i n order to buil d a more commodious and modern structure. It was to this 
hospital, and not to the Chicago hospital, 
that the late Adolphu s Busc h gave $5,000. 
*I A charter has been granted by the State 
corporation commission fo r an Industria l 
Hom e School fo r Waywar d Colored Girls 
to be located at Hampton , Va . 
<I J . R . Coffy, a colored man of Wewoka , 
Okla. , made the highest average o f any 
applican t from Oklahoma i n the departmental clerk examination of the civil 
sen-ice. There were more than a hundred 
applicants from Oklahoma . 
<I O f 133 colored dining-car men on 
the Ne w York , New Have n and Hartfor d 
Railroa d examined fo r health and 
cleanliness only one failed to pass the 
examination. 
MEETINGS . 
THE nationa l convention of the Alph a 
Ph i Alph a Fraternit y met i n its sixth 
annua l session at Howar d University, Beta 
Chapter, Washington , D . C , December 
29-31. The fraternity wil l soon have an 
official organ, The Sphinx, edited by Ray ­
mond W . Cannon, wit h Juliu s McKelvi e as 
business manager. 
*I The State Association of Colored Teachers o f Virgini a met i n Alexandri a on 
Februar y 26-27. 
<I Od d Fellows from various parts of the 
countr y met i n Philadelphi a recently i n the 
semi-annual session of the subcommittee of 
management of the Gran d Unite d Order of 
Odd Fellows. 
*I The Nationa l Association of Colored 
Editors met i n Nashville , Tenn., Februar y 
13 and 14. 
^ The annual meeting of the directors of 
the Jeanes Negro Rura l School Fun d met 
i n New Yor k Cit y i n January . Reports 
showed that $34,262 had been pai d i n 
teachers' salaries by the fund. 
^1 The sixth annual meeting of the Negro 
Race Conference was held i n Columbia , 
S. C , Februar y 18-20. 
1 The Sunday-school congress of the 
national Baptist convention wil l meet i n 
Beaumont, Tex., i n June. 
\ 
*! Colored Masons of Michiga n held their 
annual convention i n Kalamazo o on 
Januar y 27. 
*I The forty-ninth annual session of the 
Louisian a Africa n Methodist Conference 
met i n Lak e Charles on Januar y 28. 
*I The Alabama State Association of Colored Teachers wil l meet i n Birmingham, 
Ala. , next month. 
ECONOMICS. 
THE colored Masons of Florid a have a 
A
 new $100,000 temple. 
1 The Mechanics' Savings Ban k and Trust 
Compan y wil l soon be opened i n Nashville . 
This wil l be Nashville's thir d colored bank. 
*I The Institute Buildin g and Lan d Company, a corporation of ten colored men, has 
recently been organized at Charleston, 
W . Va. , wit h a capita l of $20,000. This 
corporation wil l do real-estate business i n 
Charleston and i n Institute, W . Va . 
*J Anderson R . Abbot, a colored physician 
of Toronto, Canada, died, leaving an estate 
worth $61,000. 
*I Fred . J . Douglass, a colored man of 
Topeka , Kan. , has been granted a patent 
fo r a slide valve to be used on steam 
engines. 
1 The Nort h Carolin a Mutua l and Provident Association began i n 1899 wit h a 
business of $840, and i n 1913 di d $300,000 
worth of business. 
*I Several colored men, under the name of 
the Melbourne Company, wil l open a new 
colored hotel i n Boston. 
219 220 TH E CRISIS 
1 The Alabama Penn y Savings Ban k i n 
Birmingham, Ala. , declared a dividend of 
8 per cent, at the annua l meeting of 
stockholders. 
*I The State corporation commission of 
Virgini a has granted a charter to an 
organization of colored men i n Portsmouth 
permittin g them to do a bankin g business 
wit h a capita l stock of not less than $10,000. 
Negroes have opened a mattress factory 
i n Knoxville , Tenn. The factory supplies 
many leading white and colored furnitur e 
dealers i n Knoxvill e and through the South. 
*I Majo r Taylor, a bicycle rider of Wor ­
cester, Mass., has invented an automobile 
tire which is said to be cheaper and more 
satisfactory than the tires now i n use. A 
leading firm of Worceste r furnished money 
fo r the road test, and the tires proved so 
satisfactory that a company has been organized fo r the purpose of manufacturing and 
selling them. 
The citizens of Miami , Fla. , are carryin g 
on a campaign fo r deep water i n the 
harbor, and the colored citizens, unsolicited, 
have pledged themselves to raise $10,000. 
•3 A company of colored citizens i n 
Raleigh , N C , have been granted a charter 
and expect to open a bank very soon. 
•3 Mr . J. S. Groves, a colored farme r i n 
Kansas, is considered the ''potato king " of 
that State. I n 1912 he raised 55,000 bushels 
of potatoes on 320 acres. 
TH E COURTS. 
THE "Ji m Crow " law of Oklahoma has 
been upheld by the Unite d States 
Circuit Court of Appeals. The Federa l 
District. Court previously upheld the law 
and stated that the railroa d company would 
not be compelled to furnish Pullma n ears 
for Negroes i f there was not a sufficient 
demand. 
^ Charles Lanie r of Newark, N . J. , is suing 
the Newar k Theatrica l Compan y fo r $500 
damages because he an d his wif e were 
refused admission to the main auditorium of 
the Odeon Theatre i n Newark . 
Willia m Young , a Negro, charged with 
assault upon a 14-year-old white child, has 
been acquitted in the Superio r Court of 
Georgia . 
Miss Wilm a Shackleton is suing a restaurant owner i n Brooklyn , N . Y. , for 
drawin g the color line. 
*I It is reported that Judge Risinge r has 
been upheld by the Court of Appeals i n the 
First Judicia l Distric t of Dayton , O., i n his 
decision that the colored Elk s of that State 
cannot use the symbols, insigni a an d badges 
used by white Elks. 
«I The Unite d Slates Supreme Court decided on Januar y 30, 1913, that the action 
of the Supreme Lodge , Knights of Pythias, 
i n revokin g the charter of the Gran d Lodge , 
Knights of Pythia s of Virginia , i n August, 
1913, was unconstitutional and unlawful. 
*I Benjami n Jones and Fanni e Guatie r 
brought suit against the Berli n Realt y Compan y of Lo s Angeles, Cal. , because the compan y refused to sell them propert y on 
account of color. Judge J . W . Shenk declared that race-restriction clauses i n prop ­
erty deeds were illega l and handed down a 
decision against the realty company. 
TH E GHETTO . 
THE mayor of East Orange, N . J. , 
vetoed the appointment of F . J . 
Sulliva n as policeman because Sullivan's 
average i n the civi l service was not the 
highest, as the board of police commissioners claimed. George Williams, a colored 
man, was said to have the highest average. 
Later, however, the police commissioners 
unanimously overrode the mayor's veto, 
claimin g that George William s di d not have 
the highest but the lowest average. 
*I Two white ministers of Cassville , Mo. , 
endeavored to stop the youn g people of 
their congregations from attending a New 
Year's dance by appealin g to their race 
prejudice. They distributed circulars protesting against the importatio n of a colored 
orchestra to pla y fo r the dance. The dance 
was largely attended. 
«J The St. Louis Chora l Symphon y Orchestr a gave a free festival at the Coliseum i n 
St. Louis, and advertised that there would 
be absolutely no distinction made between 
poor and rich. The colored people, however, were compelled to enter the hall 
through a rear entrance. 
«I C. W . Hill , the principa l of a publi c 
school i n Mobile , Ala. , has been informed 
by the board of school commissioners of 
Mobil e Count y that he must give u p his 
position i f he continues to edit the "Negr o 
Social " section of the Mobil e Post. The 
chairman of the board gave as the reason ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 221 
fo r this decision the fact that Mr . Hil l 
was advertising his position i n his newspape r wor k and was conducting a Negro 
social page i n a pape r published by white 
men fo r white people. 
^ Discriminati o n i n the Centra l Railroa d 
restaurant at Communipaw Avenue station 
i n Jersey City , N . J. , has been discontinued 
chiefly through the efforts of the committee 
of one hundred of colored men i n Jersey 
City . 
Q It is reported that segregation of railroad clerks i n Virgini a and Nort h Carolina 
has taken a new form. The colored clerks 
are being transferred to night trains and 
the white clerks, to day trains. 
*I Thomas Dixon 's play, "The Leopard's 
Spots, " was recently prohibited from playin g i n Florence , Ala . A number of colored 
citizens protested to the mayor, who promised that the pla y should not be given and 
warned Dixo n that every actor would be 
arrested i f they attempted to play. I n spite 
of this warnin g Dixo n sent out circulars 
announcing that the pla y would be put on. 
The mayor ordered the theatre closed on the 
evening that the company was booked to 
appea r and there was no performance of 
"Th e Leopard's Spots. " 
9 The Nationa l Biscuit Compan y no longer 
. employs Negroes. 
*J Seven native laborers were kille d and 
thirty-six wounded i n a fight between 
natives and white people i n the diamond 
mines of Jagerfontein, South Africa . The 
trouble arose over a dispute concerning the 
death of Basuto, a native, which was 
claimed to be the result o f a kic k from a 
white man. 
<J Hyattsville , Md. , has passed a segregation ordinance. 
<I The colored people of Louisville , Ky. , 
have obtained a half victory from the 
manager of the Nationa l Theatre i n that 
city. Instead of a back entrance and seats 
i n the gallery only, they wil l hereafter use 
the street entrance and have accommodation 
i n the first balcony. 
<J Recently Judge N . H . Stewart, of the 
Circuit Court o f Kalamazoo , Mich. , refused 
to appoint attorney E . J . Marshall , a colored man, counsel fo r a white woman to 
free her son. H e said that unless the 
woman could find a white lawye r he would 
not hear the case. 
f Sheldon Vanderburgh, i n spite of the 
neighbors' belief that he would not "desecrate the neighborhood," sold his home i n 
Hastings-on-the-Hudson, N . Y. , to a colored 
real-estate dealer i n order to spite his 
neighbors. The dealer claims to have 
bought it fo r one of his clients who wil l 
use it for a roadhouse. 
.The colored people of York , Pa. , have 
succeeded i n having two electric signs, 
"Colore d Bar " and "Colore d Ladies' Dinin g 
Room, " removed from the Liveric k Hotel. 
<1 Mrs. Lee Terrell, a colored woman of 
Beaumont, Tex., was ridin g alone i n a 
"Ji m Crow " car en route to Pauhuska , when 
the trainman put about thirty drunken white 
men i n the car. Mrs. Terrell complained 
to the conductor of their insults and was 
ushered by him into the baggage car, where 
she was compelled to remain until the end 
of her* tri p or else suffer the insults of the 
party of drunken men. 
*I The lower house of the South Carolin a 
general assembly has passed the Fortne r 
bill, and it is now before the senate. The 
bill prohibits white teachers from teaching 
i n colored schools, white nurses from havin g colored patients and prohibits "intimacy 
of the races i n houses of ill-repute. " 
The members of the Carpenters' Unio n 
of Mobile , Ala. , objected strenuously to the 
employment of a colored foreman on the 
new Citronelle school buildin g to be erected. 
A delegation protested to the school board 
and received promises that the board would 
investigate. It is reported, however, that 
the colored man became frightened and left 
town. 
*I A t a mass meeting i n the Harlem branch 
of the Y . M . C. A. , called by a committee 
of thirty, the Harle m Propert y Owners' 
Improvement Association was formed for 
the purpose of preventing Negroes from 
coming into Harle m to live. The organizers wil l incorporate the association as soon 
as $100,000 of stock is pledged, but just 
what methods will be taken has not yet 
been stated. 
1 A t the Temple of Creation i n New Yor k 
Cit y a series of pictures, "The Photo Drama 
of Creation, " is being given. A t the entrance of the church is this sign : "Seats 
Free ! N o Collection! Fre e to Bot h Ric h 
and Poor! " An d yet the colored people 222 TH E CRISIS 
who have attended the church claim that 
i n each case they were directed to a side 
door which led to the top gallery. 
•I A special class of colored students was 
formed i n publi c school No . 1 i n Paterson, 
N . J. , covering four grades, and i n charge 
of Miss Fanni e Lowe , the only colored 
teacher i n the school. It seems that this 
class was formed so that Miss Lowe , who 
stood highest i n the examinations, might 
have an opening and still not teach white 
pupils, fo r now that Miss Lowe has resigned 
the class is disbanded. 
Representative Fran k Clarke , of Florida , 
asked the governor of his State to call a 
special meeting of the Florid a legislature 
to enact a law that would prohibit Japanese 
and "people of like races" from ownin g land 
withi n the State. 
*J Race segregation laws seeking to separate 
the whites and blacks i n definite parts of 
Norfolk , Va. , stand adjudged unconstitutional on a technicality. The city lost its 
appea l i n the State Circuit Court seeking 
to overturn a lower court's verdict of 
unconstitutionality. 
^ W . B . Sutton, a colored plumbe r of Norfolk, Va. , has received a license from the 
board of control. Althoug h Mr . Sutton has 
worked at his trade efficiently fo r fifteen 
years, since last June he has been prevented 
from workin g by the white plumbers' union. 
The matter was taken up by the board of 
control and resulted i n the license. 
^ " A prominent Negro was arrested because 
he objected to the familiarit y of white men 
wit h colored women on the street car."— 
Muskogee (Okla.) Cimeter. 
CRIME. 
LYNCHINGS of Negroes, which have 
occurred since the last account, are 
as follows: 
<I A t Oklahoma City , Okla. , Benjami n 
Dickerson charged wit h murdering a white 
man. Nea r Wendell, N . C , James Wilso n 
charged with the murde r of a white woman ; 
even while he protested his innocence his 
face was slashed and he was tortured i n 
other ways by a mob composed of men and 
women. A t Mulberry , Fla. , Lewis Pac k 
and Wald o James, for attacking a white 
man who could not identify the Negroes, as 
it was dark when he was attacked. A t 
Jefferson, Tex., Davi d Lee, for woundin g a 
white constable who has completely 
recovered. 
^ There was a small race riot i n Delmar, 
Del. , recently, which it is claimed was the 
result of a colored ma n insultin g a white 
woman. Reports of the riot say that "before the riot ceased several colored men had 
been severely thrashed and the streets 
cleaned of colored persons, regardless of 
sex." 
1 A colored man, supposedly Dugge r 
Harris, who was accused of killin g Pede r 
T. Johnson, a white sheriff of Jacksonville , 
Fla. , was shot six times and kille d by 
Marsha l H . I. Yanc y at Helena , Ga . A 
mob of white ruffians burned the body. It 
seems now that the identification of the 
man who was kille d was by no means complete and there is doubt that the victim 
was Harris after all. 
<! Mrs. Jessie Ferguson , a colored woman 
of Chicago, was recently criminall y assaulted 
by a white policeman, whose name had not 
been made publi c at the last report. The 
officer has been released on bail awaiting 
trial. 
^ Two colored men were walkin g alon g the 
railroa d tracks, between Delawar e and 
Nowata , Okla . The town marshal, Mayfield , 
called to them to halt, but the men became 
frightened and ran . The marsha l then shot, 
killin g one man and woundin g the other. 
H e excused himself by saying that he 
thought the men were bootleggers. 
*I George Smith , a colored man, was on 
tria l i n Macon , Ga. , fo r petty larceny. His 
employer, R . C. Hazlehurst, was called as 
a character witness. H e spoke as follows: 
"Yes, I thin k he is guilty, they are all 
guilty. A s fa r as character is concerned, he 
has no character. Non e of them have." 
I n consideration of Hazlehurst's feeling's i n 
the matter, the judge added an extr a month 
and an extra fine of $5 to the sentence 
usually imposed i n petty larceny cases. 
fl J . C. Phillips, a colored college student 
from Dallas, Tex., was attacked by twenty 
or thirt y white toughs at the Gilma r station, 
where he was waitin g wit h a youn g woman 
for a train. The ruffians knocked his hat 
off, threw the books that he carried to the 
ground, and swore at him as "a n educated 
nigge r who thought himself smart. " Shortl y 
before this a colored minister and several 
women were badly treated at Bi g Sandv . 
Tex. WILLIAM HAYES WARD. 
MEN OF THE MONTH 224 TH E CRISIS 
A N UNSWERVIN G FRIEND. 
THE retirement of Willia m Haye s War d 
from the active direction of the 
Independent marks an epoch which colored 
people must not forget. Dr . War d and 
Lyma n Abbo t are both Massachusetts men 
and born i n the same year, 1835. Bot h were 
Congregationa l clergymen 
and both became i n the 
course of time editors of 
widely influential weekly 
periodicals. Her e the parallelism stops. Willia m 
Haye s War d remained 
first and last a singlehearte d straightforward 
friend of human beings, 
whether white, yellow or 
black. H e stood fo r democracy without "ifs, " and 
he stood for that "social 
equality" which eagerly 
recognizes ability and character irrespective of merely 
physica l differences. Ly ­
man Abbo t began and continued to be a man who 
developed a singula r gift 
i n sensing the popula r side 
of any great social question 
and discovering deep and 
esoteric reasons fo r supportin g that side. I n reconstruction times, therefore, both Abbo t and War d 
were strong friends of the 
Negro. Afte r the Southern 
revolution Dr . Abbot, as 
editor of the Outlook, 
gradually transferred allegiance, and became the 
most subtle and dangerous 
enemy of the Negro in 
America . H e joined i n the 
slander of mulattoes, misrepresented > and helped 
disfranchisement, and used 
every art of his remarkable gift i n casuistry to 
put the religion of Jesus Christ into the 
service of color caste. Dr . Abbo t di d this 
wit h so straight a face and such an assumption of hig h motives and impeccable respectability that thousands of well-meaning 
American s followed his lead. 
Neithe r the jeers and threats of the 
South nor the coldness of the Nort h moved 
Dr . Ward . I n the face o f criticism, and 
probably at much financial loss, the Independent continued to stand absolutely 
square on the Negr o problem. A t times its 
voice was drowned b y clamor, at times it 
ran g out absolutely alone, but still it stood 
and still its venerable white-haired editor 
cried griml y wit h the wor d of ages: "Gott 
helfe mich, ich hann nicht anders!" This 
is a record that deserves the gratitude of 
every American , and Negroes especially 
should honor Dr . War d and subscribe for 
the Independent. 
JOHN E. ARCHER, MAYOR OF BATTERSEA . ME N O F TH E MONT H 225 
It is gratifyin g to TH E CRISI S to number 
Dr . War d wit h its readers. H e writes us: 
" I think you r magazine is one of the most 
useful I read, for the most cryin g evil of 
our day is the injustice to those of more or 
less Negro blood. " 
TH E MAYO R OF BATTERSEA . 
FURTHER information concerning Joh n 
*• Richar d Archer, the newly elected 
mayor of Battersea, London , brings out 
some interesting facts. 
Hi s father was a Negr o of Barbadoes, 
West Indies, and his mother an Irish 
woman. H e was born i n Liverpool . H e 
started to study medicine, but gave it u p 
on account of a nervous breakdown. Then 
he began to read for the bar, but was 
drawn aside by politica l interests, and became an ardent supporter of Joh n Burns, 
li e gains his livelihood as a photographer 
and i n this line has taken 
many prizes, and has held 
the position of honorary 
libraria n of one of the oldest photographic societies 
in London . 
I n the borough council 
of Battersea he has been a 
member of the works, valuation, finance, health and 
baths committee. O f the 
baths committee he was 
chairman, and had under 
his supervision the largest 
public bath in England . 
H e has been a member of 
the board of guardians, 
which controls the poor 
funds for the largest union 
i n Londo n and second 
largest i n England , wit h a 
populatio n o f nearly 
480,000. 
H e is also a school manager and chairman of a 
group of school managers 
which control three of the 
largest schools i n the district. H e is one of the 
trustees of a number of 
charities, a governor of Sir 
Walte r St. John's school, 
and a member of the first 
committee formed after the 
granting of old-age pensions by parliament. 
B y reason of the na ­
tionality of his mother he 
belongs to the Unite d Irish 
League. 
Finally , i n a statement 
which he sends to TH E 
CRISIS , he declares that he "fears no man 
and brooks no insults because of the race to 
which he is proud to belong." 
W e are privileged to quote passages from 
a personal letter sent to a friend in the 
Unite d States: 
"Last week I attended a great function 
at the Guildhall when the twenty-eight Lon -
MRS . JOH N R. ARCHER 226 TH E CRISIS 
don mayors were present wit h the lor d 
mayor. It filled my heart wit h jo y to wal k 
i n the procession of mayors i n that old histori c building—the first time that one of 
our race has done so as mayor. 
"Yo u have asked me fo r a sketch of my 
life . I am not good at that sort of thing— 
I have always refused up to now, but as it 
seems to be of such special interest to the 
race, I withdraw my objection. Bu t fo r 
Heaven's sake don't describe me to be what 
the Chicago Defender states I am—tall , 
handsome and brown skinned.' The marvelous way yo u men have of makin g people 
what they are not appals me. Yo u will , of 
course, see from the photograph sent yo u 
that I am the reverse of being tall. The 
other I admit, of course, wit h all modesty. 
" I am interested i n newspaper cuttings i n 
Americ a even more than i n England . I 
have not taken the trouble to collect them, 
but I woul d lik e to know what ma y be 
said of my appointment i n America , even 
though it may be adverse. Fo r I have learned 
of one man here, an African , who di d not 
think that I ought to hold, as a man of 
color, my present position. 'Tel l it not i n 
Gath!' I woul d like to meet him because as 
a member of the board of guardians I have 
a great deal to do wit h imbeciles. " 
Universal Brotherhood 
CLASP hands across the sea, brothers, 
^ Clasp hands across the sea. 
We'r e brown and white and black, brothers; 
Wha t matters which it be? 
We all are sons of God , brothers, 
Join t workers fo r the good, 
Wit h hearts united, beating 
I n human brotherhood. 
MARGARE T VO N SEYDEWITZ. 
Jena , Germany. 
On Segregation 
B y ARTHUR TUNNELL 
(Inspired by the Washington protest meeting) 
STRONG spirits must awaken! for the 
^ time, 
Unhealthy wit h a bitter sick unrest 
That ne'er relaxes i n our fevered breast, 
Bid s that we, Godlike , rise above the crime 
That sullies the still beauty of our time, 
That makes a noble state seem still unblest, 
Because her weaker brothers find no rest, 
Bu t wearied, labor i n a cause sublime. 
Come forth ! ye deep-voiced star-souled men, 
An d o'er the sounding lan d raise high you r 
song, 
Sin g o'er and o'er the truth yo u love again, 
To tame the terror of this fearful wrong . 
Teach deep inwrought the power of love 
through all, 
That without which earth's glories all must 
fall. THE tri p to the chairman of the 
TH E NE W .. . . . . „ T , 
executive committee to the West 
ABOLITION , has brought notable editorial 
utterances. The Chicago Evening Post, i n 
a leading editorial, says: 
''Lincol n Center was fa r too small to 
hold the people who wished to attend the 
annual convention of the Chicago branch, 
Nationa l Association fo r the Advancement 
of Colored People, held last Sunday evening. The activities of this society and the 
tone of its chief spokesman upon the occasion of this annua l meeting are alike significant, and the phrase, 'the new abolitionism/ which Professor J . E . Spingar n 
made the keynote of his speech, is no 
exaggeration, but fits the movement exactly. 
"Fo r it is fiery abolitionism, as against 
the calm meliorism of Booke r T. Washing ­
ton, that this society preaches, and it is important that these two sides of the movement to alter the colored man's -status 
should be clearly discerned. 
"Wit h the propaganda of Mr . Washing ­
ton we are all more or less acquainted. H e 
emphasizes duties above rights, the actual 
over the abstract, and urges his followers 
to acquire money and commercial power, to 
farm in preference to teaching, to become 
such substantial citizens that prejudice wil l 
no longer hurt them even i f it persists. 
Mr . Washingto n is the utilitarian of the 
Negr o movement. 
"Dr . D u Bois, on the other hand, is the 
fiery idealist of the Negro movement, and 
Professor Spingar n unites to that the corresponding white idealism which is the 
guaranty that Dr . D u Bois' spirit is not 
beating itself i n vai n against a stone wall, 
but is enkindlin g a flame at which both 
white and colored men may light the torches 
fo r their common forwar d march. 
"Th e Nationa l Association fo r the Ad ­
vancement of Colored People does not believe that any white man is a free citizen 
i n a free republi c as long as black men are 
not equally free. It specializes, therefore, 
i n the work of redressing grievances due to 
race discrimination and i n education of both 
white and colored people i n the idealistic 
attitude. It urges the Negro to do what 
he is perhaps not naturally inclined to do, 
to go after his rights himself. It urges its 
white members not to patronize the colored 
man, not to aid him out of sentimental pity 
for an underdog, but to aid him because he 
is fighting the battle of America n freedom 
and America n idealism. » * * Wit h 
Mr . Washington's program, as fa r as it 
goes, we have no quarrel but a deep admiration. Bu t it must be supplemented by 
the old abolitionist flame of right for right's 
sake which Dr. D u Bois and Professor 
Spingar n are reviving. W e do not want 
to see a stronger and richer Negro race 
livin g i n permanent alienation from us. 
W e do not want to see the mistakes of our 
old competitive system, our old money 
standards of success, duplicated by the 
Negroes, as there is already a danger of it 
being duplicated under the stimulus of 
Mr . Washington's success slogan. I f the 
colored man responds so readily to that 
rather Anglo-Saxo n ideal, how much more 
readily wil l he respond to a. slogan of 
idealism. 
"Tha t idealism it is the function of the. 
Nationa l Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People to kindle. Mr . Washing ­
ton is doing a needed work i n makin g a 
strong and prosperous people from which 
the association may recruit strength. Bu t 
the two sides of the general movement must 
thus supplement each other, for together 
they represent that balance of utilitarianism 
and idealism which is the characteristic gait 
of America n progress." 
OPINION 228 
The Chicago Tribune says: 
"Ou r mistreatment of the Indians has 
been admitted to be a blot on the nation's 
'scutcheon. Ar e we to drift into an evil 
even greater? A s Dr . D u Bois says, a 
quarter century ago the solution of the 
Negro problem was formulated thus: 'Take 
the Negro out of politics. Trai n him for 
work, especially fo r farm work.' The 
Negro has been taken out of politics by 
various devices of disfranchisement which 
i n effect annul the Thirteenth Amendment. 
This process of constitutional repeal has 
been accepted complaisantly by a generation preoccupied wit h its own material 
achievements and politica l and social problems. The results of this twofold policy 
according to Dr . D u Bois and other observers are 'that the Negro schools have 
been neglected; that a large proportio n of 
the Negro children are not i n school, and 
that there has been quiet but determined 
opposition to the success of the higher 
schools for Negroes, while i n the industria l 
and agricultura l field the Negro has had to 
contend against tremendous odds.' 
"It should be said i n supplement to this 
that i n the South white schools also have 
been neglected; that the South has been 
very poor an d economically retarded, and 
that i n many districts the poor whites are 
worse off than the Negroes, though because 
of their own deficiencies. 
"Ye t after all factors are brought within 
view, the human paradox appears that 
wherever the Negro, i n spite of the staggerin g handicaps under which he moves, has 
forced himself upwar d he thereby places 
himself i n competition wit h white men and 
immediately becomes the object of their 
opposition. Wha t is really wanted of him 
is humble, useful labor. Freedom i n name 
he is to enjoy, but not the freedom a free 
soul demands, the freedom to move forward, 
to enjoy 'the blessings of liberty,' freedom 
in the 'pursuit of happiness.' 
"W e shall not solve the Negro problem 
on any such basis. The wisdom of Abraham 
Lincoln , who said 'This government cannot 
endure permanently half slave and half 
free' is wisdom to-day. Ou r policy toward 
the Negro most certainly and most profoundly wil l react upo n ourselves. That is 
a consideration which gives to the movement fo r the advancement of colored people 
the force of enlightened self-interest." 
TH E CRISIS 
The Boston Advertiser" conMR . WILSON , tinues to hammer har d on 
the President: 
"I f there is one place where there should 
be no color line, it is the department of 
social work. I n any city whic h has a 
large number of colored people one of the 
most valuable elements i n the situation is 
the co-operation of the organizations which 
colored people have formed fo r the uplift 
of their own race. I n Washington , particularly, the social problem of the city is 
partl y a problem o f poo r white folks, but 
just as much a problem o f poor colored 
folks. Al l this would be hardl y wort h sayin g were it not fo r the fact that the 
Whit e Hous e has become a center fo r the 
welfare work of Washington , and there 
seems to be a very strict rule i n these 
Whit e Hous e conferences that they are for 
white alone. There are a good man y colored welfare societies i n Washingto n which 
would like to take part i n the plans that 
are being made to improv e the city, but 
they have not been bidden to the conferences. It is evident that the polic y of the 
administration is very much what might be 
expected of Southerners, even when a 
woman of the President's famil y is tryin g 
to improve city conditions. " 
A correspondent to the Advertiser asks 
"Wher e are the Congressmen ?" and 
suggests: 
"It is all well enough to hold these meetings of protest at Washington , but what 
are the Congressmen from Ne w Englan d 
doing? Ar e they upholdin g and abetting 
this nasty discrimination? Wh o among 
them is protesting? No t man y or we 
should have heard something of it by this 
time up here i n Boston. Ar e they a set 
of cowards, afrai d of offending the administration officials who have favors to 
give out? Do they not dare to say that 
their souls are their own ? I think we all 
have reason to feel ashamed of them, and 
I think that, they wil l find that their 
cowardice has not been forgotten when the 
next nominations are given out fo r Congress 
i n Massachusetts. W e ought to have men, 
not dummies, i n Washington. " 
Anothe r correspondent i n the Bosto n 
Herald suggests: "I f we cannot be con-OPINIO N 229 
sistent on the Negro problem let us at least 
avoid hypocrisy. Charit y begins at home," 
and continues: 
"Boston , of course, maintains a pretty 
close social and industria l segregation of 
the colored people. Whe n they move into 
a neighborhood all of the whites, who can, 
move out. N o strictly social club i n Boston 
that I know o f admits colored men to membership. Restaurants discourage by rude 
and humiliatin g service all colored folk who 
would be patrons, and many, perhaps most, 
bars discriminate against the colored man. 
Segregation on the colored people has been 
applie d even by the social workers. Colored men find it hard to enter skilled employments i n Boston. Man y hotels refuse 
to employ them as waiters. Nowhere have 
I heard the colored people more bitterly 
denounced than here." 
The President's dilemma is facetiously 
set down by the Ne w Yor k Sun: 
"Onl y the most callous could withhold 
sympathy from the Hon . Woodrow Wilso n 
i n this fearful hour. 
"O n the one side the Hon . Oswald Garrison Villar d of this town frowns sternly 
upon him because the Negroes i n the government departments are undergoing the 
humiliatin g process of segregation from 
their Caucasian fellow workers. 
"O n the other hand, the Hon . Cole Blease 
of South Carolin a hurls violent invective 
upon him because 'niggers boss white women 
i n the government service,' a barbarism no 
follower of bleasocracy can tolerate. 
"Alas! for Mr . Wilson . Wha t banner 
shall he follow? The black and tan of 
Villar d or the pure white of Blease? " 
"Norfolk " writes from Washingto n to the 
Boston Record: 
"I f yo u believe that segregation has been 
abolished i n all the government departments 
yo u are very much misled. It is not so 
publi c or so open; but there are some 
departments still i n which the colored 
clerks and messengers are made to understand that they must keep by themselves or 
else that they wil l soon be out of their 
jobs. Whateve r the heads of the different 
bureaus may tell their superiors, we here 
i n Washingto n know by the personal experience of ourselves and our friends that 
the color line is being drawn every day and 
that any protest against it would mean the 
loss of bread and butter." 
TH E RIGH T SAYS Boston Advertiser in 
T O VOTE . GOOD, PLAIN ENGLISH: 
"W e have already declared 
our belief that, i f the Republica n party 
wants an issue on which to reunite the 
party, one which wil l appeal to the red 
blood and the patriotism of every decent 
American , whether Republican, or Progressive, or Democrat, it is ready to hand, i n 
the unconstitutional and outrageous suppression of the votes of America n freemen, 
i n the Southern States, merely on account 
of the color of their skins. 
" A skeptical correspondent, whose letter 
wil l be found i n another column of this 
page to-day, says that it would be impossible to induce Congress to pass any such 
law ; that too many Congressmen now owe 
their places i n Congress, i n Hous e or 
Senate, to this fraudulent and outrageous 
denial of the rights of colored men to the 
franchise. The 'South is i n the saddle,' 
says our estimable critic, and the South is 
going to do far worse things to the Negro 
than the mere denial of the right to vote. 
The persecution of the Negro in the different executive departments at Washington, 
it seems, is only the beginning of a countrywide policy, south of Mason's and Dixon's 
line, to 'teach the nigger his place.' 
"Moreover, says our illustrious critic, 
even i f Congress should so fa r violate 
every tradition and rule of the Democratic 
party, and should pass a measure which 
would so appreciably destroy the influence 
of the Democratic party i n national politics, 
President Wilson , as a self-respecting friend 
of the South, woul d surely veto it. Ou r 
critic seems to think that the very fact that 
President Wilson , who has been free enough 
i n his criticism of all the other glaring 
evils of America n politics, has been absolutely silent on this, the greatest and most 
pernicious of the politica l ills. Mr . Wilso n 
has threatened to hang as high as Hama n 
any man who tries to injur e the America n 
wage earner; but he has been discreetly 
silent about the greater evil of the abuse of 
10,000,000 of self-respecting colored wage 
earners." 
It continues the argument i n another 
editorial: 
"I n all honesty, we believe that most 
Republicans are rather ashamed of the 
makeshift offered by the Republica n 
national committee, at Washington , to the 230 TH E CRISI S 
members of the party, the country over, 
regarding representation i n future national 
conventions. 
"Th e bargain proposed is so one sided, so 
unfair, so ridiculous, that the suggested 
reduction i n the representation of the 
Southern States i n future conventions falls 
fa r . short of the admitted facts. A t the 
election of 1912, fo r example, 3,834 votes 
were cast i n Louisian a for the Republica n 
nationa l ticket; 1,597 were cast i n Mississipp i and 536 were cast i n South Carolina . 
I n this State 155,000 votes were cast for 
Mr . Taft. I f the committee's pla n prevails, 
Louisian a wil l be entitled i n the next 
national convention to one delegate for 
every 319 voters. Mississipp i to 'one for 
every 133 voters and South Carolin a to 
one for every 48 voters, while Massachusetts wil l have to be satisfied, even i f it 
retains its present 36 votes, to one delegate 
for every 4,500 voters. Alabama wil l have 
one delegate for every 650 voters, while 
Ne w Yor k wil l have but one delegate for 
every 5,000 voters. Georgi a wil l have a 
delegate for each g-roup . of 350 voters, 
while Ohio may have one delegate for every 
5,800 voters. 
"O f course any such basis of representation, so completely discriminatory and one 
sided, is almost as bad as the old system 
of the 'rotten boroughs' of the solid South. 
The national committee has not helped matters much by what it offers. It admits that 
the present system of representation is unfair, and merely suggests—not that the 
discrimination and unfairness be abolished 
—but that it be slightly less unfair than it 
has previously been. The pla n seems ridicu ­
lous. It fails to meet the vita l point of the 
whole issue, that the time has come when the 
national committee and the nationa l convention shall fairl y and proportionately represent the voters of the Republica n party, not 
merely politica l machines without any voters 
behind them. 
"I f that is the best the nationa l committee can do, for honest part y representation, the Republicans of the different States 
should consider whether they may not 
arrange their own part y conference, to deal 
honestly and justl y wit h this whole issue of 
Republica n representation and politica l 
representation i n general. Fo r the thin g is 
a stench and a scandal i n America n politics. 
The whole country knows that a large 
proportio n of the citizens of the Unite d 
States are denied the right to vote. An d 
the whole country knows that these men are 
taxed without representation, an d that the 
Constitutiona l provisions respecting the 
suppression of votes i n the Unite d States 
is impudentl y and openly violated, i n the 
matter of the representation, both i n the 
Hous e of Representatives and i n the 
Electora l College. " 
The revelation of high politica l moralit y 
i n South Carolin a since the suppression of 
the Negr o vote has been exposed by the 
contested election of Richar d S. Whaley . 
"Whateve r wa y the charges are looked 
at," says the New Yor k Evening Post, "they 
show an exceedingly ugl y state o f things. 
Fo r they are brought by Mayo r Grace of 
Charleston, and. i f false, place the head of 
that city's government i n the position of a 
villainous slanderer; while, i f they are true, 
they make the representative from the 
Charleston district a gross debaucher of his 
constituency. Her e is an extract from the 
speech of Mr . Frear, of Wisconsin , urgin g 
the investigation : 
" 'The testimony shows that .$100,000 was 
spent i n two primarie s by the two candidates, that money flowed like water, that 
men were bought and sold lik e sheep, and 
that this debauched condition of affairs existed throughout the district. Names of men 
who were bought and names of buyers were 
furnished; also amounts pai d to different 
men and amounts allotted to each war d or 
precinct. It was specifically charged that 
an expenditure of $60,000 was made by the 
Whale y faction wit h Mr . Whaley's knowledge and consent, and testimony was given 
to that effect. 
" 'Althoug h notified of every hearing, 
Mr . Whale y refused to appea r and face 
his accusers. Bu t one day durin g their 
absence the committee was called together 
to hear Mr . Whale y make a brie f statement 
and to permit him to file counter affidavits 
i n his own defence. The committee never 
had powe r to do anything, and now reports 
back to the Hous e it wants no powe r and 
does not believe an investigation desirable.' 
"This is unpleasantly reminiscent of the 
Lorime r case, i n more ways than one. Bu t 
one is hardly prepared to see this sort of 
thin g said about a South Carolin a 
gentleman." OPINIO N 231 
"The meanest law ever enacted 
EDUCATION . . „ , . . ., . , „ 
i n any State i n this country, 
is what the Continent calls "the new Florid a 
statute, which forbids white teachers to in ­
struct Negr o pupils. It is mean because 
whatever excuses are made fo r it, the real 
purpose beneath is to interfere wit h white 
Christians who want to help colored children 
an d youn g people up into better intelligence 
and better character. It is a law against the 
colored race becoming better i n the next generation than it is i n this. An d nothing could 
be more diabolical than legal enactments 
intended to perpetrate social and racia l 
depression." 
The characteristic falsification of facts 
concerning the Southern situation is illustrated by a letter from 0 . T. Headley i n the 
Congregationalist. H e says that there are as 
many Negroes lynched in the North , accordin g to population, as there are i n the South. 
This is not so. O f the 79 lynched i n 1913 
three, or less than 1 per cent., were lynched 
outside the former slave States, and two of 
these were lynched i n contiguous territory, 
namely, Southern Ohio and Indiana . The 
Nort h contains 11 per cent, of all the Negroes 
i n the country. The proportio n of Negroes 
lynched i n the Nort h has risen as high as 
5 or 6 pe r cent, i n the past, but it has never 
come anywhere near this extraordinary 
statement. 
Again , it is said that Negro school children 
i n Alabama are granted as much money per 
capit a as the whites, by the State, and that 
the State builds high-school buildings for 
both races. This is absolutely false. I n 
Alabama the colored children form 45 per 
cent, of the population and receive, according 
to the report of the Unite d States Commissioner of Education , 12 per cent, of the educational funds. The write r may be quibbling 
as to State and local funds, but even i n the 
distribution of State funds the discrimination 
is quite as great. 
The write r says that the State furnishes 
high-school trainin g to all Negroes who 
apply . There are only four colored high 
schools i n the State wit h 319 pupils, while in 
the privat e high schools there are nearly 
5,000 pupils not provided fo r by the State. 
Bu t wh y argue? 
The Greenville (S. C.) News says: 
"Ther e are many intelligent and wellmeaning persons who object to the educatio n of the Negro, holding that such education wil l breed future trouble. Then, of 
course, there is the politician who uses this 
question for his own gain by appealing 
to passion and prejudice. The politician 
is not afraid of the future ; he doesn't care 
a ra p fo r the future ; indeed this indifference to the welfare of those who come after 
him is his most distinguishing characteristic. 
So let him pass, and turn to the first class 
mentioned: the well-meaning persons who 
sincerely have doubts as to the expediency 
of Negro education. To them we have this 
to say. There are many problems which 
only time can settle; and time wil l settle 
them, i f we do our duty. An d can any one 
doubt that the duty of a stronger race is 
to raise a weaker one? An d can any one 
doubt that education, which is, or ought 
to be, preparation for life, is the best way 
to raise them? " 
The Sa n Antoni o (Tex.) Express comments on a recent meeting of Negro teachers as follows: 
"The presence of more than 1,000 teachers and the discussion of practica l questions 
relating to school work, at the recent State 
convention of colored teachers i n Brenham, 
was a pleasing indication of the wor k that 
is being done for the elevation of the 
colored race." 
I n two schools of the South difficulties 
between the colored students and the white 
Northern teachers have occurred. The 
Christian Recorder says: 
"It seems from the public press that the 
students of Shaw Universit y have rebelled 
against the president of the school, Rev. 
C. R. Meserve, and the students of Clar k 
Universit y protested against President 
Foster. 
"W e do not know the details of either 
case, and we shall not attempt any discussion of the same. 
"Bu t the unrest i n these schools, and i n 
several others, is such as to call for serious 
consideration, as it is becoming too general 
a thing these days to have colored students 
rebel. An d it is almost a new thing. It is 
very probably certain that the strained relations have grown u p largely because of 
the fact that the students are colored and 
the teachers are white. N o one regrets more 
than we do the growin g breach between the 
races. It is one of the most lamentable 
phases of our life . The times have very 
greatly changed, and many of the white 232 TH E CRISI S 
teachers who have given their lives to the 
colored race are finding that the colored 
people do not seem to appreciate it as much 
now as they once did. 
"Yet , but little of the trouble is wit h the 
remnant of that older class of teachers, 
whose devotion to the Negro must ever remai n one of the most inspirin g chapters of 
our nationa l history. I n those early days 
not only the brains but the best of heart 
an d soul, whic h the Nort h had, went to 
teach the Negro. Those were the days of 
the Armstrongs, the Wares, the Cravaths 
and their kind , who bound their students by 
ties of love, which were stronger than hoops 
of steel. A younger group of Thirkields, 
Frissels, Bumsteads, Charlotte Thornes, et 
al., followed them, but they are fast passing. " 
The Charlotte Observer has this tribute 
to the Negro nurse : 
"O f peculia r interest to Southern readers 
should be the story which comes from 
Chicago of a Southern white boy taken suddenly and desperately il l wit h pneumonia 
who was hurried by the doctors to a Negr o 
hospital as the one most convenient. Hi s 
mother telegraphed urgin g his remova l to 
some other hospital. It was too late for 
that. Fo r thirty-six hours continuously the 
nurse assigned him fought for his lif e and 
won. The mother, while doubtless not 
affected i n just the way some Northern 
people might expect her to be, pays heartfelt tribute to the qualities exemplified by 
this Negro trained nurse. She had probably known before, as Southern people 
generally know, that the Negr o woman 
household nurse is the best and most faithfu l i n the world . She could not have 
expected less of a Negro nurse professionally trained fo r the care of the sick. 
Very , very few of us who had Negro 
nurses i n our childhood can ever forget the 
debt of kindness we owe the Negro race." 
TH E NEGR O 
AND TH E 
CHURCH . 
The deeply religious are feelin g keenly the shame of the 
attitude of the church toward 
the Negro. Miss Id a Vos e 
Woodbur y said at a home mission 
conference: 
"The supreme test of the melting pot i n 
this country to-day is not the immigrant, 
but the native-born America n Negro. * * * 
Democracy to-day is on tria l fo r its life , 
and i f it fails the test, then the influence 
of this country on other countries wil l be 
nil . It is not wort h whil e fo r the white 
people of this country to send missionaries 
to Chin a while the ma n around the corner 
is a Chinaman ; no use to send to Afric a 
while the women who do you r laundr y are 
Negroes. The time has lon g since passed 
when we can send men to foreign countries 
to evangelize without backin g u p what they 
say of the Christian's Go d right here i n 
our own country. The wor k there wil l 
never be perfect unless we have i n this 
country the spirit of universa l brotherhood. 
"I n every crisis i n this country's history 
the black man has fought fo r its salvation, 
an d where the black hand has touched the 
staff the old flag has never touched the 
ground. Americ a can never fulfil its mission of saving the worl d until it exemplifies 
the spirit of equality, democracy an d universal brotherhood i n this supreme test of 
the melting pot. " 
Walte r Rauschenbusch has fo r the first 
time spoken out on the Negr o problem: 
"It seems clear to me," he says, "that any 
religio n whic h claims to be Christianit y 
must not only teach us to respect the wort h 
o f others, but must also stiffen the backbone of men and teach them to respect 
themselves. There is some historica l justification fo r the charge of Nietzsche that 
Christianit y has taught the servile virtues 
o f patience and submission. I believe i n 
gentleness and meekness, but not i n servility. I have no faith i n force methods and 
even believe i n non-resistance, but not i n a 
non-resistance of cowardice and silence. 
There was nothing cringin g i n Jesus. H e 
di d not strike back, but neither di d he 
flinch. H e was 'the terrible meek.' 
" I am thinkin g of the Negr o race i n sayin g this. Fo r years the problem of the two 
races i n the South has seemed to me so 
tragic, so insoluble, that I have never yet 
ventured to discuss it i n public . We , of 
the Nort h have come to realize that the 
problem of the black man was solved fifty 
years ago i n anger and bitterness and, 
therefore, solved very poorly . W e realize 
that we cannot solve it fo r the South. Bu t 
no solution b y Southern men can be permanent which does not satisfy the Christia n 
consciousness of the whole nation. An d 
no solution wil l satisfy the Christia n spirit OPINIO N 233 
of our united nation which does not provide 
fo r the progressive awakening of hope and 
self-respect i n the individua l Negro and the 
awakening of race pride and race ambition 
i n all Negro communities. An y white boy 
i n his teens wil l prove to us that the awful 
awakening of manhood never takes place 
without repulsive side products, such as 
sullenness, stubbornness and insolence. But 
the cure fo r the evils of incipient manhood 
is maturer manhood, and not repression. 
W e are hearing voices from the South that 
practically condemn the black race permanently to the position of a servile caste, 
and some that even deny that the Negro 
shares the same common human blood with 
us. W e know well that these views represent only one drift i n Southern thought, 
perhaps only a small minority. Bu t we 
have before this seen a small oligarchy with 
determined convictions, and backed by 
inherited social prejudices and concrete 
economic interests, swinging great sections 
of the nation wit h them and imperilin g the 
mora l progress of our people. W e owe it 
to our brethren i n the South, who are our 
beloved kinsmen and one wit h us, to say 
that the solution of the problem does not 
lie that wa y and never will. " 
m 
SAV E SOUT H " Sout h Carolin a was a gloriCAROLINA OUS State; South Carolin a is 
a glorious State; but by all 
that's holy, the good people of South Carolin a ought to take hold of their State government. The impossible Blease is a blot 
on the splendid history of the Palmetto 
State. Those who follow his lead deserve, 
as they wil l i n time receive, the condemnation of the better people of the South, 
irrespective of color. To defeat Hampto n 
and Butler, and the type of gentleman 
statesmen of whom they were representatives, Tillma n and his followers sowed the 
dragon's teeth, which i n the fertile soil of 
prejudice fructified and grew, until to-day 
there is a harvest of blind passion and 
bruta l prejudice rampant i n the State that 
for years was i n the forefront of America n 
civilization. 
"One body of the legislature of South 
Carolin a has passed a bil l prohibitin g white 
people from teaching Negroes. This is but 
an illustration of the criminall y shortsighted 
legislation proposed by those whose hold 
upo n office is only through ignorance and 
prejudice."—Lexington (Ky. ) Herald. 
TH E WORL D PROBLE M
 Th e colo r
 consciousOF TH E COLO R LINE . ness is getting to be 
all pervasive. A 
write r i n the Londo n Chronicle says: 
"Mr . Bryce's remarks on race antagonism remind me of a day when I took an 
America n visitor 'round the metropolis 
sightseeing. It was his first visit to this 
country, and at the close of the day he 
gave me his impressions. One o f them was 
a disagreeable one, occasioned by his observation of the fact that the Negro i n our 
country is treated as a man and a brother. 
I had quite unconsciously subjected my 
America n guest to the annoyance of having 
to sit i n close proximit y to a colored gentleman at a restaurant which we visited, and 
of meeting another, a noted musician, at a 
literary club. W e argued the question at 
some length, but I soon found that the 
antagonism la y deeper than argument. It 
was instinctive and ineradicable, and yet, 
oddly enough, he was of Britis h stock. 
Two or three generations of ancestry i n the 
Unite d States had sufficed to set up i n him 
this incurable race prejudice. " 
A white South African , writin g from 
Londo n to the Natal Witness, declares 
that : 
"I n a country like South Africa , where 
the dark races outnumber the whites by 
something like six to one, there must be no 
cheese-paring tactics; no soft-soaping methods; no brotherly love between black and 
white. 'Once a nigger, always a nigger.' 
It is a terrible thing to say; but once you 
educate and Christianize your native you 
make a blackguard of him. 
"I f the Englis h people could only realize 
something of the awfulness of the 'black 
peril' evil i n South Africa , they would 
draw i n their horns, and keep their hospitality to people of their own color and 
not encourage the blacks as they do to-day." 
The A. P. 0., a colored pape r of South 
Africa , says i n answer to Sir Thomas Watt : 
"Wh y the success of the India n strike 
should ultimately lead to 'mob rule' by 
natives is difficult to conceive, except it be 
used simpl y as an argument to scare whites 
into supportin g the government to persecute 
Indians. 
"Mo b rule, indeed! I f ever there were 
'mob rule' i n South Africa , it came into 
existence wit h the birth of the Both a government. The white mob has fleeced the TH E SOCIAL LIFE OF COLORED AMERICA. 
Bachelor Benedicts' Assembly 
Central Casino Jan. 9 
Photo By "Schlesinger" II. — TH E BACHELOR-BENEDICTS' ASSEMBLY, 
NEW YORK CITY. 236 TH E CRISIS 
natives to the tune of nearly £4,000,000 
since union, out of which Sir Thomas Wat t 
gets £3,000 a year. The white mobs are 
burnin g Kaffir kraals to drive natives into 
slavery. An d it is to put an end to this 
mob rule and establish law and order that 
the natives wil l and must one day strike, 
and that at no distant date." 
Willia m Pickens has this interesting comment i n the Congregationalist: 
" A Negro i n Europ e pretty soon develops infallibl e tests by whic h he can tell 
American s at sight. A white man i n Paris, 
i f he be a Frenchman , who has not seen a 
dozen Negroes i n all his life, wil l give the 
Negro a look of norma l curiosity and pass 
on ; but a white man i n Paris, who has just 
come from some part of Mississippi , where 
five-sixths of the inhabitants are colored, 
wil l stare at a Negro i n the Champ s de 
Mars as i f he had never seen one before, 
and, alas! he may not only stare, but frown . 
I f a black man enters a ear i n which all 
the places are taken but one, and the person sitting next to it tries to spread himself 
over two seats so as to prevent the Negro 
from sitting, he knows that person to be 
an American . 
"I f he enters a dinin g room i n Berli n 
and some guest gives him a tigerish look, 
as i f to say, 'Yo u have no business here,' 
he knows that guest is his fellow countryman. I f the people across the table seize 
the dish of food deposited by the waiter, 
rake all the contents into their own plates 
and leer at the Negro contemptuously, he 
knows they are folks from home. I f he is 
on the deck of a Rhin e steamer and some 
meddlesome person at a safe distance interlards a remark wit h 'nigger,' he recognizes 
a person from the chivalrous part of the 
Unite d States. I f anybody anywhere offers 
him gratuitous insult, he recognizes i n that 
body one of those whom the newspapers at 
home call his 'best friends.' O f course, 
there are other American s than these 
abroad, but the Negro meets no such person 
from any other part of the world , civilized 
or savage, Christia n or heathen. 
" I saw one youn g woman from Arkansa s 
who, when she was i n Jerusalem, made a 
scene i n a publi c dinin g room when she discovered two colored women seated at 
another table i n a fa r corner from hers. 
To the great embarrassment of the rest of 
her party, most of whom were from the 
Nort h and East, she carried her protest intc 
rebellion and woul d not eat i n that room. 
An d the two colored women were America n 
members of the Internationa l Sunday 
School Convention that had been i n session 
at Zurich . This scene i n the old Jerusalem 
is enough to make the Negr o wonde r how 
the Lor d wil l manage it i n the Ne w Jeru ­
salem i f li e admits people fro m Arkansas. " 
Battell Loomis writes i n the Independent: 
"There is a colored barber on the Fal l 
Rive r boat 'Commonwealth,' who, b y no 
unpleasant stretch of the imagination, could 
be called 'nigger.' 
" I had my hair cut by hi m the other day 
and, to whil e away m y time, picke d u p the 
book he had been reading. It was essays 
on the style and aim of Goethe's writings. 
I lai d the volume down again, since its 
owner at once outdistanced it i n interest 
to my mind . Fro m 59th Street, East River, 
to the pie r i n the North , I enjoyed that 
most excellent of pleasures, communion wit h 
a human heart and an aspirin g mind . The 
man was familia r wit h the late Coleridge -
. Taylor's subtle harmonizations o f Africa n 
melodies and was well read i n the literary 
works of this country. 
" I cite this Negr o thus full y because it is 
my purpose emphatically to consider the 
futilit y of race distinctions as typified 
by the vulga r epithets applie d i n scorn. 
Other terms—which I might call boomerang 
words, since they hit their users harde r than 
those they are aimed at—are 'dago,' 'chink,' 
'sheenie' and 'gringo.' These are al l used 
i n the worl d and I quote the latter because 
it is applie d i n Southern quarters to us 
superior white men i n the Nort h o f the 
Western hemisphere. 
"It simpl y doesn't apply . W e are Ameri ­
cans, not gringos. So, logically, are our 
scorned brethren Italians, Chinese, Nippon ­
ese and Jews. There can be no disparative 
race distinction between men. A man , and 
there are some of every color, is, above all 
petty definitions, secure i n his title to manhood and he wil l seek and find his own i f 
he has to despise his own ki n to do it. " 
Ex-Presiden t Taft has recently been 
recommending nationa l compensation fo r 
the lynchin g of foreigners. H e says i n the 
Independent: 
"It does not soothe one's prid e of country to note the number of lynching s o f our 
own citizens that go unwhippe d o f justice OPINIO N 237 
and that are properl y held u p to us with 
scorn whenever we assume, as we too frequently do, a morality higher than and a 
government better than that of other peoples. No r is our feeling i n this regard 
rendered less acute by hearing from the 
governors o f some of our States, expressions brazenly defending and approvin g 
such lynchings. Stil l more embarrassing is 
our situation, when we are called upon to 
explai n to a government wit h whom we 
have made a solemn covenant to protect its 
citizens or subjects i n their right o f peaceable residence here and i n the enjoyment of 
business and happiness under the aegis of 
the Unite d States, to have to say that while 
we di d make a covenent, they ought to 
have known that under our system we as a 
government had no means of performing 
that covenant or of punishin g those who, as 
our citizens, had grossly violated it. " 
UNCLE MOSE I doan want no hifalutin ' 
„_ „ „ comberfercations 'bout de in -
Suggests. , , , , -
dependence ob de farmer. 
B y de time yo u rent yoh r patch ob groun' 
an d gets credit foh de one-eyed mu l wi d de 
lame shouldah, and pays Mas' Storekeeper 
fo h bacon and beans, and raise yohr little 
dab o' cohn, and weah yo ' wif e and children 
to a frazzle draggin ' cotton bags i n de 
brillin ' hot sun, and den sells yo ' crop, yo ' 
finds wha r yo ' independence am at. I f yo' 
du n hab enuff left to take yo ' to de new 
place dat yo ' rents i n hope ob transubboshicatin' yo ' condition, yo ' hab bin a very 
successful agricultahist. Yo ' ki n den push 
de lines a littl e hahdah, and may be, by 
de time yo ' lays down to de las' sleep an' 
de great crop is done lai d by, yo ' wil l 
have enough ovah de mortgage to pa y foh 
buryin ' yo', pervided de brederin' wil l dig 
de grave free gratis; and dat wil l be de 
fust" lan d yo u ever owned i n all yo ' bohn 
days!"—Appeal to Reason. 
Last sprin g the Cottolene Compan y 
PRIZES . offerec ] prizes i n Albany , Ga. , for 
the best cakes that should be made by using 
their cooking fat. So much interest was 
aroused that not only private families, but 
public schools entered the contest. Miss 
Zephyr L . Greene, a graduate of Atlant a 
University, and a teacher o f cooking i n the 
colored public school, bought materials under 
the directions and she and her children baked 
cakes, put numbers upon them and sent 
them into the contest. Then the unexpected 
happened—at least to the white folk and 
especially to the teacher of cooking i n the 
white school who was also a contestant: 
Miss Greene won the first prize—a gold 
medal—over all contestants, and her children 
also won a prize. The white teacher was so 
incensed that she refused the prize that was 
given her, saying that she di d not know 
"niggers " would compete! 
" 'W e make a great mistake i n believing 
that the characteristics shown by the Negro 
i n this country are the racia l characteristics of his people i n Afric a and are due to 
hereditary tendencies. Biolog y does not 
show that there is any inequality i n the 
mental outfits of the white and the black 
races, and, therefore, we should not withhold from the Negro the benefits of education, which are given to his white brother.' 
"These are the opinions of Professor 
Fran z Boas, of Columbi a University, presented to an audience that gathered i n the 
lecture hall of the university museum, 
where he delivered the second of a series of 
three lectures on America n racia l problems. 
Professor Boa s brought before his audience, 
by pictures and by specimens from the 
university museum, examples of the artistic 
sense of the native of Centra l Africa , and 
demonstrated by the exhibits that the Afri ­
can is. higher i n the scale of artistic mentality than was the North-America n Indian. 
"H e said that the condition of the Negro 
i n Americ a is due to the treatment he received from the whites. The Negro, he said, 
is capable of advancing just as fast as can 
the whites, provided the opportunity is not 
withheld from him. The speaker stated 
that he di d not believe that there should be 
any legislation such as that existing i n many 
of the Southern States by which marriage 
is prohibited between members of white and 
black race. H e said that racia l problems 
become less acute when the physical differences between the races are reduced. I n this 
way, he believes, a race problem between the 
whites and mulattoes would cause less 
apprehension than the present problem 
involvin g whites and blacks."—Philadelphi a 
Record. A CRUSADE. 
THE Wester n tri p o f th e 
chairma n o f the boar d 
o f directors wa s a clario n 
cal l t o arms . T o 
Chicago , St . Louis , 
Kansa s Cit y an d Indian ­
apolis wen t the cr y whic h ha d alread y 
arouse d blac k Washingto n as i t wa s 
neve r arouse d before . Mr . Spingar n 
tol d th e people , colore d an d white , tha t 
the time ha d come fo r organizatio n an d 
work . Th e ne w abolitionis m ha s come . 
Its workers ar e i n the field an d its voic e 
is hear d fro m St.. Pau l to Ne w Orlean s 
an d fro m se a to sea. 
Alread y the Bourbo n press o f the 
South , abette d b y colore d traitors i n the 
North , is takin g notice . Th e Richmou d 
Times-Dispatch sai d i n its leadin g editoria l o f Januar y 12 : 
"Someon e ha s sent us a specia l num ­
be r o f a Negr o monthl y magazine , whic h 
appears to u s to be abou t the most in ­
cendiar y documen t tha t ha s passe d 
throug h the mails sinc e the anarchists' 
literatur e wa s barred . 
"O n its titl e pag e this remarkabl e pub ­
licatio n bears this legend : ' Hereditar y 
Bondsmen ! Kno w Y e No t Wh o Woul d 
B e Fre e Mus t Strik e the Blow? ' 
Answerin g its ow n question , the maga ­
zin e proceed s to list some o f the 'blows' 
valian t Negroe s hav e struck , the rac e 
hatre d the y hav e aroused , the bloodshe d 
the y hav e precipitated , the insolenc e 
whic h ha s arouse d so man y against them . 
Altogethe r the arra y woul d be amusin g 
wer e no t its purpos e so manifestl y 
vicious.' ' 
It declare s tha t fighting mean s razors 
an d revolvers an d fears tha t th e white s 
o f the Sout h woul d be incline d to 
answe r wit h ruthless repressio n an d 
crue l injustice . Al l tha t ha s bee n 
gaine d i n a generatio n fo r goo d wil l an d 
peac e woul d be sacrificed . 
It the n cite s th e recen t Souther n 
Sociologica l Congress as characteristi c o f 
the attitud e o f the South ! O n th e con ­
trary , tha t splendi d congress is precisel y 
the sort o f fighting whic h we advocate , 
an d ther e wa s no t a Souther n ma n i n i t 
wh o di d no t ris k his brea d an d butte r b y 
speakin g out. 
It is the reactionar y Bourbonis m o f 
the Times-Dispatch an d its il k tha t 
make s a grea t mora l battl e fo r a ne w 
abolitio n absolutel y necessar y i n th e 
land . Th e edito r think s that : 
"Thi s particula r magazin e is o f lim ­
ite d circulation , an d is probabl y th e 
orga n o f ambitiou s Negroe s i n Ne w 
York . Its remarks, therefore , ar e 
scarcel y worth y o f consideratio n an d its 
opinion s beneat h notice . Bu t wer e this 
spiri t to sprea d amon g th e Negroes, w e 
ca n bu t thin k ho w disastrou s woul d be 
its workings. " 
TH E CRISI S sol d 32,00 0 copie s o f its 
Januar y number , whic h is a large r cir ­
culatio n tha n th e Times-Despatch has. 
An d TH E CRISI S renew s th e invitatio n 
to ever y American , blac k o r white : Joi n 
o r die . Joi n th e Nationa l Associatio n 
fo r the Advancemen t o f Colore d 
People . Suppor t its work , advocat e its 
principles. 
Ignor e th e mischievou s intimatio n o f 
vena l colore d editors tha t w e ar e "fight -
EDITORIAL EDITORIA L 239 
ing " Booker T. Washington. W e are 
fighting slavery, caste and cowardice in 
black men and white; nothing more and 
nothing less. 
LYNCHING . 
WE do not blame the people 
of the United States for 
being ashamed of lynching, but we have serious 
doubts if recent methods 
of curing the evil are 
going to be really efficacious. W e do 
not refer now to the unjust and 
dangerous hastening of the trials of accused persons, nor even to the proposed 
lessening of the penalty for mob 
murder ; but rather to an attempt, deliberate or unintentional, to suppress the 
truth concerning the present extent of 
lynching in this land. 
TH E CRISI S noted this last year. The 
first reports suggested that only thirtyfour persons had been lynched during 
1912. The second report published in 
other papers raised the amount to fifty 
or more while TH E CRISIS ' record was 
"sixty-three, possibly sixty-eight." 
A s this, however, was our first attempt 
to keep a record, we let the matter go 
without comment; but we note for the 
year 1913 precisely the same phenomena, 
namely, an early syndicated report in 
certain papers with thirty-odd lynchings; next comes the Chicago Tribune, 
which has hitherto been looked upon as 
an authority on lynching statistics, and 
reports forty-four lynchings for the 
year. The n comes Mr . B. T. Washington's report saying there were fifty-one. 
Go d knows TH E CRISI S is not anxious 
to increase the red record nor to revel 
in the spread of this most disgraceful 
blot upon our civilization. Bu t nevertheless TH E CRISI S has counted during 
the year 1913 seventy-nine and possibly 
eighty lynchings. There is, of course, 
much difficulty in determining just the 
number of lynchings. News agencies in 
the South often deliberately suppress 
these reports and in nearly all cases are 
vague as to names, places and details. 
It is always possible, therefore, that the 
same lynching may be reported twice; 
then, too, there is evident difficulty in 
determining what constitutes a lynching. 
Ordinar y murders, even though by mobs, 
have usually not been included. Makin g 
all due allowances for these things, TH E 
CRISI S is unable to see any reason for 
believing that lynching decreased last 
year. O n the contrary, the evidence of 
a substantial increase seems very strong. 
W e would be only too glad to have our 
conclusions disproved. 
BOOMING TH E CRISIS. 
THE Washington Bee, a 
weekly colored periodical 
has been stirred to its 
vitals by the fear that 
the money collected in 
Washington and elsewhere for the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People is 
going to be used for the support of TH E 
CRISIS . W e assure the editor that not a 
single cent of such moneys goes to the 
support of TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S 
supports itself, and has from the beginning, with the single exception that the 
association provides an editor for it. 
Eve n this, however, does not apparently suit the nimble Bee. "Bu t the 
National Association for the Advance ­
ment of Colored People ignores the 
splendid, vitalizing work of the race 
newspapers already established, and 
established and financed by their editors, 
while concentrating its efforts and giving 
of its funds exclusively to make TH E 
CRISIS , a very late comer, the real and 
only organ of the race.'' Her e again the 
editor is mistaken. Fa r from displacing 
the colored weekly newspapers, TH E 
CRISI S is giving them all possible publicity and full and careful credit for 
everything which it reprints. 
TH E CRISI S regrets, however, that the 
amount of matter published in the Bee 
and in many other papers, which is 240 TH E CRISIS 
worth reprinting or even reading, is not 
nearly as large as it ought to be. More ­
over, TH E CRISI S is convinced that more 
careful attention to some of the very 
things which this editor denounces 
would bring larger success to the colored 
weekly papers. 
First: Facts. Of the newspapers 
mentioned only one, the Afro-American 
Ledger, makes a careful and valuable 
attempt to present the facts concerning 
the Negro. The others present some of 
the facts, but in a partial and incomplete way. 
Second: English. Some of the best 
of colored papers are so wretchedly careless in their use of the English language 
and sense of the value of words that when 
they see English they are apt to mistake it for something which the Bee 
mysteriously characterizes as "Osca r 
Wild e atomized sentences," whatever 
that may be. 
Bu t third and most important: Few 
of the colored weekly papers have stood 
staunch for principle. Outside the 
Guardian and the Cleveland Gazette 
there have not been more than one or 
two colored papers from whom the 
Xegro people could expect year in and 
year out strong, staunch advocacy of 
the fundamental principles of freedom 
and justice. Small wonder that they 
welcome a periodical which (whatever 
its many faults may "be) at least tries 
to give the facts, talk English and stand 
as an unpurchasable advocate of justice 
and right. 
TAXATIO N WITHOUT REPRESENTA ­
TION, PLUS THEFT . 
NEGROES form 40 per 
cent, of the population 
of Memphis. Tenn. The 
city laid the following 
taxes during the year 
1912: 
Fo r General Purposes $1.32 on $100 
Fo r Publi c Schools 25 on $100 
Tota l Cit y Rate 1.57 
State Lev y for Parks 15 on $100 
State Lev y for Cossett Librar y .03 on $100 
Tota l Rate for Cit y $1.75~on $100 
State and County Taxes. 
State 35 on $100 
County 21 on $100 
Schools 32 on $100 
High Schools 01 on $100 
Bolton College 01 on $100 
Industrial School 01 on $100 
Industrial School Apportionment 01%on$100 
M. & O. R. R. Sinking Fund. . .01 on $100 
County Bonds Sinking Fund. . .01 on $100 
Levee Bonds Sinking Fund. . .01 on $100 
Interest 05 on $100 
Bridge 08 on $100 
Turnpike 15 on $100 
Normal School 01 on $100 
Fro m this taxation the Negroes get 
less than half their proportionate share 
for public schools and not one-fourth 
their share of public improvements; 
they cannot enter the parks for which 
they paid, but in 1913 they were given 
a small plot of land for a park. The y 
are denied all access whatsoever to the 
following places which they support by 
taxation: 
The Cossett Library . 
The high school. 
Bolton College. 
The industrial school. 
The normal school. 
An d Negroes have not a single representative in the city government. 
Not only this, but they are large 
renters of real estate. Everybod y knows 
that the renter of real estate pays the 
taxes on it because the owner invariably 
charges him enough to pay the taxes and 
repairs and a reasonable (or unreasonable) return i n addition. 
Wh o is supporting Memphis? 
Wh o is supporting the South? 
Taxation without representation is 
tyranny . |g 
TH E SURVEY . 
THE editor of the Survey 
expresses to us his disK/^B^k^ f satisfaction wit h an 
/Sn(JjCSyr ^ editorial i n our last 
y^C>^<<c2^ issue, because of the 
omission of a paragraph 
which was in the first draft of the statement referred to. and because an official 
of this organization also objected to 
paragraph six. The omitted paragraph EDITORIA L 241 
simpl y state d tha t th e Nationa l Associa ­
tio n fo r th e Advancemen t o f Colore d 
Peopl e wa s workin g fo r the mentione d 
objects. "Whe n the Survey questione d 
this th e autho r said , "Omi t it. " Bu t 
th e Survey refuse d eve n the n to prin t 
the article . A s to th e objection s raise d 
b y an y officia l o f this organizatio n the 
edito r o f TH E CRISI S ha s n o knowledg e 
o f an y suc h action . Th e Survey has, o f 
course , the righ t to rejec t eve n solicite d 
manuscripts afte r acceptanc e an d fo r 
an y reaso n o r none . Bu t the objectio n 
at th e tim e as state d to the write r wa s 
certainl y the inclusio n o f paragrap h six , 
an d al l othe r objection s seeme d subsidiar y to this. 
m 
A LITTL E PLAY . 
TIME: Now. 
Place : Here . 
Ente r the Pal e On e 
an d the Brow n One , 
dresse d alike , speakin g 
English , bu t comin g fro m 
opposit e entrances. 
Th e Pal e One : ' ' Colore d peopl e ar e 
dirty , ignorant , lazy , poo r an d rude . 
Unti l the y become clean , intelligent , 
thrifty , wel l to d o an d polit e the y must 
expec t to be treate d badly. " 
Th e Brow n One : " Ar e al l colore d 
peopl e dirty , ignorant , laz y an d rude ? 
I f so, I a m colore d an d therefor e I must 
be- • " 
Th e Pal e On e : ' ' Oh , no ! I mea n most 
colore d people ; o r a t an y rat e some 
colore d people. " 
Th e Brow n One : "An d therefor e 
shoul d al l colore d peopl e be treate d 
badly , o r onl y th e dirt y an d "ignoran t 
an d laz y an d poo r an d rude? " 
Th e Pal e On e : ' ' Onl y the dirt y an d 
ignoran t an d " 
Th e Brow n One : "An d is i t onl y 
dirty , ignorant , lazy , poo r an d rud e 
colored fol k wh o ar e to be badl y 
treated? " 
Th e Pal e One : "Certainl y not. Al l 
peopl e wh o ar e dirty , ignorant , lazy , 
poo r an d rud e must expec t ba d 
treatment. " 
Th e Brow n One : "An d ha s histor y 
prove n tha t 'ba d treatment ' is the best 
cur e fo r dirt , ignorance , povert y an d 
rudeness, o r is ba d treatmen t their 
cause? " 
Th e Pal e One : " I can' t go int o that. 
A t presen t the y ar e treate d badly. " 
Th e Brow n One : "The y surel y are . 
An d now , finally, ho w shal l I be 
treated? " 
Th e Pal e One : ' ' Yo u shan' t marr y m y 
sister.' ' 
Th e Brow n One : " I don' t wan t to ; 
bu t to retur n to the subjec t - " 
Th e Pal e One : "Yo u ar e seekin g 
socia l equality! " 
Th e Brow n One : "I f tha t mean s I' m 
seekin g decen t treatmen t " 
Th e Pal e One : "Yo u belon g to a n 
inferio r race ! '•' 
Th e Brow n One : "Fo r Heaven's 
sake ' ' 
Th e Pal e On e : "Oh , bother!' ' 
Exi t the Pal e On e i n anger. 
Exi t the Brow n On e i n though t . 
FRO M TH E NE W YOR K "WORLD. " 
TO the edito r o f th e World: 
" I fee l i t m y dut y to 
prais e the Negr o cre w o f 
the 'Monroe. ' Wh y I 
spea k o f the Negroe s 
especiall y is becaus e 
their grea t wor k o f rescuin g an d sacrificing ha s no t bee n full y appreciated . 
"Ever y sensibl e an d considerat e ma n 
know s tha t these me n deserve unlimite d 
credit . Ther e ha s bee n ver y muc h sai d 
abou t the wireless operato r an d th e 
officers' bravery . Unquestionabl y the y 
wer e extremel y brav e an d the y wil l be 
lon g remembered ; bu t the colore d her o 
wh o got ou t o f his lifeboa t to giv e his 
seat to a lad y an d the n too k chance s 
o n swimmin g fo r his life , whic h he lost, 
is complimente d as a 'brav e coon, ' a 
'goo d nigger, ' etc., an d wil l soo n be 
forgotten . • • 
"Som e peopl e ca n see al l th e evi l 
Negroe s do, bu t ver y littl e o f the good . 
"JOH N Y . MORSE. " The Association of Negro Secondary and Industrial Schools 
W, B y LESLI E PINCKNEY HIL L MM 
H E Association of Negro 
Secondary and Industria l 
Schools is an attempt on 
the part of eighteen Southern schools, most of them 
without adequate endowment, to bind their efforts 
i n two main directions. The first object is 
to create a wide r general interest i n the 
wor k which these schools are doing for the 
neglected masses of colored people throughout the country. It is well known that 
these institutions suppl y what the public -
school systems cannot or wil l not attempt. 
They offer not only the three R's, but also 
instruction i n personal hygiene, home sanitation, good manners, agricultura l and trade 
or manua l work. It is only i n the last few 
years that the public schools have given any 
attention whatever to those special needs of 
our people, failure to suppl y which has 
been the chief explanation of what is called 
the Negro problem i n the South. Schools 
like those of this association have courageously endeavored to meet the situation, untrammeled by the conventions and traditions 
of the prevalent schools system, and with 
the faith that there should be no race 
problem, so fa r as ordinary intelligence 
and the ability to do well some part of the 
world's work may be required of Negro 
youth. These schools have had as their 
major aim the development of productive 
citizens. The remarkable degree i n which 
they have actually succeeded i n reaching 
this aim is acknowledged on all sides. It 
is the graduates of these institutions who 
are becoming leaders in education, i n the 
buildin g up of a higher home life, and in 
widenin g the bounds of industria l opportunity for their people from within . 
These schools have accomplished all this 
with very little money. Such resources as 
have been available have been the result of 
constant appeals to the public and volunteered subscriptions. The attitude of the 
publi c toward charities of all sorts has 
undergone radica l changes i n the last few 
years. There is a decided tendency to give 
to good causes only after thorough investigation. This is right. There is also a 
tendency to think that enough is being done 
for the education of the Negr o i n the South. 
This is wrong . There is hardl y a single 
private school fo r colored people i n the 
South that is able now to keep u p wit h the 
rapi d rise i n the cost of supplie s of every 
sort, particularl y food supplies. It is extremely hard to get good teachers fo r starvation salaries, and money fo r salaries is 
another most grievous need. The quality 
of teaching is indirectly conditioned upon 
the quality of the teacher. Youn g men of 
mental and physica l vigor can make more 
money i n almost any other vocation than 
teaching. The same general statement may 
be made about women, who soon drop out 
either for marriage or fo r some industria l 
work that wil l yiel d more i n dollars and 
cents. Money , then, is dreadfully needed. 
The principals of these schools have gone 
Nort h ever since the wa r to appea l to 
charitably disposed individuals, to churches, 
and to the philanthropi c societies and organizations fo r the help they have had to 
secure. Bu t this system has practically 
broken down, and on all hands one hears 
the cry that some better method of supportin g these institutions wil l have to be found. 
Moreover, the Northerne r is more and more 
inclined every year to concentrate upon 
charities at home; and this at a time when 
representatives from these Southern schools 
are every year increasing i n the North . 
The situation is now, indeed, so critica l 
that a number of these schools are considerin g the necessity of havin g to close their 
doors, unless some surer means of support 
can be found. 
To awaken a new and more effective publi c interest, therefore, i n these schools is 
(he first aim of the association. The second 
aim is to make known to the publi c the 
exact status of every school fo r the trainin g 
of Negroes i n the Unite d States, to the end 
that those whose work is worthy, and whose 
accounting fo r funds received is what it 
ought to be, may receive the support they 
deserve, and, on the other hand, that the 
fraudulent and improperl y conducted in ­
stitutions, existing more on pape r than i n 
fact, and increasing the severe burden which 
the honest schools have already to carry. NEGR O SECONDAR Y AN D INDUSTRIA L SCHOOL S 
may be set before the publi c i n the prope r 
light. It is the belief of the association 
that the best people, white and colored, 
throughout the country do appreciate what 
these schools are attempting, and are willin g to continue their support o f them i f 
they can be assured that they are conducted 
upo n approved present-day business prin ­
ciples, that they are not wasting their resources, and are givin g to the thousands of 
youn g people who stream through them 
real education. The association also feels 
it a duty to safeguard the supportin g publi c by makin g it impossible for any member 
school to fai l of exact accounting for every 
penny that has been received or spent. 
No w it is proposed to create this wider 
interest, and to secure needed money by a 
very definite program. Al l the schools of 
the association are committed to a minimum 
standard of wor k as definitely outlined i n 
the minimum course of study, which in ­
cludes both academic and industria l training . The effort is not made to constrain 
every institution into one set form or to 
make all these schools alike i n any sense. 
It is perfectly well understood that one of 
the most valuable contributions these institutions can make to the whole cause of education is found i n the development of individualit y and the tryin g out of wellconsidered experiments. A t the same time 
it is no more than just and right to the 
publi c that each one of these schools shall 
accomplish a minimum of actual work, both 
i n the three R's and i n the industria l departments. It is the guaranteeing of this minimum fo r which the association vouches. The 
white schools of the country may be open 
to the charge of too great rigidit y and 
inflexibility. Ou r schools, having not yet 
achieved high standards, are, for the most 
part, open to the charge of too much laxness. It is this that the association desires 
to correct. 
I n the next place the association wil l 
endeavor to save the principals of these 
several schools from the dreadful waste of 
time and talent to which they have heretofore been subjected by rason of the necessity upo n them of continually traveling 
from one end of the country to the other 
fo r funds. It proposes to do this by apportionin g definite territory to each member 
school and organizing campaigns that wil l 
be so intensive as to reach withi n that area 
every America n citizen who ought to be 
called upon for help. These campaigns wil l 
be conducted on the scientific pla n used by 
any good farme r in cultivating a plot of 
ground. Instead of scattering his efforts 
over a wide area, he wil l concentrate. 
Whereve r this principl e has been applied 
to farming , results have abundantly justified the method. Larg e cities like New 
York , Philadelphia , Chicago and Boston wil l 
be left open to all the schools that have 
supporters there, but even i n these in ­
stances there wil l be a definite understandin g among the schools that from year to 
year strong campaigns wil l be waged i n the 
interest of the association as a whole, the 
subscriptions resulting to be apportioned 
among all the schools according to their 
respective payrolls fo r teachers or on some 
other well-considered basis. It wil l require 
on the part of each school the highest 
degree of self-control, sincerity and cooperation to make such a pla n successful. 
If, however, the several schools can rise to 
this it wil l not merely mark a new epoch 
i n co-operative educative enterprise among 
colored people, but wil l doubtless wi n back 
to a neglected cause the interest and the 
backing which once it enjoyed but has now 
largely lost. 
These two main ideas, then, govern the 
whole scope of the work of the association; 
first, the creation of a wider and more 
effective interest i n 'educational work among 
Negroes by makin g known as widely as 
possible their exact status and, secondly, 
the dividin g of the whole country into territories to which each of these several 
schools, through stated periods, shall be 
assigned fo r its soliciting, this soliciting to 
be done by intensively organized campaigns. 
A third important aim that might be 
mentioned is that of discouraging the startin g of new schools where there is no obvious 
need or means of support, and the wasteful 
duplication of work i n communities where 
two poor, struggling institutions might be 
combined to make one good school. 
To carry forward this program there is 
need of the immediate opening of a central 
office i n New Yor k City . Fo r this arrangements have already been made. This office 
wil l be i n charge of a high-grade manager, 
who wil l build up an exhaustive bureau of 
exact statistics covering the work of every 
Negro school i n the Unite d States. This 
office wil l also be responsible for organizin g the campaigns mentioned above and 
243 244 TH E CRISIS 
fo r wide publicity. It will , finally, be the 
headquarters o f all the schools of the 
association, and through its agencies wil l 
have complete charge of the raisin g and 
apportionment of funds. 
It is gratifyin g to know that hardl y any 
business man of standing thus fa r approached has failed to endorse these centra l ideas of the association Eve n those 
who are not certain as to what it may 
accomplish feel that it is an experiment 
highly w
T
orth while, and urge the necessity 
of tryin g it out. Dr . James H . Dillard , of 
the Jeanes and Slater Funds, has stated that 
he thinks the enterprise one of the two 
most important forwar d steps he has known 
i n Negro education i n the Unite d States, the 
other being the Association of Negro Colleges recently formed. Mr . Oswald Garriso n 
Villar d has been an earnest supporte r of 
the idea, and made possible the first meetin g i n Ne w Yor k last year. Mr . Clarence 
H . Kelsey , president of the Titl e Guarantee 
and Trust Company , has been equally helpful , havin g offered one-fourth of the money 
necessary for the expenses of the central 
office durin g this first year o f experiment. 
There are i n the Unite d States nearly two 
hundred schools that ought to be deeply 
interested i n what this association is attempting. Onl y eighteen at present are 
actually members. I f these eighteen can 
prove faithful to ' the great trust to which 
they are now committed, there is little doubt 
that the present yea r wil l show a largely 
increased membership. 
The next meeting of the association wil l 
be held at the Hobart Library , 416 Lafa ­
yette Street, Ne w Yor k City , on Wednesday, 
Marc h 25, 1914. 
TH E STRUGGL E 
B y SAMUE L H . BISHO P 
IN the quiet of a Southern 
evening, as the great red 
sun was fallin g slowly behind a distant line of 
pines, its light breaking 
int o shimmering aisle s 
across a curiously foreshortened landscape, two men were sitting 
on the steps leading to the boys' dormitory 
of a school fo r Negroes. One was a youth 
into whose dreamy and saddened eyes the 
horizontal rays of the sun were pourin g as 
if, robbed of their blindin g glare by the 
dark trunks of the pines and the tender 
haze of evening, they woul d drown the pain 
i n the golden glory of a faultless and 
lingering day. H e had been a student i n 
the school where he was now a commencement guest; and the old purposes and ideals 
nurtured i n the place he loved had been 
surging from his heart into eyes which 
held i n their unseeing gaze the delicately 
tinted gray of the capitol dome rising 
among the nearer trees, and onto a tongue 
that knew the tried and sacred confidence 
of his teacher's ear. The other was the 
teacher who had shared his boyish dreams, 
and who, indeed, had inspired the best he 
had hoped and purposed i n the dear old 
days of school. Fro m the lip s of the 
teacher, as they sat together, whil e to and 
fro over the campus walke d happ y and 
hopeful groups of fresh graduates or 
younger students who felt themselves a year 
nearer their goal by reason of the events 
of the day now closing, had droppe d those 
wonderful words of Matthew Arnold : 
"Docil e echoes of the eternal voice, pliant 
organs of the infinite will , such workers 
are going along wit h the essential movement of the world ; and this is their 
strength and their happ y and divine fortune." An d then he had paraphrased what 
follows: "I f the believers i n an unrelentin g purpose which never yields to the pressure of a generous love, and of the homely 
obligations of blood and of circumstance, 
are impatient wit h us and call us effeminate, though they surpass us i n the sphere 
of influence by all the superiority of their 
genius and energies, yet we go the wa y 
the human race is going ; and whil e they 
abolish the listening fidelities whic h constitute social purpose and the organized 
life of man, we may hope we help to make 
those initia l bonds i n the multiplicatio n o f 
which consists the kingdom of God . The 
altering equilibrium and redistribution of 
life, " he added, "the unexpected pressure 
of that mysterious thing we call duty and TH E STRUGGL E 
the consequent varyings of purpose only 
diversify our opportunities and open 
chances to us fo r new ideals. N o outward 
changes of condition i n lif e can keep the 
nightingale of its eternal meaning from 
singin g i n the soul and i n the visible lif e 
and wor k of every man who has generously 
and of deliberate volition admitted into his 
purpose the conditioning purpose by which 
Go d relates him to his fellow man. A s 
James says, 'Mer e ideals are the cheapest 
things i n life' ; the real significance of life 
is the offspring of the marriage o f ideals 
and a deep-willed social sympathy. " 
The relationship of pupi l and teacher 
had been very close, had had i n it on the 
one side that wonderful sympathy which 
Dr . Arnol d had wit h the boys at Rugby , 
an d on the other that faith and reverence 
which one feels as he sees Stanley sitting 
i n Rugb y chapel wit h his eyes fixed upon 
the teacher who was to him the "image of 
high principl e and feeling, " or To m Brow n 
kneeling at the grave of him who had 
opened his eyes to the glory of the human 
brotherhood and softened his heart til l it 
could feel its bond. The teacher, too, knew 
what it means to see the broken arcs of 
cherished dreams lyin g like bits of the 
spectrum on the shifting waters o f the 
sea. H e had been educated at Codrington 
College, the Oxfor d of the Britis h West 
Indies, and had longed wit h all his soul 
to use the ancient ideals of England's 
noblest and richest culture fo r the realization of what he proudl y termed the "message of his Coromantee fathers," of whom 
Christophe r Codrington had said : "There 
never was a rascal or coward of that 
nation. " 
No w he had come to see that a people 
must plow before it can reap, must work 
wit h its hands as it thinks wit h its mind, 
must have clean and healthy bodies i f it 
is to ' have luci d and far-reaching spiritua l 
vision, must prove its earthly competence 
i f it woul d attain to heavenly fulfilment. 
A disciple of the classics of lustrous and 
inviolat e Greece, of earth-swaying Rome, 
o f the Ital y o f Dant e and Petrarch, of 
Shakespearean England , o f the German 
Aufklarung , he had adjusted himself, 
though not without some bitter pain , to the 
soil-born gospel of twentieth-century America . Wit h Pericles he could now correlate 
Knapp , and wit h Aristotle , Mclve r as the 
apostles of a civilization which cultivates 
universal excellence rather than rewards it 
as the gift of the capricious gods to the 
few. 
It was a hard lesson, but he had learned 
it ; and he could therefore assuage the pain 
of the youth who had yet to learn that it 
is not the maintenance detached and 
unsullied of ideals, but their use i n the 
environment of the common lif e which 
constitutes the satisfaction and jo y of existence. Lif e is not a pearl of great price 
for the treasure box, but a many-tentacled 
trust fo r all the varyin g needs of man. A s 
they had been sitting together the youth 
had told again the, story of the iro n in his 
soul—the tragedy of his people's isolation 
from the gracious amenities, the inner reserves, the unrestrained powers and fulfilments which make the best of America n 
lif e beautiful and noble and great; the 
grindin g obligations they must assume and 
the satisfactions they must forego; the 
fealties they must respect and the limita ­
tions to which they must submit. "M y 
people are oppressed," said he; "they need 
deliverers—men learned i n law and history, 
men who wil l not bow to any prejudice, 
men whose character and power wil l force 
the issues of right and justice into the 
daily economic and politica l lif e of the 
South and of the country. Man y is the 
time I have walked around that gray old 
capitol, beautiful i n some of its lines, yet 
with its ugl y dome and dust-stained marble 
speaking the ugly wrongs and grimy in ­
justices of the politica l system it houses. 
A s a boy I was a leader i n games and i n 
debate, the chosen of my fellows—with 
their poor liberty of choice. Ca n my people be free while they are shackled and 
gagged at the ballot box, when men represent them who deny them what makes 
representation vali d and worthful ? Di d 
not all nature, the spirit of my race, the 
need of my class call upon me to study 
law, get power, enter as lawmake r that old 
buildin g which has lost its borrowed sunset 
glow while we have been lookin g at it, push 
my wa y to Congress where only my people's wrongs can be righted? Yo u say, 
with Matthew Arnold , whom I do not know, 
I am going wit h the essential movement of 
the world . Is it the essential movement of 
power ? Is there not a greater strength, a 
diviner fortune than to submit fo r oneself 
or fo r one's people to what one knows to 
be wrong? " 
245 246 TH E CRISIS 
The sun had set and the dusk had fallen, 
lights presaging the evening gaieties had 
sprun g from the various buildings on the 
grounds, some of the students were packin g 
for early departure, and there was a 
mingled sense of culmination and disintegration i n the air and i n the varyin g 
activities of the evening peculia r to the 
closing of a school year. "Le t us go in, " 
said the teacher; and together they went 
upstairs and along the corridors, between 
rows of trunks i n various stages of packing, 
to the room where they had so often talked 
of lif e and of its meanings. The youth 
flung himself onto the bed as i f his rebellious spirit had wearied the body with 
its insistent and incessant chafings and 
beatings; and as the teacher looked at him 
through the dusk a gentle sarcasm crept 
into his voice, though his words were very 
slow and tender, fo r he feared the boy 
might not understand. H e took him to the 
uninhabited places where the real prophets 
and leaders have found their God , to the 
region beyond the Jorda n where the Naz -
arene first saw the vision of Hi s mission. 
H e pictured the Christ as the thaumaturge 
the boy i n his impatience wished to be— 
makin g bread of stones, flying on angels' 
wings, fellin g the eagles and the legions of 
Roma n power, the worl d conquered, and 
the loud-tongued praises of men of every 
clime ; but at the awfu l cost of pain , 
patience, faith, honor and love. 
Then the sarcasm vanished and a yearnin g took its place. H e called to the boy's 
min d how the Maste r rejected force, how 
H e set His face toward Jerusalem and 
Gallilee and the doubtful issues of an uneven struggle wit h a blin d and adulterous 
generation. "Forc e and the vulga r arts of 
the thaumaturge cannot settle human problems," said he so yearningly and so win -
somely that the youth sat erect and 
listened as to music across a starlit water. 
"La w never brought men freedom; institutions and forms of government never 
alone inspired the genius or furnished the 
guarantees of a noble citizenship; force 
never softened hardened hearts or tore the 
scales from blinded eyes. The issues of a 
people's lif e are i n the heart of the lif e 
itself, and the remedy of a people's wrongs 
i n a character that abashes and makes 
wrong both ridiculous and monstrous. The 
highest and most productive service to lif e 
is not particula r performance but abundant 
life . The terms of leadership are not those 
of a profession but those of a vita l human 
soul, an d the medium of leadership is the 
connected possibility and the wide-reaching 
assent which grow out of the order of God . 
You, " he said, "faile d to make you r arrangements fo r you r law course at Howard ; 
but yo u have literar y skill , knowledge of 
you r people's needs and an unusua l bent 
for good farming . I f it be to you r ambition the via dolorosa to Calvary , is it not 
better to far m as yo u are doing, to teach as 
I know yo u are teaching—at a salary next 
to nothing—a rura l school whic h woul d 
have been closed i f yo u had' not volun ­
teered, to light small torches fo r the hands 
of humble beginners, to inspir e efficiency 
and home buildin g fo r a people whose first 
needs are of honest usefulness and healthy 
homes, than to curse and be cursed i n a 
battle which does not seem to have been 
ordered either of Go d or of circumstance 1? 
Mar k you , I am not defending wron g or 
belittling you r ambition. Lif e is always a 
battle; but yo u are i n it and yo u must win . 
' ' ' Say not the struggle naught availeth, 
The labor and the wounds are vain, 
The enemy faints not, nor faileth, 
An d as things have been they remain. 
If hopes were dupes, fears may be liars; 
It may be, i n yon smoke concealed, 
Tour comrades chase e 'en now the fliers, 
An d but for you possess the field. 
Fo r while the tired waves vainl y breaking, 
Seem here no painful inch to gain, 
Fa r back, through creeks and inlets makin g 
Comes silent, flooding in, the main. 
An d not by eastern windows only, 
When daylight comes, comes i n the light; 
In front, the sun climbs slow, how slowly, 
Bu t westward—look, the land is bright.' ' ' 
The summer stars swin g silently through 
the deep, dark blue of the sky, trunks are 
jammed shut i n the corridors outside, a 
group of boys are singin g "Climbin g Jacob's 
Ladder, " i n the distance music and dancing 
sound from the assembly hall ; and from 
the youth on the bed i n that darkened 
room comes i n a whisperin g sob whic h conceals a chorus: "Yes, that is life. " A s 
the master went to his room his heart 
thrilled wit h a jo y whic h was almost alarm; 
for it was only that afternoon that while 
talkin g to an ambitious girl of the essentials of a girl's education she ha d ejaculated as he paused lest he might weary 
her: "Tha t woul d be good; that woul d 
be life. " The Smith-Lever Bil l and Other Wor k 
of the 
National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People 
AGAIN the association finds itself on 
the firing line i n Washington . First 
came the segregation matter and now the 
Smith-Leve r bill , which provides fo r cooperative agricultura l extension work between the agricultura l colleges i n the 
several States and the Unite d States 
Department of Agriculture . 
The Smit h bill , introduced into the Senate 
by Hok e Smit h of Georgia , and identical 
wit h the Leve r bill, introduced into the 
Hous e by Asbur y F . Leve r of South Carolina , proposes to appropriat e the total sum 
of $15,120,000 durin g the next ten years 
and thereafter the sum of $3,000,000 a year 
fo r this agricultura l extension work. 
Since the bills make no mention of race 
whatever, they are apparently fair. Onl y experts and those very familia r wit h the history 
of the color line woul d grasp the sinister 
significance o f the provision which allows 
the legislatures of the States to name the 
college or colleges which are to administer 
these funds. I n all the Southern States, 
except Tennessee, there are separate agricultura l colleges for the education of white 
an d colored students. This provision would 
enable the legislature of any State to give 
the entire appropriatio n fo r that State to 
the white colleges. 
The bil l was first called to our attention 
by our legislative expert i n Washington. 
Mr . Brinsmade , the attorney fo r the association, immediately went to Washington . 
Befor e he reached there, however, the bill 
had been rushed through the House . This 
was a sudden move and made our work 
more difficult. Mr . Brinsmade succeeded in 
interesting a number of Senators. H e 
drafted an amendment to safeguard the 
interests of the colored farmers which, at 
our suggestion, was introduced by Senator 
Jones of Washington . To meet the requests 
fo r fulle r information on the subject, Mr . 
Brinsmade and Dr. D u Bois compiled a 
memorandum i n support of the amendment. 
Copies of this may be secured at headquarters fo r 15 cents each so long as the 
suppl y lasts. 
To quote from the memorandum: "The 
proposed amendment is calculated to insureto the colored farmers of the South a share 
i n the benefits to be derived from the money 
appropriated under the act. A s the bill 
reads without the amendment, the colored 
farmers may not receive any of the benefits 
i n these appropriations. Certainly they 
wil l not receive their fair share." The 
memorandum then shows by detailed 
statistics that when the interests of colored 
farmers have not been expressly safeguarded 
they have received only a small proportion 
of their prope r share of funds appropriated 
for agricultura l extension. 
To quote again from the memorandum: 
"The colored farmer is the last man who 
should be deprived of the benefits of the 
proposed act. 
"A. — If his interests alone are considered, 
this is obviously so. With his poorer opportunity for acquiring an education, he is at 
a distinct disadvantage i n his effort to compete with his white neighbor. The reports 
show, however, that he has done remarkably well. A slightly' larger proportion of 
the colored than of the white rura l popula ­
tion attended at agricultura l colleges. It is 
those who cannot go to the colleges that 
the act is primaril y intended to benefit. 
Consequently the colored farmers need those 
appropriations at least as badly as the 
white. 
"B . — I f the interests of the whole South 
are considered, we arrive at the same results. It is for the interests of the South 
that as much as possible be made of its 
vast agricultura l resources, which are at the 
present time so insufficiently developed. A 248 TH E CRISIS 
large proportio n of the farms i n the South 
are operated by Negroes, either as owners, 
part owners, managers, share tenants or 
cash tenants. The total value of farm 
property operated by Negroes was $1,116,-
641,576, as compared wit h $7,855,485,313, 
the total value of white farm property. (See 
1910 census.) It cannot seriously be urged 
that it is fo r the advantage of the South 
that the benefits to be derived from this 
bil l shall not be shared by a race which 
operates $1,116,641,576 wort h of farm 
property. " 
Whe n the bil l was debated, Senator Varda -
man was leader of the fight against the 
amendment on the ground that the colored 
people themselves wis h the money to which 
they are entitled distributed by the white 
colleges. Not only have the Senators had 
the advantage of the facts contained i n our 
memorandum, but they have been interviewed 
personally by Mr . Brinsmade , Dr . D u Bois 
and others, so that they di d not have the 
excuse offered by some of the Representatives, who voted fo r the bil l and then said 
that they di d not realize what they were 
doing. The whole matter was thoroughly 
thrashed out i n the Senate committee on 
agriculture and forestry, which reported the 
Smit h bil l without amendment, and, as one 
of the members of this committee admitted, 
it was thoroughly understood that the bill 
without amendment di d not secure to the 
colored colleges their fair share of the proposed appropriations. 
Just before the Jones amendment was 
voted on, Senator Shafroth offered a substitute which placed the decision as to what 
colleges should distribute the funds jointl y 
i n the hands of the governor of the State and 
the Secretary of Agriculture , instead of i n 
the hands of the State legislature. Senator 
Jones objected that this was not a prope r 
substitute, but was rather an amendment to 
perfect the bill . A s such it was voted on 
and adopted. There is no doubt that the 
Southern Senators were forced to offer this 
amendment by the two days' fight i n the 
Senate on the Jones amendment. 
This amendment is not as fair as the Jones 
amendment, but an important point is gained 
in that the Federa l Government is given 
equal power wit h the States i n deciding 
what colleges shall administer the funds. 
The Jones amendment, was then voted on 
and defeated by a vote of 32 to 23. The 
vote woul d certainly have been much closer 
had the Shafroth amendment not been previously adopted. Certai n Senators who had 
announced their intention to vote fo r the 
Jones amendment eventually voted against it. 
A n amendment proposed by Senator 
Hitchcock , requirin g that i n the demonstration wor k itself there shall be no race discrimination, was then adopted without roll 
call. 
I f the Hous e does not concur i n the 
Shafroth and Hitchcoc k amendments the bill 
wil l go to conference. The South does not 
wis h a second fight on the race question, and 
therefore we have every reason to believe 
that the Shafroth amendment wil l be incorporated i n the bil l as finally passed. 
A s usual the association is havin g difficulty i n getting publicit y fo r this important 
measure. Specia l letters and a '"story" 
prepared by a trained newspaper man have 
been sent to a large number of papers and 
an effort has been made to reach the correspondents of the bi g dailies i n Washington . 
Other organizations and friends of our association are tryin g to help. 
The Pennsylvani a Abolitio n Society, 
whose president is Mr . Henr y W . Wilbur , 
our good friend, and whose secretary is 
Mr . Ellwoo d Heacock, also president of 
our Philadelphi a branch, is circulatin g an 
"appea l for justice, " which it has sent 
to members of Congress and to others. This 
society is also attempting to get publicit y 
i n the press. Its appea l shows clearly 
how the Smith-Leve r bill , without the Jones 
amendment, violates the amendment to the 
Morril l act, whic h safeguarded the colored 
colleges. I n commenting furthe r upo n the 
clause i n the Smith-Leve r bill , whic h permits the legislature of any State to designate the white college as the distributor of 
the national fun d fo r education, the appea l 
says: "W e feel that no such temptation i n 
the nature of an opportunit y should be 
placed i n the wa y of any white college i n 
our country. " 
M 
MEETINGS . 
THE association has held a numbe r of 
successful meetings i n addition to 
those mentioned under branches. Lac k of 
space prevented our noting these i n the last 
issue of TH E CRISIS . 
I n Schenectady Mr . Villar d addressed a 
large and appreciative audience at Unio n TH E N. A. A. C. P. 249 
College. I n Jersey Cit y he addressed an 
enthusiastic meeting held under the auspices 
o f the committee of one hundred of Hud ­
son County. The president of this committee is Dr . George E . Cannon. 
Protest meetings against segregation were 
held i n the Moun t Olivet Baptist Church , 
wit h Dr . Willia m P . Hayes, Jr. , presiding ; 
i n the Churc h of the Messiah, Dr. Joh n 
Hayne s Holme s presiding, and i n Coope r 
Union . The speakers included Miss Oving -
ton, Dr . D u Bois, Mrs. M . C. Lawton , 
Mr . Arthu r B . Spingarn , Mr . Wilfor d H . 
Smith . The addresses at the Coope r Unio n 
meeting were o f an unusually high quality. 
Mr . Bennet made a delightful presiding 
officer. The speakers were Miss Lillia n D . 
-Wald , head of the Henr y Street Settlement, 
Dr . D u Bois, who gave his paper on farm 
segregation, and Mr . Villard , who made a 
most eloquent address, i n which he scored 
the Smith-Leve r bill . Resolutions unanimously passed by the meeting were wired 
to the President. 
O n Januar y 8 Dr . Spingar n left New 
Yor k fo r a Western trip , on which he 
visited many of our branches. Space prevents our givin g a detailed account of the 
series o f brilliantl y successful meetings 
which he addressed. Most enthusiastic letters of appreciation have been received from 
all the branches he visited; one of those 
just chartered sending i n 106 new members 
as a result of their meeting. The expenses 
of this entire tri p were borne by Dr. 
Spingar n personally. 
A t Detroit he was entertained at luncheon 
on Januar y 9 by representative colored citizens at the Hote l Pontchartrain (Detroit's 
best hotel, which fo r the first time on this 
occasion disregarded the color line). Amon g 
the white men at this luncheon were 
Judge Albert H . Murphy , of the Michiga n 
Circuit Court, Mr . Frederic k Ingram of the 
Detroit Charte r Commission, and Mr . James 
Schermerhorn, of the Detroit Times; Mr . 
Francis W . Warre n acted as toastmaster. 
O n the evening of the 9th, Dr . Spingar n 
spoke to an audience o f over 1,800, Judge 
Murph y presiding, and other representative 
speakers, white and black, also addressing 
the audience. 
A t Chicago he was the guest of the Cit y 
Club , at a luncheon, on the 10th, Mr . Rob ­
ert McMurd y presiding and introducing 
him. O n the night of the 11th he spoke 
at the Abraham Lincol n Centre, Chicago, to 
an audience of over 2,000. H e was introduced by Judge Edwar d Osgood Brown , 
of the Illinois Circuit Court, president of 
our local branch ; and among the other 
speakers were Roge r N . Baldwin , secretary 
of the Civi c League of St. Louis; Dr. C. E . 
Bentley, Robert McMurdy , Rev. Jenki n 
Lloy d Jones, Charles T. Hallina n and Judge 
Julia n W . Mack , of the Federa l Commerce 
Court. On the 12th a little luncheon was 
arranged for him at the Cit y Club, at which 
were present Miss Jane Addams, Dr. Bentley, 
Willia m C. Graves, Mr . Allinson , Mr . Halli ­
nan, Judge Brow n and others, and plans 
were discussed fo r the Chicago branch and 
its work durin g the coming year. 
A t Quinc y he spoke to about 1,200, the 
Rev. Dr. Hartley , of the Presbyterian 
Church, and Rabb i Kuppi n also speaking. 
A t Kansa s Cit y he spoke to over 2,500, 
after a reception at which he met the leadin g citizens of the colored community. I n 
the afternoon he had also spoken at the 
rooms of the board of publi c welfare to 
the students of its classes i n civics (white). 
A t Topek a he spoke at the First Congregational Churc h (of which Dr . Sheldon, 
author of "I n His Steps," is pastor 
emeritus) and was introduced by Arthu r 
Capper, Republican-Progressive candidate 
for governor of .Kansas- at the election of 
1912. Man y of the most distinguished 
officials of the State, county and city were 
on the platform or i n the audience, which 
numbered over 1,800. Afte r the meeting a 
banquet was tendered to Dr. Spingar n at 
the home of James Guy , at which Mr . 
Cappe r and many leading white and colored citizens were present. 
A t St. Louis he spoke to an audience of 
3,000 (many being turned away) on the 
evening of the 19th. 
A t Indianapolis, after a reception at the 
local Y . M . C. A. , he spoke to an audience 
of over 2,500. Rev. Mr . Wicks, of the 
Unitaria n Church, and Rabb i Feuerlicht 
being among the other speakers. 
A t Cleveland he spoke to over 2,500, 
being introduced by Rev. Mino t Simons, of 
the Unitaria n Church, and being followed 
by Judge Kenned y and Judge Hadden , of 
the probate court. 
Dr. Spingar n spoke to a large and representative white audience on Januar y 19, at 
the Cit y Clu b of St. Louis, at a luncheon TH E CRISIS 
i n his honor. The president of the club 
introduced Rev . Joh n W . Day , of the 
Churc h of the Messiah, who i n tur n introduced Dr . Spingarn . Afte r speaking of the 
signs of a new sentiment and a new leadership i n the South regarding the Negro, 
Dr . Spingar n devoted himself almost entirely to pointin g out that the economic 
uplift of the Negro was impossible without 
the safeguarding of his civil and politica l 
rights, and ended wit h a ple a fo r justice 
and fair play. Incidentally, he answered 
the contention that the Negro vote was 
corrupt by pointin g to the example of 
Adams County, 0., and other places, where 
white communities had shown that the 
presence of the Negxo has nothing to do 
wit h corruption of the franchise. 
The next day the St. Louis Globe-Democrat devoted three paragraphs to the two 
speeches, under the heading "Negroes Hea r 
Spingarn. " Afte r devoting two paragraphs 
to the evening speech, which had been 
addressed to Negroes, it added the followin g 
paragrap h about the afternoon speech, 
addressed exclusively to white people : 
"Professor Spingar n also addressed the 
Cit y Clu b yesterday afternoon on 'The Negro 
and His Problems.' 'The Negro, although 
he has the right to vote, does not get the 
ful l benefit from his vote,' said Spingarn . 
'Often he goes to the polls, and instead of 
placin g his vote where it woul d be fo r the 
best interests of his people, sells it, receiving 
not more than from $3 to $5.' Spingar n 
asked that the Negro be given the same 
economic, civic and commercial privileges as 
the whites." 
This absolute fabrication is the St. Louis 
version of a fifty-minute plea for justice to 
the Negro. I n Dr. D u Bois' "Quest of the 
Silve r Fleece " it is pointed out that the 
Southern white man, chivalrous and honorable i n his relations wit h other white 
people, does not hesitate to steal, cheat or 
lie when dealing with colored people. I f 
this seems an exaggeration, consider the 
case of Dr. Spingar n and the press of 
St. Louis. 
BRANCHES . 
BOSTON . 
AT the annual meeting of the Boston 
branch Mr . Francis J . Garriso n was 
re-elected president; Mr . George G . Brad ­
ford, treasurer; Mr . Butle r R . Wilson , 
secretary; Miss Adelene Moffatt and Mrs. 
Ma y Hallowel l Loud , members of the executive committee to serve fo r three years. 
O n December 22 the Bosto n branch held 
a meeting at the Rus h A . M . E . Church . 
The speakers were Mr . Cobleigh, Rev . 
Christophe r R . Elio t and Mr . Isaac Harris. 
Mr . Wilso n presided. 
CALIFORNIA . 
The Norther n Californi a branch has been 
doing good wor k i n holdin g meetings of 
protest against segregation. The branch 
has recently elected new officers, of which 
a ful l list wil l be printe d as soon as it is 
received at headquarters. The wor k of 
the branch is accomplished through several 
committees who are endeavoring to organize 
the colored people i n the cities about the 
bay. 
CHICAGO . 
The meeting held by the Chicago branch 
has already been mentioned i n connection 
wit h Dr . Spingarn's trip . A t the annua l 
meeting of the branch, Januar y 11, Judg e 
E . 0 . Brow n was re-elected president; Mr . 
T. W . Allinson , secretary and treasurer, 
and Mr . G . R . Arthur, assistant secretary. 
DISTRIC T O F COLUMBIA . 
On Januar y 16 the Distric t of Columbi a 
branch held an election, at whic h the followin g officers were elected: 
President, Mr . Archibal d H . Grimke ; 
treasurer, Mr . G . C. Wilkinson ; secretary, 
Mr . W . B . Hartgrove ; executive committee, 
Miss Charlotte E . Hunter, chairman ; Mrs. 
Juli a Layton , Mr . Willia m McCary , Mr . 
L . M . Hershaw, Rev . A . C . Garner, Mr . 
Neva l H . Thomas. 
The chairman of the committee of fifty 
and more gave a most interesting report 
upo n the wor k o f the committee. W e 
expect to publish this later i n TH E CRISIS . 
The same evening a meeting was advertised to be held i n True Reformers' Hal l 
by the Rev. James L . White , who invited 
all citizens to hear a lecture upo n the 
Nationa l Associatio n fo r the Advancement 
of Colored People. Mr . White , i n the 
notice of his meeting, stated: " I claim 
that the Nationa l Association fo r the Ad ­
vancement of Colored Peopl e is doin g more 
harm than any organization since the Civi l 
War, and that the citizens of Washingto n 
are being deceived i n their support o f the 
said organization, and that segregation is 
a ghost story. " 
250 TH E CIVI L RIGHT S AC T 251 
The Washingto n Herald, i n commenting 
on this, stated that the meeting was held 
i n the Metropolita n Churc h i n M Street. 
The pastor of the Metropolita n Churc h 
made an announcement from his pulpit 
that there was not a bit o f truth i n this 
statement and that no such meeting had 
been held i n that church. 
The next day it was stated i n the Wash ­
ington Star that no such meeting had been 
held i n either place. 
O n the anniversary of the birth of 
Charles Sumner, Januar y 6, the Distric t of 
Columbi a branch held a remarkable mass 
meeting. The speakers were Senator Clapp , 
Mr . Thomas Ewing , Mr . Archibal d H . 
Grimke , Judge Wendel l Phillip s Stafford 
an d Mr . Oswald Garriso n Villard . The 
Rev. I. N . Ross presided. W e have had 
many requests to prin t Mr . Villard's in ­
spirin g address. Notic e of its publication 
wil l be given later. 
HOWAR D UNIVERSITY . 
The Howar d Chapte r has commenced its 
campaign of organization among colleges 
and universities. The officers are : President, S. A . Allen ; vice-president, Madr e 
Penn ; secretary, Miss Eulali a Lane ; corresponding secretary, T. B . Dyett; treasurer, George Brice . 
MUSKOGEE . 
The list of the officers of the Muskogee 
branch is as follows: President, J . E . 
Johnson ; secretary, W . Scott Brown , Jr. ; 
treasurer, J . W . Sharpe ; corresponding 
secretary, Mrs. G . L . Prince ; advisory 
board, Parra r L . McCain , Thos. W . Leahy, 
Joh n D . Benedict, 0 . A . Wells, Willia m 
Bain . 
SEATTLE . 
The Seattle branch, which has just been 
chartered, is to be congratulated fo r the 
emancipation celebration which it held at 
the Moun t Zio n Baptist Church New Year's 
night. On the program were the Rev. J . L . 
Williams, Mrs. L . A . Graves, Mr . Eugene 
Johnson, Mrs. E . Llewellyn , Dr. W . R . 
Carte r and the mayor of Seattle, Hon . 
George F . Cotterill. A feature of the meeting was three-minute talks by representatives of various States. The Hon . A . R . 
Blac k presided. 
TACOMA . 
Mentio n should be made of the organization wor k which is being done by the 
Tacoma branch. This was the branch 
which first interested our Seattle members, 
and now they have almost perfected an 
organization i n Portland , Ore. 
Branches have been chartered by the 
Nationa l Association as follows: Cleveland, Providence, Seattle, St. Paul , Trenton 
and Talladega, Ala . A chapter at Cornell 
University has been officially recognized 
and wil l be chartered. Ful l lists of the 
officers of all these branches wil l be given 
in the annual report. 
TH E CIVIL RIGHT S AC T 
B y JUSTIC E WENDEL L PHILLIPS STAFFOR D 
WHEREAS, as is essential to 
just government, we recognize the equality of all 
men before the law, and 
hold that it is the duty of 
government i n its dealings 
wit h the people to mete 
out equal and exact justice to all , of whatever nativity, race, color or persuasion, religious or political ; and it being the 
appropriat e object of legislation to enact 
great fundamental principle s into law. " 
—Preamble to the Civil Rights Act. 
The men who at the close of the Civi l 
Wa r endeavored to secure the fruits of 
that great conflict expressed their profound 
convictions i n three Constitutional Amend ­
ments and i n the Civi l Rights Act . The 
first of these amendments, number thirteen, 
prohibited slavery. The second, number 
fourteen, forbade the States to discriminate 
between the races i n regard to civil rights. 
The third, number fifteen, forbade the 
States to discriminate between the races i n 
regard to suffrage. 
The Civi l Rights Ac t forbade discrimina ­
tion between the races at any publi c place, 
such as theatres, hotels, on railroads, steamboats, etc. The conviction of the time was 
that we were one people, and that all discriminations by State or nation on the 
ground of race were inconsistent with the 252 TH E CRISIS 
true spirit of our government. I n their 
view the government was no more a white 
man's government than it was a black 
man's government. It .was neither. The 
language of the act was so broad and 
comprehensive that it included i n its prohibition the citizens of the various States. 
No t only di d it forbid the States themselves 
to discriminate, but it forbade the citizens 
of the States to do so. I n this respect it 
was held unconstitutional by the Supreme 
Court, upon the groun d that the Congress 
could not deal directly wit h the citizens of 
the States upon this subject but must leave 
the States to deal wit h their own citizens. 
Thus, when a case arose i n which a colored 
person had been discriminated against i n a 
publi c place by a citizen of one of the 
States, and i n one of the States, the court 
held that the case was one as to which 
Congress had no power to legislate and 
that so fa r as it had attempted to do so, its 
attempt was unconstitutional and void. This 
objection did not apply, however, to such 
acts of discrimination i f they were committed i n the Territories, or i n the Distric t 
of Columbia , or on the high seas, because 
it was admitted that the legislative power 
of Congress extended to such cases. The 
court expressly recognized this distinction 
and held the act voi d i n part only, declining 
to decide what effect the unconstitutionality 
of a part might have upon the remainder 
of the act. Man y years passed and no case 
came to the Supreme Court, i n which the 
discrimination had occurred under such 
circumstances that the validit y of the act, 
as applyin g to Federa l jurisdiction, could 
be tested. Recently such a case has arisen 
and been passed upon. A colored woman, 
traveling by steamboat on the high seas, 
from a port i n one State to a port i n 
another State, was denied equal accommodations wit h white passengers solely on the 
ground of color, and the discrimination was 
challenged. The court promptl y overthrew 
what was left of the act, by holding that 
being bad i n part it was bad i n the whole. 
They admitted that Congress had the power 
to forbid such an act of discrimination ; 
they admitted that it had forbidden it. Bu t 
they said that because Congress had at the 
same time forbidden -people whom they had 
no right to forbid, therefore even those 
whom they had a right to forbid were not 
bound to obey. This result was reached by 
applying , and it seems to me by misapply ­
ing , a well-settled rule of construction. 
Tha t rule is that when an act has been 
passed whic h must stand or fal l together, 
because the legislature woul d evidently not 
pass it at all unless it could pass it as a 
whole, then, i f one part was beyond the 
power of the legislature and must fall , the 
rest must fal l wit h it. The court said that 
that was the ease here—that i f Congress had 
known that it could not forbi d the citizens 
of the various States from discriminatin g 
against each other on the ground o f color, it 
would not have attempted to forbi d the 
citizens of the Territories, or other people 
subject i n this respect to the command of 
the Unite d States Congress, from so discriminating. That is the point where, as it 
seems to me, the decision breaks down. Fo r 
as I have read the history of that period 
it is too plai n for argument that the Con ­
gress that passed the Civi l Rights Bil l 
would have passed the bil l just as fa r as 
they had power to pass it. Indeed, it was 
their very zeal fo r equal rights that carried 
them beyond the bounds whic h the court 
held existed. Imagine the scorn and contempt wit h which the decision woul d have 
been received by the men who voted fo r 
that bill, not merely because it overthrew 
their work, but even more because it professed to do so i n futherance of the real 
intention of its authors! The suspicion 
wil l arise that the court regarded the act 
as the expression of a sentiment and conviction that has passed away, and made use 
of this rule of construction to get ri d of it. 
They knew that no Congress of the present 
day woul d re-enact the law. 
There are other points which, i f I were 
writin g for lawyers, I should be glad to 
elaborate, but I hesitate to do so for la y 
readers lest I should confuse rather than 
clarif y the subject. To me the case seems 
as unsound from a strictly legal standpoint 
as it does from the broader view above in ­
dicated. The decision is placed upo n two 
grounds. The first is that the prohibitio n 
is i n one general expression and so admits 
of no separation, such as to allow it to be 
applie d to the places over whic h Congress 
had jurisdiction. I f it had enumerated the 
places, as thus: "I n States, i n Territories, 
i n the Distric t of Columbia , on the high 
seas," etc., then the court might have 
dropped out the wor d "States " and left the SOM E MOR E BOOK S 253 
law i n force as to Territories, the Distric t 
of Columbia , and the high seas! Is not 
this stickin g i n the bark ? Is the mental 
concept any different i n one case than i n 
the other? The second is that this is a 
penal act and therefore must be construed 
strictly, so as to make no one liable to the 
penalty unless it was clearly the intention 
of the lawmakers that he should bo liable. 
Bu t this rule yields to the more fundamental rule that the principa l intention of 
the legislature must be effectuated i f possible. Is not the principa l intention here 
made plai n by the preamble and by every 
provision o f the act itself, namely, to secure 
to the oppressed and insulted colored people the treatment they were entitled to 
receive? An d would Congress have hesitated to secure this treatment for as many 
as possible, even though they could not 
secure it fo r every single one? The opinion, wit h cold-blooded indifference, ignores 
the warm pulses of humanity that beat i n 
every wor d of the Civi l Rights Ac t and 
give it lif e and meaning. The iniquit y of 
such a decision is that it tends to destroy 
faith i n justice, faith i n common honesty, 
faith i n the judgments of courts, and even 
faith i n God . Bu t let us not lose our faith. 
Troubl e may be i n store, indeed; trouble 
must be in store for a nation whose 
Supreme Court can thus forget the nation's 
ideals of righteousness, and read one of its 
noblest enactments by the farthin g candle 
of a technical rule instead of by the love 
of equal rights and justice—the holy light 
that flames in every line of the instrument 
itself. Bu t whatever troubles may come, and 
perhaps through those very troubles and 
punishments, justice will triump h i n the 
end. 
The decision marks the lowest point yet 
reached by the receding tide of sentiment 
i n favor of equal civil rights. Le t us hope 
that it may also mark the lowest point that 
will be reached. The wor k before us is not 
to find fault wit h the court so much as 
to create, i f possible, a publi c sentiment i n 
favor of equality as true and wholesome 
as that which was embodied i n the law that 
has been swept away. Whe n that has been 
done the law wil l be safe i n the hands of 
any court. Unti l that is done, even a 
righteous decision of the court cannot much 
avail to stem the tide of hostile sentiment. 
"Facts of Reconstruction." By John R. Lynch. 
325 pages. Neale Publishing Co., New York, 1913. 
FOREMOST i n importance 
this month comes the longawaited reminiscences of 
Joh n R . Lynch . 
Majo r Lync h was one of 
the half dozen prominent 
colored men i n the history 
of reconstruction, and perhaps more than 
any livin g man knows the truth from the 
Negro's point of view. His purpose i n 
writin g "Th e Facts of Reconstruction" are 
stated clearly i n the preface : 
"Wa s the enfranchisement of the black 
men at the South by act of Congress a 
grave mistake? 
"Wer e the reconstructed State governments that were organized as a result 
thereof a disappointment and a failure ? 
"Wa s the Fifteent h Amendment to the 
Federa l Constitution premature and 
unwise ? 
"A n affirmative answer to the above questions wil l be found i n nearly everything 
that has been written about reconstruction 
durin g the last quarter of a century. The 
main purpose of this work is to present 
the other side." 
The answers fill the book and are most 
interesting. I n 1872 he tells us: "N o one 
could be found i n any party or either race 
who was bold enough to express the opinion 
that the Congressional plan of reconstruction was a mistake, or that Negro suffrage 
was a failure. To the contrary, it was 
admitted by all that the wisdom of both had 
been full y tested and clearly vindicated. 
The adoption of any other pla n would have 
resulted i n the accomplishment of nothing 
but the mere physica l abolition of slavery 
and the denial of the right of a State to 
withdraw from the Union . These would 
have been mere abstract propositions, with 
no authority vested i n the national government for their enforcement. The wa r for 
SOM E MOR E BOOK S 254 TH E CRISIS 
the Unio n woul d have been practically a 
failure . The South woul d have gained 
and secured substantially everything fo r 
which it contended except the establishment of an independent government. The 
black man, therefore, was the saviour of 
his country, not only on the field of battle, 
but after the smoke of battle had cleared 
away. " 
H e shows that Negro suffrage had slowly 
but surely built u p a good State government i n Mississippi . The last "carpet-bag" 
governor "had given the State an excellent 
administration. The State judiciar y had 
been kept up to the high standard established by Governor Alcorn . Ever y dollar 
of the publi c money had been collected and 
honestly accounted for. The State was i n 
a prosperous condition. The rate of taxation had been greatly reduced, and there 
was every prospect of a still further reduction before the end of his administra ­
tion. Bu t these facts made no difference 
to those who were flushed wit h the victory 
they had so easily won. " 
And , finally', when the reconstruction government was overthrown and the reform 
administration came, we are reminded that 
its treasurer promptl y stole $315,612.19! 
"Gouldtown." By William Steward and T. G. 
Steward. 237 pages. Lippincott, Philadelphia, 
1913. 
Persons interested i n fair y tales should 
read a true one as set down gravely, 
sedately and completely i n the story of 
"Gouldtown. " 
It seems that one of Olive r Cromwell's 
majors bought parts of New Jersey from 
Berkeley and Carteret and settled there; 
but to his mind, all did not go well wit h 
him, for this is what he says i n his will : 
"Item, I do accept against Elizabet h 
Adams of having any ye leaste part of my 
estate, unless the Lor d open here eyes to 
see her abominable transgression against 
him, me and her good father, by givin g 
her true repentance, and forsakin g yt 
Blac k yt hath been the rui n of her, and 
becoming penitent fo r her sins; upo n yt 
condition I do wil l and require my executors to settle five hundred acres of lan d 
upon her." 
It seems that this granddaughter clung 
to her black husband. Other mulattoes i n 
various ways joined the settlement and today this remarkable community still exists. 
A s the book says: 
"Severa l of the earlier Goulds and 
Pierces, as well as Murrays, intermarried 
wit h whites, and members o f their imme ­
diate offspring went awa y an d lost their 
identity, they and their descendants becomin g white ; while from those who still main ­
tained their identity as people of color 
there have come many who have reached 
distinction, and i n whom their native county 
shows merited pride. " 
"Masterpieces of Negro Eloquence." Edited by 
Alice Moore Dunbar. 512 pages. The Bookery 
Publishing Co. 
The widow of Pau l Laurenc e Dunba r 
has edited a valuable volume of orations of 
colored men. 
There are fifty-one speeches given and 
nearly all of the Negr o leaders fro m Doug ­
lass to the Grimkes, are represented. Some 
orations are rather essays than speeches, 
but this, i f anything, enhances the value 
of the book, which becomes i n this wa y a 
commentary of the Negr o on his own problems covering one hundred years. 
The wor k was hurried fo r publication 
durin g the jubilee year and shows some 
proofs of the hurry . There are several bad 
slips i n proofreading, and it woul d have 
been well to have put little biographica l 
sketches lik e the one placed before Doug ­
lass' speeches before all the others. 
Nevertheless the total result is worth 
while, and the message of the whole book is 
perhaps summed up i n its last paragraph : 
"Strange , is it not, my brothers, how 
often i n Americ a those great watchwords 
of human energy —'B e strong!' 'Kno w thyself!' 'Hitc h you r wago n to a star!'—how 
often these die away into dim whispers 
when we face these seething millions of 
black men? An d yet do they not belong 
to them? Ar e they not their heritage as 
well as yours ? Ca n they bear burdens 
without strength, know without learning 
and aspire without ideals? Ar e yo u afrai d 
to let them try ? Pea r rather i n this, our 
common fatherland, lest we live to lose 
those great watchwords of liberty and opportunity which yonder i n the eternal hills 
their fathers fought wit h you r fathers to 
preserve." • TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 255 
Hammerless, 
Double-Barrel Shot 
Gun—very superior. Fitted with 
top snap-break, bar side locks, forged 
frame, case hardened locks and frames. • 
Nicely finished, highly polished stock and H 
fore end. Polished blued steel barrels; m 
choke bored, 12 Gauge and either 30 or 32 £ 
inch barrels. Well balanced and accurate, m 
A perfect beauty* The same model used by J 
some of the best shots in the country. We give it 
some of the best shots in the country, we give it mm 
Absolutely FREE to Our Agents | 
i 
All that we require is that you show our Q 
samples and take a few orders for our 
special made-to-measure clothes. We 
pay highest cash profits and give extra 
presents besides. Your choice of 628 I 
valuable premiums—such as Leather Suit £ j 
Cases, Musica l Instruments, Pipes, I 
Watches, Sporting Goods, Hats, etc. 5 
Write for elegant free outfit and full particulars w\ 
• SPENCE R MEA D CO. , Dept. 745. CHICAG O H 
E*u\mmmmmmmmmm* n 
Big Pay for Easy Work 
If You Live in a Small Town 
We want &000 agents — 5000 bright, young men 
willing to hustle .....i earn $5.00 to Slfi.OO a day 
welling our linn hand - made • to - measure clothes. 
This throws open onu apod job in every community 
or town of not over 10,000 people. 
To the first man In you r tow n wh o 
written us, will be given the first opportunity 
to got ou r Complet e Sampl e Out ­
fit Free , You need no experience, but 
i .11 • right out making money— $2.00 to $9.00 
pro lit on every unit yon sell. Wholesal e 
Price s for Suit s 87.98 to $28.00 — Pants 
52.48 to $8.60. We prepay the postage or 
express on every shipment. 
Every garment Is made-to-order 
find strictly hand tailored. Satisfaction Guarantee d o r You r 
Mone y Back . 
To prove to you the unequalled ' 
quality of our tailoring, we will let 
you order a Sample Suit or even a 
rmirof pants at the wholesale price. 
Remember, we want only one agent In each town, 
someone else from your town may write us tomorrow—so don't delay—but mail your letter today. 
Th e Chicag o Tailors' Association 
Dept . 264 va n Bure n an d Mswjtej Sta. . CHICAG O 
WANTED—ON E MA N OK WOMAN IN EVER Y 
locality to start a Candy Kitchen. best paying 
small business on earth. Few dollars starts you. 
Get away from wage slavery. Write for particulars. Native Herbarium Co., Ambler, Pa. 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS . Dignified 
work. Address: 7 0 Fifth Avenue, 
New York. 
$60 A WEEK and EXPENSES 
That's the money you can get this year. I mean It. I want County Sales manager 
quick, men or women who believe In the Bquare deal, who will go Into partnership with 
me. No capital or experience needed. My folding Bath Tub has taken the country by 
storm. Solves the bathing problem. No plumbing, no water works required. Full length 
bath In any room. Folds In small roll, handy as an umbrella. I tell you It's great! 
GREA T I Rivals $100 bath room. Now listen! I want YOU to handle your county. 
I'll furnish demonstrating tub free. I'm positive—absolutely certain—you can get bigger 
money In a week with me than you ever made in a month before—I KNOW IT! 
TW O SALE S A DAY—$30 0 A MONT H 
That's what you get—every month. Needed In every home, badly wanted, eagerly bought. 
Modern bathing facilities for all the people. Take the orders ri^ht and left. Quick 
Bales, immense profits. Look at these men. Kunkle, Ohio, received $240 first week; 
Mathlas, Florida. *120 in two days; Corrigan, New York, $114 In 60 hours: Newton, 
California, $60 in three days. You can do as well. TWO 
SALES A DAY MEANS $300 A MONTH. The work Is very 
easy, pleasant, permanent, fascinating. It meant a business 
of your own. 
I grant credit, furnish sample, help you out, back you up— 
don't doubt, don't hesitate, don't hold back. You cannot 
lose. My other men are building homes, bank accounts, so 
can you. Act. then, quick. SEND NO MONEY. Just name 
on penny post card for free tub offer. Hustle! 
YOU ! 
YESY0 U 
CAN GET IT 
H . S. ROBINSON 
President 
190 Vance St., Toledo, O. 
DEMONSTRATIN G 
TU B FRE E 
Canadian Address: Walkerville, Ont., Canada. 
Mention TH E Crisis 256 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
SCHOO L OF BEAUT Y CULTUR E AN D HAI R DRESSIN G 
Kelsey's Hair Dressing, Hair Grower, Scalp Tonic and Face Lotion have no equal, 
Guaranteed under Food and Drug Act, June 30, 1906. 
Price, 60c each. 
KELSEY' S 
Telephone, Momlngslde 8162 
143 West 131st St. 
NEW YORK 
Manicuring, Shampooing, Hair Dressing, Marcel Waving, Facial and Body Massage, Hair Making, Chiropody, 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimited practice in parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summer Course, $7.50 up. Send for 
booklet. Mme. A. Carter Kelsey, Gen'l Instr.; Dr. Samuel 
A. Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen'l Manager. 
MUTUAL TEACHERS' 
AGENCY 
Recommend s teachers for schools; secures 
employment for teachers. Blank s and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N. W . Washington, D. C. 
Only 
$65.00 
No. 24 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A Valu e Unequaled . Sol d onji.o o 
Profi t Margi n FrQ m 
Factory to User 
Writ e fo r price s 
an d othe r styles . 
Sen d fo r catalogue . 
C . R . PATTERSO N 
& SONS , 
Greenfield , Ohi o 
t Negr o Carriag e concer n i n th e Unite d States . 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
You can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU. Others are making $20 to 
$500 a week. Why can't you ? By our method 
you can start with $5 and up. We offer you thirty 
live, money-making mail order plans. You can 
make 95 cents profit on every dollar order. We 
furnish circulars, printed matter and place your 
advertising at lowest rates. Send 10 cents for 
complete outfit. Do it to-day—Now! 
MAIL DEALER S WHOLESALE HOUSE 
517 Dearborn Street Chicago, HI. 
Again Ahead 
As usual we are ahead of the rest. Ahead In Btyle 
—ahead iu quality—ahead In designs—ahead In price 
and ahead in terms. Sofarahead 
that you wJll be behind the times 
If you d " not wear one of our 
new, nobuy suits this spring. 
Get One for Nothing 
Our new scheme is a dandy 
You get your suit without one 
cent of cost. The nobbiest, most 
up-to-date suit a man ever putt 
on his back. Cut right up to the 
minute with Btyle sticking out 
all over it. Make 
$
lOtO*15 D £y 
Our plan makes this easv. 
Simply send us a postal and we 
will exrlatn It all and send you 
the FREE Btlf-meaBurlng blanks, 
samp s, fashion chart, etc. We 
prepay express on everything. 
Write us now. 
PARAGON TAILORING CO. 
Dept. 251 Chicago 
WANTE D 
500 Negro families (farmers preferred) 
to settle on FRE E Government Lands in 
Chaves County, New Mexico. Blackdom is 
a Negro colony. Fertile soil, ideal climate. 
No "Jim Crow" Laws. For information 
write 
JAS. HAROL D COLEMA N 
Blackdom ---- - New Mexico 
$25.00 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
' 'History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War 1' combined with "History of the Negro Race.'' 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street New York 
REGALIA 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO. 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E. Cor. 8th and Plum Sts. 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
COLORED ME N 
WANTE D T O PREPAR E A S 
SLEEPING-CA R AN D TRAI N 
PORTERS . 
No experience necessary. Positions pay $65 to $100 a month. 
Steady work. New York roads. 
Passes and uniforms furnished when 
necessary. Write now. 
I. RY. C. I., Dept. 19, Indianapolis, Ind. 
Buy Real Estate in "Twin Cities." 
You can double your money by an investment of 
city and suburban property in and around 
Minneapolis. I have some good investments in new 
towns in Western Canada. Communicate with 
me. 
B. MAXE Y McDEW 
802 Sykes Block Minneapolis, Minn. 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 257 
MILE S M . WEB B 
Chicago's Expert Photographe r 
1 specialize in every phase of artistic picture 
making. Send me your photos for enlargements. 
Prices reasonable. Satisfaction guaranteed. 'Phone 
6688 Douglass. 
WEBB STUDIO 
3519 State Street Chicago, 111. 
flJP 
The Loyal Knights and 
Ladies of Malachites 
is incorporated under the 
laws of the District of Columbia. Itsobjectistocombine the Negroes of the 
world for their mutual advancement along industrial and commercial lines. 
It also stands for the full 
enjoyment by the Negro of 
r P .. j Cni>.ftma his civil and political rights. 
rnJSQP *
 Thi s
 movement is internauovernor tionalin its scope; we have 
lodges not only in the United States but in 
Jamaica, B. W. I.; Colon, Bocas delToro, Panama (CanalZone) and Costa Rica. It is a dark 
day for the Negro and he must come together. 
Race movements have failed because our people were told that by contributing thereto the 
race only would be benefited, but no tangible 
individaal benefits were offered. By our plan 
the member pays 35c. per month in the Association and receives $4.00 per week sick benefits and $100 at death. We not only look 
after the race but each individual member as 
well. A big convention is soon to be held here. 
We want a lodge in every village, hamlet and 
town and a delegate to be sent to this convention. Organizers wanted everywhere* For 
full particulars, write 
KNIGHTS O F MALACHITES 
1111 You St. N. W. Washington, D. C. A 
AGENTS WANTED—Bi g seller. $3 to $5 per 
day. Costs you from 10 r • 20 cents; sells for 
35 cents and up. Sample free for the asking. 
G. A. ALBUR Y & CO., P. O. Box 414, Bristol, Pa. 
Beautiful Colored Doll Free 
This Negro doll lias light 
brown color, long black 
hair, jointed limbs, sleeping oyes. Fo r selling our 
artistic Negro post cards 
and other beautiful cards. 
Largo assortment; very 
cheap. Agents and dealers are making big 
money handling them. 
Terms free. Sample of 
all post cards sent postpaid for 15 cents. 
J . GRIFFIT H 
AR T COMPAN Y , 
36-38 Beekman St. 
New Yor k 
James Webb 
Was Jesus a Negro 
with Woolly Hair? 
Webb's books and pictures prove 
it and show it by the Bible. A 
picture, 12x18, of Jesus with 
woolly hair, and His Holy Angels 
at His second coming, and a book 
with Biblical references, extending 
from Genesis to Revelations, proving the fact. All for $1.50 and 
postage prepaid. The book alone 
is worth its price. 
The following are comments upon the same: 
' 'I beg to say, after hearing Elder Webb on 
the subject, that the blood of the Negro coursed 
through the veins of Jesus and Solomon. I am 
frank to say that I have seldom, if ever, enjoyed 
such an intellectual treat. The position he 
assumed as the subject of his lecture touching the 
Hametic blood and race is difficult and requires a 
practical knowledge of Biblical and historical lore. 
But I am pleased to say that he not only shows 
himself an expert, but the master of the situation, 
and I commend him to the ministry and churches 
of our race of every denomination.1' 
Truly, 
(Signed) Bishop H. M. TURNER. 
"The evidence submitted by Elder Webb tending to prove 
that the Saviour or mankind was a black man seems to be 
sufficient to put those who oppose the proposition upon their 
proof. Now that the chain of evidence presented by Mr. 
Webb appen rs so complete, it is strange that none of the 
delvers in the Biblical records have not advanced the sensational proposition before. Not only was Christ a Negro, 
but It seems that Solomon, who has been held up through 
all the anas as the personification of wisdom, had Ethiopian 
blood In his veins, also."—Seattle "Dully Times." 
Price $1.50 for picture and book. Send money 
order or express order to James M. Webb, 3519 
State Street, Chicago, 111., in the care of the Webb 
Studio. 
WANTED—Colore d carriage smiths, 
woodworkers, trimmers and painters. Sober, experienced men only. 
Address: TH E CRISIS, 70 Fifth 
Avenue, New York City. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 258 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
Residence 2546 Michigan 
Bell Phone E-2161 
Office Phone 
Home 58 Main 
C. H . CALLOWA Y 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
117 W. 6th Street Kansas City, Mo. 
rr»i»„v,„-„.. /Central 104-W Telephones: { Mai n g l 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
Attorney-at-Law Notary Public 
1607 Williamson Building - - - Cleveland, O. 
Office L. D. Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L. D. Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORG E A. DOUGLA S 
Counselor-at-Law 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J . 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
102O Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block 
Minneapolis Minn. 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia Pa. 
Tel. 2026 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorney and
 1 Counselor-at-Law 
S4 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street - - - Baltimore, Md. 
Phones: Office, Bell 4059; New 420-11 
Residence, New 733-A 
THOS . E . GREENE , JR. 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
Maloney Block - Youngstown, Ohio 
William H. Austin Edmund O. Austin 
Law Offices of 
AUSTIN & AUSTIN 
St. Paul Building, 220 Broadway, New York 
Suite 7—H, I, J , K 
Telephones: 7400, 5365, 5366 Cortlnndt 
B. F. BOOT H 
Attorney-at-Law 
57 N. Second Street 
Memphis Tenn. 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUD E E . CURTI S 
Surgeon Dentist 
188 W. 135th Street - - - - New York City 
Telephone Connection 
R. W . FEARIN G 
Electrician 
Contracting, Repairing, Motors, Electric and 
Gas Fixtures 
Electrician recent Emancipation Exposition in 
New York 
85 Marlon Street .. . - Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Telephone Columbus 3935 Open All Night 
RODNE Y DAD E & BROS . 
Undertakers and Embalmers 
Notary Public 
Funeral Parlor and Chapel Free 
Licensed Lady Embalmer Prompt Service 
266 West 53d Street - - - - New York City 
Between Broadway and 8th Avenue 
MME . FANNI E BELL E D E KNIGH T 
Dramatic and Dialect Reader. Engagements solicited. Students given special training in the 
Delsarte Method. Instruction also given in Dialect. 
English Grammar and Rhetoric. 
Terms Reasonable. 
Telephone Morningside 9045 
Studio: 231 W. 134th St. New York City 
TAND Y & FOSTE R 
Architects 
1931 Broadway New York 
Telephone 5368 Columbus 
H . HENR Y HARRI S 
Architect 
Corner 8th and Princess Streets 
Wilmington ----- - N. C. 
WILLIA M L . BEL L 
Architect 
138^ Auburn Avenue - - Atlanta, Ga. 
JUNIOR MECHANICA L DRAFTSMA N desires 
position. Persistent, resourceful and efficient. 
Reference. Address DRAFT, care of TH E CRISIS. 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August 
Box 25, Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, O. 
FO R SAL E 
Adjoinin g the campus of Fis k University , 
a moder n house of ten rooms, wit h water, 
gas. bath and steam heat: lot 50x175 feet. 
Frui t and shade trees; small fish pon d and 
chicken houses. Price $5,000. AddressH . H . WRIGH T 
Fisk University - Nashville, Tenn. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . * The Art of Printing 
A S EXEMPLIFIE D I N OU R WOR K EMBODIE S TH E FOL ­
LOWIN G POINT S O F MERIT : 
1. Stationery 
2. Form 
3. Workmanship 
(a) Neat 
(b) Attractive 
(c) Quality 
(a) Polite 
(b) Business 
(c) Social 
(a) Artistic 
(b) Correct 
(c) Prompt 
We Print TH E CRISIS 
ROBER T N . WOOD , Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T Telephone: Lenox 6C67 NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
Homes in Long Island! 
Few people realize the wonderful possibilities of Long Island 
property, the rapid growth of that section of the city and its wonderful 
future. 
W E AR E SELLIN G GOO D HOME S IN CORONA , with all 
improvements, only five cents carfare to New York. Corona is in the 
very center of Greater New York, and in a few months will be reached 
by the rapid transit lines of Manhattan, giving to the people of that 
section of the city a five-cent carfare to any section of Manhattan. 
The only place within thirty minutes of Times Square, Grand 
Central Station or the Pennsylvania Station, where the man of small 
means can get a modern home with all improvements at a moderate 
cost. We would be glad to have you visit Corona at our expense. 
Corona is one of the highest elevations in New York City, has an 
excellent car service, good schools, excellent water supply and the best 
place in all New York for children. For full particulars as to price 
and terms address 
L . S. REE D & COMPAN Y 
142 Hunter Avenue Long Island City 
Some choice investment lots for $50 on reasonable terms A Selected List of Books 
ar e PRIC E INCLUDE S POSTAG E 00 ffi 
TH E QUES T O F TH E SILVE R FLEECE . W . E . B. D U Bois $1.50 
HOUS E BEHIN D TH E CEDARS . Charles W . Chesnutt 1.65 
HAZEL . Mar y White Ovington 1.08 
AUTOBIOGRAPH Y O F A N EX-COLORE D MAN . Anonymous 1.40 
TH E TESTIN G FIRE . Alexander Corkey 1-35 
LYRIC S O F LOWL Y LIFE . Paul Laurence Dunbar 1.40 
MARRO W O F TRADITION . Charles W . Chesnutt L6 5 
TH E SPOR T O F TH E GODS . Paul Laurence Dunbar 1.65 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . Mau d Cuney Har e 1.50 
A NARRATIV E O F TH E NEGRO . Lelia Amos Pendleton 1.65 
SOUL S O F BLAC K FOLK . W . E . B. D u Bois 1.35 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . Kelly Mille r 2.15 
HISTOR Y O F TH E NEGRO . B. G . Brawley 1.35 
HAL F A MAN . Mar y White Ovington 1.12 
MIN D O F PRIMITIV E MAN . Franz Boas 1.65 
AFTERMAT H O F SLAVERY . William Sinclair 1.65 
JOH N BROWN . W . E . B. D u Bois 1.45 
FACT S O F RECONSTRUCTION . John R . Lynch 1.65 
STOR Y O F TH E NEGRO . Booker T . Washington 3.25 
FLOWE R o' TH E PEACH . Percival Gibbon 1.45 
TH E COLORE D INVENTOR . Henry E . Baker 15 
A CHILD' S STOR Y O F DUNBAR . Julia L . Henderson 25 
A ddress 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue - - - - - New Yor k City 