Th e CRISI S 
Vol. 9—No. 1 NOVEMBER , 1914 Whole No. 49 ) 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R <^p^? TE N CENT S A C OP Y "Out of the House of Bondage" 
The latest and greatest book from the pen of 
PROFESSOR KELL Y MILLE R 
"N o man of his race has so sure a power of prunning falacies with passionless 
intellectual severity."—Boston Transcript. 
"Th e man searches deeply into underlying causes."—St. Joseph, Mo., News-Press. 
" A philosophic treatise."—Charlotte, N . C , Observer. 
"N o student of social conditions of America at the present time will want to fail to see 
it on his shelves."—Southern Workman. 
E. -1 $ ^ • 5 
242 Pages. Price $1.50. 
Agents Wanted Everywhere V „
 1 
Address: Prof. KELL Y MILLER , Howard University 
Washington, D. C. 
A Life of 
N orri s W righ t C une y 
By 
MAU D CUNE Y HAR E 
(His Daughter) 
Woul d you like to read about a red-blooded man who was one 
of the great leaders of Negro Americans ? Woul d you like to inspire 
your children with the life of this "Tribune of the Black People"? 
250 pages. Postpaid, $1.50. Best terms to agents. 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue New York City TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 7 0 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducted by 
W . E. BURGHARD T D U BOIS 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , Business Manager 
Contents Copyrighted, 1914, by the National Association (or the Advancement of Colored People 
Contents for November, 1914 
PICTURE S 
COVE R PICTURE , "November." Photograph from life. By L . M . Miner. 
COLORE D Y. M . C. A. BUILDING S 14, 32, 35 
"OU T O F AFRIC A HAV E I CALLE D M Y SON " 26, 27 
FOU R COLORE D DONOR S T O Y . M . C. A . BUILDIN G FUND S 34 
ARTICLE S 
WHER E DOE S YOU R CONGRESSMA N STAND ? 22 
TH E BURDE N O F BLAC K WOMEN . A Poem 31 
TH E COLORE D Y . M . C. A . By C. H . Tobias 33 
TH E GOLDEN-FACE D PEOPLE . A Story by Nicholas Vachel Lindsey 36 
TW O BOOK S 42 
DEPARTMENT S 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 7 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 12 
OPINIO N 15 
EDITORIA L 28 
TH E BURDE N 45 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIV E CENTS EXTR A 
RENEWALS : When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANG E OF ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-five years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Mora l and Spiritua l Environ ­
ment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work . 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for self-help. 
Fall Term Began September, 1914. 
For information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
The Agricultura l and 
Mechanica l College 
Maintained by the governments of North Carolina and 
of the United States. Open 
all the year round. For 
males only. Fall term began September I, 1914. 
Board, lodging and tuition, 
$7 per month. Best opportunities for Negro youth. 
Night school for indigent 
but ambitious young men. 
For catalog or further information, address 
PRESIDEN T DUDLE Y 
A. & M. College Greensboro, N. C. 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOH N HOPE , President 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
An Episcopal boarding and day school for 
girls, under the direction of the Sisters of St. 
Mary. Address. 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
611 N . 43d St. W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
AVOI D BA D SCHOOL S 
Educate your children at home under our expert teachers 
[Courses for Adults 
I Pupils received at any time. Write to 
Educationa l Extensio n School , Bo x 319 4 Statio n F , Washington , D . C . 
Highly Endorsed. Financially Responsible. 
TH E GENERA L 
HOSPITA L 
SCHOO L FO R 
NURSE S 
Colored Department 
Moral atmosphere and home influences. Thoroughly modern 
training. Eight hour duty. Practical experience under Professional guidance. Laboratory, 
Surgical, Obstetrical, Medical 
and Contagious cases. Scientific 
instruction in Dietetics. Special 
private nursing. Graduates eligible to State Registration and 
National Red Cross Nursing 
Service. Address, 
MIS S HARRIE T LECK , Principal . KANSA S CITY , MISSOURI . 
SPECIA L OFFE R 
A year's subscription will be given free 
to anyone sending in at one time five 
paid-up yearly subscriptions to TH E 
CRISIS. This offer holds good until 
mid-night, December 31, 1914. 
TH E CRISI S 
One Dollar A Year 
70 FIFT H AVENU E NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
4 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 5 
The National Religious Training School 
"I cordially commend the school's interest and needs to all who believe 
in the Negro race and in our obligation to help promote its intellectual, moral 
and religious uplift." 
—REV . DR. CHARLES H . PARKHURST, New York City. 
IT IS MOR E THA N A MER E SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNIT Y OF SERVICE AN D UPLIF T 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, Y. M . C. A. 
and Y . W. C. A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their 
studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced co-workers and actual every-day 
practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE DEPARTMENT . 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
For catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDEN T JAME S E. SHEPAR D 
National Religious Training School Durham, N . C. 
The school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance fund 
of $15,000 for running expenses. Won't you help us this year? 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNSYLVANI A 
Unde r the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, 
healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach of a great variety of educational institutions, public and private, extending from West Chester to 
Philadelphia ; representing a wide range of educational problems and 
practice. 
This school offers to young colored men and women who have a reasonable 
secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to become teachers, 
carefully graded courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, 
manual crafts and agriculture. Fo r teachers of experience and intending 
teachers it offers also a six weeks' summer-school course during the months 
of July and August. Tuition is free. Board, lodging, heat, light and 
laundry privileges are offered for nine months for $100. The charge for 
the same during the summer-school course is $15. Writ e for particulars to 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , Principal 
Vtantion TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OF INTEREST TO VOCA L STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMEN T 
Points explained, viz,: Breath in 
Singing, Trying the Voice, the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto, Tenor Leggiero or High 
Tenor, the Baritone, the Bass, 
Parts of the Vocal Apparatus, the 
Mouth, the Tongue, Position when 
Practising, Position when Singing, 
How to Practice, Good Rules for 
Singing. 
Comment from the conductor of the Paulist Choristers, the celebrated choral society which received 
the first prize awarded at the International Singing 
Contest held in Paris on May 25, 1912: 
"Dear Mr. Tinsley: 
"I take great pleasure in commending your very 
useful and succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development.' Your own appreciation of 
the psychology of singing and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly reduced to a 
simple system. Cordially yours, 
"Father WILLIA M J. FINN, C. S. P., 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N. Y.: "A very practical 
little book is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' 
by Pedro T. Tinsley. It contains some very excellent 
material and vocal exercises, and should be in the 
hands of all vocal students." 
From "Music News," Chicago, Ill.: "Accordingly 
his 'Practical Method of Singing' is a most concise 
and practical little manual, containing many valuable 
vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be helpful to all 
ambitious vocal students." 
HELPE D HIM GREATL Y 
"Since I practised your exercises of 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' my voice is more resonant 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a new voice." Prof. John T. Layton, 
Director Coleridge-Taylor Musical Society, 1722 10th 
St., N. W., Washington, D. C. 
PRICE $1.00 
Address the publisher: Pedro T. Tinsley, 6448 Drexel 
Ave., Chicago, Ill.; or Clayton F. Summy, 64 E. Van 
Buren St., or Lyon & Healy, Adams and Wabash 
Ave., Chicago, Ill. 
A XMA S GIF T ? 
Wha t bette r Xma s gift to you r frien d tha n 
a year's subscriptio n to th e CRISI S ? 
W e hav e nea t an d attractiv e Xma s card s to 
announc e suc h a gift whic h w e shal l b e gla d to 
sen d fo r th e asking . 
TH E CRISI S 
One Dollar Per Year 
70 FIFT H AVENU E NE W YOR K 
TH E XMA S CRISIS 
FIRST: a cover in two colors with 
one of the MOS T BEAU ­
TIFUL , if not the most 
beautiful of the beautiful 
CRISI S covers: 
"ANNUNCIATION, " a 
life study by Battey, the talented artist in photography. 
SECOND: a remarkable ARTICL E on 
the scientific meaning of 
racial differences by one of 
the greatest living authorities, DR . JACQUE S LOEB , 
of the Rockefeller Institute. 
THIRD: a CHRISTMA S STORY , 
of course. 
TH E CRISIS CALENDA R 
A t last we have a calendar worthy of 
The CRISI S and of the Negro race. 
It has QUOTATION S from Negro 
authors for each WEE K in* the year, 
selected by B . G . BRAWLEY , the foremost of our younger literary men. 
It has an HISTORI C EVEN T of interest to colored Americans for each day 
in the year, selected by L . M . HER -
SHAW , the well-known publicist. 
It has 12 leaves, is printed in two colors on fine paper, 11 by 8 1/2 inches, and 
sells for only 25 cents. READ Y DE ­
CEMBE R FIRST . 
This information is worth passing on 
to your friends. 
(Trade Mark) 
"A MOTHER' S LOVE " 
is the title of one of our five new Negro pictures, just off the press. 
It portrays a beautiful young colored mother fondling her sturdy babe. 
Painted in 12 colors it is rich and elegant and every home should 
have a copy hanging on its wall. Writ e us for description of our new 
pictures and terms to agents. Fo r 15 cents in stamps we will send a 
sample copy of " A JOYFU L WELCOM E INT O HEAVEN" , 
the picture which our agents have sold 25,000 copies of during the 
past few months. 
AGENTS WANTED EVERYWHERE 
^The Douglas Specialties Co . 
Department K 
3548 Vernon Avenue, :: Chicago, Ill. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
6 TH E CRISI S 
Vol. 9 -No . 1 NOVEMBER , 1914 Whole No. 49 
MUSIC AN D AR T 
Mr. RICHAR D B. HARRISO N gave a 
series of recitals in Boston, New York 
and Philadelphia. His programs included 
scenes from "The Merchant of Venice," 
"Julius Caesar," "Macbeth," and "Damon 
and Pythias." 
<[ The Music School Settlement for Colored People, formerly at 257 West 134th St., 
New York, has removed to larger quarters 
at 4 and 6 West 131st Street. J. Rosamond 
Johnson, the well-known composer, is general supervisor and there is room for 500 
students. 
<J The choir of the Towne Avenue A . M . E . 
Church of Los Angeles, Cal., gave in September their third annual recital. The supplemented chorus of 150 voices, drawn from 
several of the church choirs of the city, was 
assisted by an orchestra of 13 instruments 
with pipe organ and piano. This choir and 
the baritone, Mr. Emanuel Hall, are said 
to be in constant demand by both white and 
colored religious organizations in and- about 
the city of Los Angeles. Mr. William M . 
Bynum is the director and Mr. Elmer C. 
Bartlett, organist. 
<J On Wednesday night, August 26th, a 
pantomime and poses were given before a 
large audience at St. Paul A . M . E . Church, 
Washington, Pa. The undoubted artistic 
and financial success of the entertainment 
was due to the management of Mrs. E . R. 
Butler, wife of the pastor of the St. Paul 
A . M . E . Church. Mrs. Butler secured the 
services of Miss Hallie Q. Brown for the 
training of 32 young women who took part 
i n the entertainment. 
<J During the month of August in the auditorium of the Arizona School of Music at 
Phoenix, Ariz., a company composed of colored amateur players assisted by pupils of 
the U . S. Indian School, gave an interesting 
performance of Shakespeare's Richard III. 
before a large mixed audience. The Arizona 
Gazette says of the performance: "The performers were letter perfect in their several 
parts and rendered the difficult lines with 
dignity and a large measure of appreciation, and the keen understanding of the play 
was a credit to performers and audience 
alike. The leading role was acceptably filled 
by James H . Robinson, who staged the play 
and conducted the rehearsals." 
IJ The Music Department of Wiley University, Marshall, Texas, has secured the services of Carl Diton as director of music. 
Mr. Diton will have charge of one of the 
best music schools of the southwest, the faculty of which comprises five teachers representing New England Conservatory, Oberlin Conservatory, Wiley and Fisk Universities. Mr. Diton is well known as a pianist 
in the East. 
<J Mme. Viola Spikes-Kitchen, a pianist of 
Los Angeles, Cal., gave a piano recital at 
Bethel A . M . E. Church, Dallas, Texas, on 
September 29th. 
<I The Saxaphone Trio, composed of three 
colored young men of Lexington, Ky. , was 
one of two dance orchestras engaged to play 
for the Louisville Hop Club, an exclusive 
social club of Louisville, Ky. , at their dance 
given on September 11th. The second orchestra, composed of seven pieces from the 
Majestic Theatre, was to play alternately 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 8 TH E CRISI S 
with the Trio. After the first numbers of 
the program, a general demand was made 
for Goodwin's Saxaphone Trio alone, to the 
retirement of the white orchestra. The Saxaphone Trio was engaged later for the coming Christmas dance. 
<J "Burkes and Arbuckle Company" is the 
name of an enterprising firm of music publishers, composed of colored men of Boston, 
Mass. A n anthem "I Wil l Extol Thee," by 
Mrs. Lillian Irene Harding of Cambridge, 
Mass., is one of their latest publications. 
*J Mr. Sidney Woodward, tenor, of Atlanta, 
Ga., one of the foremost singers of the race, 
was heard in an interesting song recital at 
Ebenezer Church, Boston, Mass., on September 23d. 
q Miss C. Delpha Boger. teacher of music 
of the State College, Orangeburg, S. C , was 
heard both in recital and private musicales 
in Boston, Mass., during the summer months. 
Miss Boger possesses a voice which gives 
much pleasure and is a singer of rich imagination and understanding. 
SOCIA L UPLIF T 
MR. CHARLE S EDW . RUSSELL' S 
book on Wendell Phillips has been delayed on account of his absence in Europe. 
The publisher expects to issue it in January. 
q St. Mark's M . E. Church. X . T. C , has 
dedicated a new $50,000 parish house. This 
house will provide baths, billiard rooms and 
quarters for the pastor's family. 
C| The Governor of Virginia has designated 
a bank to hold the $55,000 appropriation 
made by Congress for an emancipation exposition. The exposition will be held at 
Fort Lee and will be chiefly agricultural. 
q The Oklahoma State Federation of Colored Women's Clubs met at E l Reno. Mrs. 
Judith Horton of Guthrie was elected president and Mrs. Sadie E. Carey of Guthrie, 
chairman of the executive board. The retiring president was presented with a memorial 
and made permanent chairman of a legislative committee which is pushing a bill to establish a reformatory for colored children 
in the state. 
q The baseball team of the 25th infantry 
has won the inter-regimental baseball pennant at Schofield Barracks, Hawaiia. 
q Kansas City has a federation of colored 
charity with a white and colored board 
which is to raise $7,500 a year for charitable 
work. 
q The Wissahickon School Club, a colored 
organization of Philadelphia, has been successful in athletics, beating the Germantown 
Boys' Club, a white organization, and one 
of the largest of its kind. The colored boys 
won 16 medals, 1 running suits, 1 gold watch 
and 4 silver cups. 
q Indianapolis has one colored fire company, No. 16, established at Ashland Avenue and 16th Street. 
<J A new colored business directory of Philadelphia has been published. 
q The Association for the care of Colored 
Orphans of Philadelphia, has purchased five 
acres of land at Cheney, Pa. They will 
build there an administration building and 
two cottages at the cost of $35,508. 
q A colored neighborhood association was 
formed in New York at a recent meeting in 
the Harlem branch of the Public Library. 
This association is the first of a series that 
will be launched later, through different 
parts of the city. 
<J As soon as a suitable farm site is selected 
the Mercy Hospital for colored people will 
be moved from Philadelphia into the country where the facilities for outdoor treatment will be much greater. This hospital 
will have an entire colored corps. 
q Mrs. Herman Goller, a while woman of 
Philadelphia, inherited $60,000 from her 
father who made this money on a tobacco 
plantation in the South with colored laborers chiefly. He stipulated in his will that 
she should use the money for the uplift of 
colored people and, in order to do this, she 
is building houses in good neighborhoods 
and renting or selling to colored people. 
She recently rented a $7,500.00 house in a 
white neighborhood to a well-known colored 
family. The neighbors are very indignant. 
q The report of the two colored branch 
libraries in Louisville, Ky. , shows that 85,985 
volumes were circulated during the past 
year, an increase of 13,763 over last year. 
Two hundred and ninety meetings were held 
in the assembly' room. 
q The colored people of Harlem are beginning to protest again against the license 
allowed to certain dens of vice in their 
midst. A deputation has waited on the police and one thorough raid by the police has 
been made. 
q A colored porter by his coolness during a 
fire in the subway in New York City was 
the means of saving the lives of more than 
one hundred panic stricken passengers. He ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 9 
stood his ground calmly and directed them 
to safety. 
•I Mr. Charles Burroughs announces a recital of poetry and verse of contemporary 
American and British authors at the Berkeley Theatre, New York City, on November 
6th. The program will include examples of 
the work of Robert Service, Henry Van 
Dyke, Alfred Noyes, Madison Cawein, and 
others. 
<| Miss May Miller, the fifteen-year-old 
daughter of Prof. Kelly Miller of Howard 
University, won first prize for the best essay and drawing on "Animal Pets" offered 
by the Washington Post. This contest was 
open to all persons under seventeen years 
of age. Miss Irene Miller, a younger daughter, won the prize for the first correct 
answer to the puzzle published in the Children's Number of TH E CRISIS. 
The answers were: 
WORD SQUARE: RHYMED ENIGMA: 
Card Douglass 
Ari a 
Ril l CHARADE: 
Dale Night mare 
NUMERICAL EXIGMA : 
Make hay while the sun shines. 
A half dozen other correct answers were 
received but Miss Miller's was the first. 
m 
ECONOMIC S 
TH E Savannah Tribune has published a 
thirtieth anniversary edition of 32 
pages giving an excellent history of the colored churches, schools and fraternal orders 
in the city. 
A colored broker in Baltimore estimates 
that the colored people of that city own 
property worth between seven and ten millions. 
C| The Pioneer Building and Loan Association of Philadelphia has increased its investment assets in the last ten years from 
$27,563 to $71,805. 
<J Various colored commercial enterprises 
in Mississippi are in financial difficulties, 
among them the bank in the colored town of 
Mound Bayou which has closed its doors. . 
m 
EDUCATIO N 
TH E city of Atlanta has abolished the 
double session in the white schools but 
the colored schools still have two sessions a 
day and even then cannot accomodate the 
pupils. 
^ The Jeanes' Fund co-operated last year 
with 118 county school superintendents in 
12 states. The supervising teachers visited 
2,853 schools and raised $65,413. 
<| A new public school for colored children, 
valued at $100,000, was opened in Savannah, 
Ga., on October 1. 
(J John Henry Lewis received the M . A. degree at the summer convocation of Chicago 
University. Mr. Lewis graduated from Yale 
in the spring. 
<I Colored people of Caroline County, Va., 
have built three two-room graded schools, 
costing $1,200 each, and one three-room 
school, costing $1,800, in the past two years. 
At present they are constructing two schools 
worth $1,200 and one worth $2,500. Six of 
these schools will receive $22 from the state 
and the seventh $100. 
<J The Mother Superior of the Sisterhood 
of the Blessed Sacrament has opened a parochial school in the Harlem district of New 
York City, which will accommodate 360 colored boys and girls. The Mother Superior 
was formerly Miss Katherine Drexel, daughter of the Philadelphia banker. She has 
founded sixteen schools for Negroes and 
Indians. 
<fl The boys' dormitory of Miles Memorial 
College in Birmingham, Ala., was recently 
destroyed by fire. 
MEETING S 
' THE Biennial Movable Committee of the 
Odd Fellows met in Boston during the 
week of September 13. Edward H . Morris 
was re-elected Grand Master. The parade, 
which was the largest of its kind ever given 
by colored people in Boston, was participated in by 6,000 men, the majority of 
whom were in uniform, 
tj The colored Baptists of Iowa and Nebraska held their annual convention in September at Des Moines. 
<]| Colored fairs were held in many parts of 
the South during October. 
<][ The City Federation of Colored Women's 
Clubs met in Chicago. There were 275 
women representing 52 clubs. They voted 
to join the United Charities. 
<J At a meeting of the Equal Eights Convention in New York Mr. J. E. Spingarn 
said: "I am tired unto death of hearing 
some of your leaders repeat that you have 10 TH E CRISI S 
bothered too much about rights and too little 
about duties. This sharp distinction between rights and duties is an illusion; for 
how can you perform any duty without its 
corresponding privileges'? How can you 
perform the duties of a citizen for example, 
unless you have the right to perform them? 
No, we believe in the rights of all men, and 
by 'rights' we mean that combination of privilege and obligation which makes up the 
rounded life of citizens and of men." 
CHURC H 
TH E National Baptist Convention had a 
stormy time in Philadelphia but seems 
after all to have made progress. The Home 
Mission Board was separated from the Publishing Board and placed under Dr. Joseph 
A . Booker, of Little Rock, Ark. The Publishing Board under Dr. R. H . Boyd was 
brought into closer connection with the National Convention by being placed under a 
committee. Finally the crying evil of electing the president of the Convention by acclamation without giving the delegates a 
chance to vote is to be done away with after 
this year. 
<J The thirtieth annual conference of (Episcopal) Church Workers among Colored People was held in New York City, with a number of delegates from various parts of the 
country. 
tfl The Provident Baptist Church of Los An ­
geles, under the Pastortate of the Rev. Al ­
fred C. Williams, has bought a new edifice 
which will be an institutional church. 
«J The First Calvary Baptist Church of Norfolk, Va., is doing notable work in social 
uplift among the colored people. 
<J The St. James Colored Presbyterian 
Church of New York City has broken 
ground for the erection of a .$63,000 edifice 
on West 137th Street. It is planned to have 
a gymnasium, and a roof garden. 
<J The colored women of the Baptist Church 
raised last year $19,171 for the training 
school at Washington. Local societies raised 
$17,087 for stale missions and education, 
making $36,558 for the year. 
POLITIC S 
IN the recent primary of the Republican 
party in Chicago two colored men, Major 
R. R. Jackson and A . H . Roberts, were nominated for the legislature. 
q Mr. Caveness of E l Paso, Texas, has been 
appointed on the Grand Jury of that county. 
CJ Two hundred colored men met in Birmingham to protest against their exclusion 
from the councils of the Republican party. 
<J Mrs. Mary C. Byron, a juvenile court 
worker in Chicago, has been sent by the National American Woman Suffrage Association to campaign among the colored people 
of Missouri on behalf of the 13th amendment, the amendment which would bring 
about suffrage in that state. Mrs. Byron is 
the only colored organizer sent into any of 
the seven campaign states by the women 
suffragists. 
m 
PERSONA L 
MR. GEORG E F . BETTS , for 50 years 
head waiter at Young's Hotel, Boston, 
Mass., died recently. He was perhaps the 
best known man in his profession. 
<I William E. Scott the colored artist of 
Indianapolis won the grand prize for a 
painting at the Indiana State Fair, and also 
a third prize and a prize for general excellence. 
CJ Major C. A . Fleetwood of Washington, 
D. C , is dead. He was a veteran of the 
civil war and well known in social circles. 
<J Dr. W. R. Pettiford, founder and president of the oldest Negro bank in America, 
died recently. 
q Lieut.-Col. Allen Allensworth of California was recently killed by a motor cycle. 
He was a former chaplain in the U. S. army, 
tj Isaac Fisher, editor of the Negro Farmer, 
published at Tuskegee Institute, has made a 
remarkable record in the winning of prizes 
for tersely and pointedly-put comments on 
various topics. His last exploit was the taking of a prize of $500 offered by Everybody's Magazine for an essay on "What 
We've Learned About Rum." There were 
0,000 competitors, including Congressman 
Hobson of Alabama. 
<I David H . Clarke who was accidently 
killed in the Canal Zone was a prominent 
member of various colored orders. 
<J John Woodson, a colored man, has been 
appointed to the New York Fire Department and assigned to duty in Brooklyn. 
m 
FOREIG N 
'TMI E South African natives in an appeal 
to the English Parliament show in an 
astonishing way the confiscation of their land ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 11 
by the English. They say that in the Union 
of South Africa 1,250,000 whites own 264,-
000,000 acres of land, while the 4,500,000 
natives have only 21,000,000 acres. 
<J Because of the scarcity of colored teachers in the Transvaal, South Africa, a number of the colored schools have had to close. 
Almost nothing is done for the training of 
teachers in that state. 
m 
TH E GHETT O 
BY a decision of the court the Richmond, 
Va., colored ghetto has been slightly enlarged by the inclusion of North Fifth 
Street. 
<J Some white people in Cincinnati have 
been greatly incensed because a capable and 
intelligent colored woman was temporarily 
made a teacher of white deaf mutes. 
•J A n attempt to segregate Miss Adelaide 
Cook, grand daughter of the late John F . 
Cook of Washington, D. C , and another 
colored girl, in the girls' dormitory at Cornell led to an appeal to the N . A . A . C. P. 
President Schurman assures us that exact 
justice will be done. 
«J The 24th infantry of the U . S. Army is 
stationed at Corregidor, P. I. They have 
recently built a post exchange but contrary 
to custom not a single one of the enlisted 
men has been given employment in the exchange. 
(f The Pullman Company has filed a statement with the railway commission of California, declaring that the average wages of 
the porters is $32.85 a month. It goes on 
to declare: "In no business does the employer pay his or its employees more than 
is demanded nor more than would be necessary to secure other equally competent persons for the work. There is no demand by 
the sleeping car employees of this company 
that their pay be increased, and it is not believed that an increase of wages, or prohibition of tips, or either or both, would materially lessen the tips given to porters by the 
traveling public." 
q Mrs. A . M . Sweet, a white resident of 
Philadelphia, has asked Court No. 1 for an 
injunction against the Citizens Republican 
Club. This club is a well known colored 
organization whose home is next door to 
Mrs. Sweet's house. She has asked that the 
club be declared an "unbearable nuisance." 
q A white minister was scheduled to preach 
at a colored church in Hanover, Va., but his 
congregation objected and he gave up the 
appointment. 
q A Negro Morals Commission of Minneapolis, Minn., has been trying in vain to 
have two low dives closed where vicious colored people are allowed to congregate. 
q White people of Louisville, Ky. , have 
asked the Board of Park Commissioners to 
have the lawn tennis courts in Shawnee Park 
now used by colored people closed. 
TH E COURT S 
Another test of the Baltimore segregation law will be made in the courts 
on account of a Jew who has moved into 
Etting Street where there are no white inhabitants. 
q In Philadelphia the manager of a moving 
picture show on Columbia Ave., together 
with his special officer and chief usher ejected and seriously injured Miss Madeline 
Davis last March because she refused to 
take a special seat. The case was carried 
to court and recently each of the defendants 
was fined $50 and costs. Judge Bonniwell 
said to the culprits, "I am ashamed to class 
you as men." 
q The segregation ordinances of Virginia 
are before the Supreme Court of that state. 
q The Supreme Court of Virginia has decided that it is not a slander to call a white 
man a Negro. 
q The Supreme Court of North Carolina 
has decided that the four Johnson children 
cannot attend the white schools of Wilson 
County because they have one-sixteenth of 
Negro blood. 
CRIM E 
DURIN G the month of September there 
has been one Negro lynched: Nathan 
Brown hung by a mob for alleged murder 
in Rochelle, Ga. 
<J Lawrence Avery was killed September 21 
at Columbus, Ohio, while in company with 
Mrs. Ida Hoolihan. Mrs. Hoolihan accused 
two unknown colored men and the police 
immediately arrested W. II. Deonsbuy. 
Since Avery's death the woman has confessed that he was killed by her husband. 
q A colored bishop and several colored 
men of prominence accused of arson at 
Asheville, N . C , have been promptly acquitted by the court. 
72S&72 MEN or THE MONTH 
A COLLEG E PRESIDEN T 
THE promotion of Professor John M . 
Gand y to the presidency of Virgini a 
Norma l and Industria l Institute is a merited 
distinction and marks the inevitable rise of 
the hard student and energetic worker. 
President Gand y began his education i n his 
native state, Mississippi, and later spent two 
years i n the preparatory school at Oberlin 
College. H e received the degree of Bachelor 
of Arts from Fis k Universit y i n 1898, and 
through further study won the degree of 
Master of Arts from the same institution in 
1901. H e studied i n the Columbi a University Summe r School in 1905 and did seven 
years of home study work in philosophy and 
education under the direction of the Illinois 
Wesleyan University . 
Becoming a teacher in the state school of 
Virgini a when college courses were offered 
he was for three years Professor of Lati n 
and Greek, and when the collegiate department was eliminated became Professor of 
Education, in which capacity he served three 
years. Durin g the entire period of his connection with the school Professor Gand y has 
been active in every phase of educational 
work in the state and he is personally known 
to a larger number of Virgini a citizens than 
is any other man connected with the school. 
Fo r some years and until recently he was 
instructor i n two Summer Norma l Schools 
of the state; he organized the teachers of his 
own county into a Teachers' Association and 
was the first president of the organization; 
he was influential in organizing the educational forces in several counties and i n securing industria l supervisors; he has been 
interested in the organization of Farmers' 
Conferences and was the founder of the 
Conference i n Chesterfield County ; he has 
kept active the intellectual lif e among his 
fellow teachers at the State Norma l School 
through a Teachers' Readin g Circl e in which 
he was the moving spirit ; for two years he 
was president of the State Teachers' Association. 
Perhaps Professor Gand y is most widely 
known for his work as executive secretary 
of the Negro Organization Society of Vir ­
ginia . Workin g wit h the president of this 
organization, Majo r R. R. Moto n of Hamp ­
ton Institute, he has for two years been the 
most effective force i n the state, among 
Negroes, for creating' and promotin g a general interest in education, fo r improvin g 
health conditions through education, fo r securin g co-operation among farmers, and for 
wagin g a campaign for better homes and 
better morals. This wor k carried him into 
every section of the state and served largely 
to qualify him for his new responsibilities. 
President Gaudy's broad forma l prepara -
PR3SIDEN T J . M . GAND Y ME N O F TH E MONT H 13 
DR . M . B. LUCA S SERGEAN T WILLIA M PAYN E 
tion, extensive experience, full knowledge of 
educational conditions and needs in Virginia , 
remarkable constructive ability, and large 
following among all classes of people of the 
state combine to make his selection to till the 
place to which he has been called a happy 
one. 
A WOMA N PHYSICIA N 
MRS . MARI E B. LUCAS , M.D. , from 
the Howar d Universit y Medica l College, class 1914, has been announced by the 
Distric t of Columbi a Boar d of Medica l Ex ­
aminers as having passed with credit the examination held by them last month for li ­
cense to practice medicine in the District. 
There is probably no graduate of this year's 
classes of Howar d in whom the people of 
Washingto n are more deeply or more lovingl y interested than in this rare example of 
true and courageous womanhood. 
Dr. Luca s was formerly a Washington 
publi c school teacher. She has the distinction o f being the only woman to graduate 
from the Medica l Department this year. 
He r record durin g the four years' course was 
among the highest; and last year she was 
awarded the Perr y prize in pediatrics. She 
is the wife of M . Grant Lucas, Principa l of 
the Bruce School, Washington. Their only 
son, Fran k V . Lucas, has been promoted to 
the third-year class of the M Street Hig h 
School. 
THRE E CAPTAIN S O F VOLUNTEER S 
On Ma y 25, 1914, a Boar d of Examiners. 
consisting of five United States Arm y 
Officers met at Fort Huachuca , Arizona , 
and examined four soldiers of the 10th 
United States Cavalr y for the office of Cap ­
tain of United States Volunteers. 
The examination extended over a period 
of thirteen days, consisting of arithmetic, 
geography, grammar, history, army regulations, guard manual, Held service regulations, topography, military law, international law, infantry dril l regulations, cavalry 
dril l regulations, hippology, manual of 
court-martial, militar y appearance and bearing, and general fitness for the position of 
Captai n of Volunteers. Al l of the candidates passed good examinations, making a 
general average above 80 per cent. The 
names of the candidates are as follows: 
Sergeant Majo r E . P. Frierson and Com-14 TH E CRISI S 
SERGEANT E. P. FRIERSON 
missary Sergeant W. W. Thompson, of the 
10th U . S. Cavalry; Quartermaster Sergeant 
William Payne, Quartermaster Corps, and 
Ordinance Sergeant Stephen T. Bandy, U . S. 
Army. Al l of these except the last one were 
colored. 
Sergeant Major Frierson is a veteran of 
the 10th Cavalry, having been in the service 
over twenty-two years and enjoys the highest 
confidence of his superior officers as a noncommissioned officer. He is capable, trustworthy, neat, competent and has a thorough 
knowledge of administrative functions of a 
regiment. 
COLORED Y. M. C A., COLUMBUS, GA. 
(SEE PAGE 33) 
SERGEANT W. W. THOMPSON 
TH E PHILADELPHI A COLORE D Y M C A 
COST $110,000 (SEE PAG E 33) ' ' ' TH E WORLD WAR 
„ . The Northern Budget of 
TH E COLOR LIN E 
Troy, N . Y. , says: 
" 'Colored Help Wanted.' It is not too 
much to say that the various warring nations 
of Europe have hung out this sign. Al l the 
principal nations engaged in the war have 
foreign colonies, and it is not to be wondered at that the suggestion was made at 
home that it would be well to save as many 
native subjects as possible and to put into 
the war such of the colonists as were available." 
This has brought the inevitable color prejudice to the fore. The German Ambassador has announced to the United States that 
he is "unconditionally opposed" to the use 
of colored troops. The New York World 
replies: 
"This is a curious prejudice on the part 
of the diplomatic representative of a Government that is seeking to bring Turkey into 
the conflict and trying to persuade the Turk 
to instigate a 'holy war' in Egypt and India 
against all non-Mohammedans. 
"When Germany went to war with the 
British Empire she must have expected to 
fight the British Empire, and not merely a 
selected part of the population the color of 
whose skin happened to meet the approval 
of Berlin. 
"It is natural enough that Great Britain 
should bring up her Indian troops, who, by 
the way, are as completely identified with 
the Aryan race as the Prussians. But no 
matter what their race may be, they are part 
of the empire and part of Great Britain's 
regular military power. 
"If Germany were at war with the United 
States her troops would have to meet our 
Negro cavalry, than whom there are no better soldiers in uniform. 
"German denunciation of the Indian 
troops is as futile as German denunciation 
of the Japanese as "yellow-bellies." It is 
too late to draw the color line in war. That 
line was erased more than fifty years ago 
by Abraham Lincoln in that noble letter to 
the Springfield Convention : 'And there will 
be some black men who can remember that, 
with silent tongue and clenched teeth and 
steady eye and well-poised bayonet, they 
have helped mankind on to this great consummation.' " 
The Aga Kahn spiritual head of many 
million East Indians declares as a reason for 
the Indians lack of sympathy with Germany : 
"Many of my fellow-countrymen have 
been in Africa and seen the German administration in the east and southwest African 
colonies. They know what the Germanization of India would mean, and they know, 
too, that if England were driven out of 
India, Germany, should she be successful in 
this war, would step in." 
Perhaps the most cutting criticism of the 
American attitude came from the Turkish 
Ambassador in defending his country from 
the charges of cruelty and barbarism. He 
said: 
"Since a large number of American papers are siding with Great Britain and France 
in this affair, I will permit myself to say 
that the thought of the lynchings which occur daily in the United States and the memory of the 'water cures' in the Philippines 
should make them chary of attacking Turkey 
in connection with acts of savagery committed by her under provocation, compared 
with which the economic competition of an 
Italian, or the sniping of a Filipino, or even 
the outrage of a Negro are as nothing." 
This statement has annoyed both the President and Mr. Hearst's Chicago Examinar. 
The latter says: 
"That Rustem Bey, the Turkish Ambassador, should abandon Washington after 
likening our occasional lynchings to the 
OPINION 16 TH E CRISI S 
reign of terror in the Turkis h Balkan s is a 
fortunate ending to that incident. " 
Bu t the Independent acknowledges our 
guilt : 
"Tha t this is a barbarous country, i n spots 
is undeniable when we learn that i n 1913 as 
many as 79 colored men and women were 
killed by mobs, lynched without trial. The 
crimes charged against them were various, 
some serious, others trivial. Some of the 
victims were doubtless innocent. The figures 
prove a shocking degree of barbarism to 
exist with us; and the only relief we find is 
that there is a pretty steady decrease i n the 
number. In 1892 there were 155 lynched, 
and 154 the next year. A t this rate of decrease we may be quite civilized 20 years 
from now. There have been only 22 lynchings i n the first six months of the present 
year. " 
An d the Boston 'Traveler and Evening 
Herald adds: 
"Her e is a record of atrocities for which 
we venture to say no paralle l can be found 
i n any of the 'barbarous' nations now at war, 
and compared with which the atrocities 
charged against the German soldiers would 
appear for the most part as trifling indiscretions incident to the heat of war. 
"Befor e we throw any more stones at the 
Germans, let us be sure we are not livin g 
in a glass house. If wa r is what Sherman 
said it was, it is natural to expect a few human devils in an army of three or four millions of men engaged in deadly conflict; but 
who would expect to find mobs of human 
devils at work in times of peace at the very 
feet of Libert y Enlightenin g the World ? 
"Meantime , we should like to direct the attention of Mr . Wilso n and the southern gentlemen who sit in the saddle at Washingto n 
to this paragraph from an address to the 
people of the Unite d States issued by our 
colored brethren at their recent convention 
in New Yor k City : 
" 'Let the America n people, and especially 
the President, in view of the bloody wa r of 
all Europ e and the probable grant of freedom to Ireland and suffrage to women, freedom to the Poles and Finn s and relief from 
segregation and politica l disabilities for the 
Jews, induced by the needs of warrin g nations, remember that TWELV E MILLIO N 
NATIV E CITIZEN S IN THI S COUNTR Y 
AR E WORS E PROSCRIBE D THA N 
THOS E OF EUROPE . We appeal to 
President Wilso n to free colored Americans 
from Jim-Cro w cars, disfranchisement, 
lynchin g and segregation, especially under 
the fedaral government at the federal capital, now, rather than await some awfu l wa r 
here.' " 
Eve n the Ne w Orleans Item is getting a 
bit peeved and says: 
"Severa l recent lynchings i n Mississipp i 
and Louisian a give evidences o f a savagery 
beyond excuse." 
The Des Moine s (la.) Register and Leader 
publishes a letter in which the write r says: 
"Andersonvill e was simpl y a demonstration of the fiendishness that existed i n all of 
that part of the country known as 'the 
south,' and engendered by three centuries of 
the institution of slavery, and which exists 
to-day i n somewhat less degree. Bu t a few 
months since the write r had occasion to take 
a seventeen-mile ride i n a 'mail hack' in 
'border state,' i n a county where no Negro 
is allowed to 'alight.' I n course of the ride 
there was a discussion of the Negr o question, 
in which I asked what would be done i n case 
a respectable, educated Negr o with good 
character should buy a farm in that county 
and move in . The only other passenger 
said, 'Damm him, we would lync h him before 
mo'nin.' The driver, who was son of a 
'county judge,' said, 'W e would strip him, 
tie him to a tree, slit his skin into strips one 
inch wide, take off one at a time, and then 
pile brush about him and fire it.' This is 
but a late day expression of the same civilization that was responsible for Anderson ­
ville and was not war. " 
Mr . Stansberry Boyce , Washington , D . C , 
sends us these notes on the war: 
"Leopol d left a legacy to be pai d by the 
Belgians for the inhuman slaughter and mutilations of the inoffensive inhabitants of 
Congo i n his greed for rubber. 
"Esconced far to the Nort h of Europ e it 
might never have been the opportunit y of 
any future Africa n kin g to enforce payment 
but God moves in a mysterious way and the 
Belgians now know what it is to murde r a 
harmless people at their own firesides. 
"Wil l the Canadians refuse to fight alongside the East India n whom they would not 
acknowledge as a part of the human famil y 
and were forbidden to enter Canad a as also 
were the West Indian Negroes ? 
"The African s and their descendants i n 
Americ a have proven to the worl d that they 
do not lack courage and militar y ardor. 
This the Frenc h have recognized by enlisting OPINIO N 17 
them in their present struggle. W e hope 
for the sake of the African s that they will 
give a good account of themselves, but the 
colored race is like the Irish who are invincible in fighting for other nations but not 
for themselves." 
B. T. WASHINGTON' S 
ADVICE 
SEGREGATIO N 
Mr . Booke r Washing ­
ton's endeavor to induce colored people to 
stop fighting segregation ordinances has 
brought bitter retorts from colored papers. 
The Columbia n Herald of Louisville , Ky. , 
calls it "obsequious doctrine" and says: 
"Whe n Booke r Washington advises the 
delegates to the Negro Business League to 
cease fighting segregation laws and to devote themselves to acquiring wealth and in ­
telligence, he was simpl y advocating his 
propaganda which he has been preaching for 
the past quarter of a century, viz., 'The line 
of the least resistance,' or to state it more 
accurately, 'no resistance at all. ' 
"It is this obsequious doctrine that has resulted i n growin g up a generation of mora l 
cowards among the Negroes of this country. 
This teaching o f his has brought about a condition of economic serfage that has well nigh 
sapped all the manhood and darkened the 
hopes and stiffened the ennobling aspirations 
of the Negroes for fifty years. It is to be 
very much regretted that a man of such commandin g opportunity and wide influence i n 
his day and generation should be so servile 
and spineless i n his teachings. 
"It is this very damaging doctrine that 
has brought about the unbearable and humiliatin g conditions of ji m crowism, disfranchisement and segregation, which may 
be regarded as 'the unkindest of all. ' " 
The Louisvill e News says: 
"It is inconceivable that one who occupies 
so prominent a position in the Afro-Ameri ­
can worl d should so far forget his position 
and his dignity as to urge his race to cease 
protesting against the most cowardly and 
humiliating legislation i n the land. 
"I f is safe to say that segregation has 
many champions even among our race, but 
almost without exception they are to be 
found among the element where there is the 
least intelligence and where there is an in ­
herent fear of opposing anything the white 
man chooses to do. Bu t here we are smitten 
from an unexpected quarter; a recognized 
leader of his race, an educator, tells us to 
forget our manhood; to forget the sacred 
and inalienable rights of political and personal liberty and to passively submit to the 
humiliation of being pushed aside as (hough 
we are a race o f lepers, because we would 
seek cleaner and healthier neighborhoods in 
which to live. 
"T o submit to a degradation without serious objection is worse than cowardly; it is 
unmanly and ignoble and any race that 
would do so without exhausting every means 
of moral and legal protest is unworthy of 
the name of civilized. Segregation is wrong, 
wrong i n principl e and fact; and, if Dr. 
Washington believes it is wrong, as we think 
he does, it is to be deeply regretted that he 
lacks the mora l stamina to say so. 
"It is obvious even to the friends and supporters of Dr. Washington, that i f he is 
quoted accurately, he cannot in the future 
be regarded as being in sympathy with the 
Afro-America n who places his self-respect 
and manhood-above everything else, and who 
is not willin g to sacrifice either for the sake 
of livin g on more congenial terms with his 
white brother." 
I n striking' contrast to Mr . Washington's 
advice the Rev. Quincy Ewing , a white 
southern minister of Mississippi, lays bare 
the whole inner meaning of segregation and 
"Jim-Crow " legislation. 
"Conside r further that, while no Negro, 
no matter what his occupation, or personal 
refinement, or intellectual culture, or moral 
character, is allowed to travel in a pullman 
car between state lines, or to enter as a guest 
at hotel patronized by white people, the 
blackest of Negro nurses and valets are given 
food and shelter in all first-class hotels, and 
occasion neither disgust nor surprise in the 
Pullman cars. Her e again the heart of the 
race problem is laid bare. The black nurse 
with a white baby in her arms, the black 
valet looking after the comfort of a white in ­
valid, have the label of their inferiority conspicuously upon them; they understand 
themselves, and everybody understand them, 
In be servants, enjoying certain privileges 
for the sake of the person served. Almost 
anything the Negro may do in the South, 
and anywhere he may go, provided the manner of his doing and his going is that of an 
inferior. Such is the premium put upon his 
inferiority ; such his inducement to maintain 
it. " 
A correspondent writes us: 18 TH E CRISI S 
"Booker T. Washington's advice to the 
Negroes concerning the Segregation Laws, 
is like advising the poor downtrodden Negro 
not to even try to get out of the hole he is 
in, but make the hole bigger and live in it." 
The Cleveland Gazette says: 
"The race can produce a dozen 'big, definite pieces of constructive work,' get education, religion, money, etc., and Dr. Washington and every one else knows that 'race prejudice'—segregation and other forms of racial discrimination—will NOT disappear in 
any appreciable degree. If we want our 
rights and proper treatment, we must fight 
for them just as every other race in the history of the world, worthy of them, has to do. 
It is the height of folly and positively silly 
for any one to preach any other 'doctrine.' 
Of course, the prejudiced South and its 
northern sympathizers will 'pat Dr. Washington on the back,' continue to make his 
trips for his school, throughout the country, 
profitable, and to try to make our people 
accept him as our national leader, just as 
long as he continues to preach his infamous 
'doctrine of surrender' and endeavor to make 
us 'ground arms' in the effort to enforce our 
rights, under the law; but are we fools 
enough to do so? We hope not. It is little 
less than an outrage for him to give that advice to the League, and make such a talk as 
that at Philadelphia, with our people in 
Louisville, Ky. , and several other points in 
the South, and the North, too, fighting desperately against segregation and kindred 
evils. Dr. Washington has done more by 
such talks to promote disfranchisement, 
'jim-crow' street and railroad cars and segregation in the South, and dozens of kinds 
of racial discrimination in public places, in 
the North, than almost all other agencies 
against us combined. Nothing is so dangerous as the enemy within. It is high time 
that the manly, among our educated and 
leading men and women, were speaking out 
in the open and ceasing their cowardly sulking for fear of personal harm. Slowly but 
surely is the 'doctrine of surrender' takingbold of our masses, making a cowardly, 
hopeless mass of humanity that are anything 
but the ME N and WOME N Douglass, Langston, Lynch, Bruce. Garrison, Phillips, Lovejoy, and the host of others, most of whom 
have gone, worked and fought so long for. 
As a matter of fact tremendous pressure 
is put upon Mr. Washington by the white 
South. Whenever for a moment he tries to 
stand up for the rights of his race the white 
South proceeds to hammer at him. When, 
for instance, he recently made a very mild 
appeal for better accommodations on railroads, the August Chronicle said: 
"Washington's program in the past led 
him away from 'rights' like this. For the 
Negro he has sought 'rights' to labor, behave 
and acquire property. 
"The longer the Negro avoids crusades for 
such things as parlor car and lower berth 
accommodations and the more diligently 
that he eschews politics, the better bis 
chances for progress. It would be to the 
Negro's advantage if he was not allowed to 
vote at all. Booker may as well be reminded 
that the white men and women passengers 
are not to sleep in the same Pullmans -with 
black men and women passengers. Also, 
that the railroads are not going to put on 
special Pullmans for the blacks. Also, that 
what is here said is true of the white people 
of the North, the East and the West, as well 
as of the white people of the South. 
"Booker was more level-headed before than 
he is since he dined at the white house." 
What earthly reason is there in trying to 
cater to and humiliate oneself before people 
who talk and think like this"? 
TH E SUFFRAG E 
The Macon (Ga.) 
WOMEN AND NEGKOES Daily Telegraph 
"Eight thousand Negro Baptists, representing 2,500,000 members of their race in 
the United States, at a convention of their 
church in Philadelphia, have declared themselves 'heartily in favor of the woman suffrage movement.' The Philadelphia Record 
quotes the presiding officer. Rev. E . C. Morris, of Montana, as saying that the woman 
suffrage movement is based on an injustice 
from which his race has suffered greatly— 
'taxation without representation.' The only 
other utterance quoted from the same speaker reads as follows: 
" 'The capital of our nation is a hotbed of 
race hatred and from there it will continue 
to spread to all sections of the country until 
Negro men shall be permitted to re-enter 
congress and speak for themselves. Why 
should 10,000,000 people be denied representation in the highest law-making body of 
the land? Why should matters be so manipulated as to close West Point and Annapolis OPINIO N 19 
to educated and patriotic young Negro men, 
who are anxious to be trained in military 
science for the good of their country'?' 
"The account before us is brief and 
unsatisfactory, but it is at least clear that 
the members of this convention wish it understood that the down-trodden American 
Negro sympathizes with the down-trodden 
American woman, and that the emancipation 
of the latter is expected to unshackle the 
former and send him straightway to Congress." 
This, of course, does not at all suit the 
Telegraph and the Tampa (Fla.) Times is 
quite upset: 
"The women of America—and more particularly those of the South—will hardly appreciate or relish the coupling of their cause 
with that of the Negroes. They have not 
heretofore been classed together and they 
do not rate themselves and the blacks as 
companions in misfortune and the victims of 
the oppression of the white men. ... " 
FIGHTING 
TH E NEGRO 
LABO R UNION S 
The Laurel (Miss.) Daily 
Leader publishes an interesting letter from a contractor 
who has hired Negro labor: 
"Mr. Anderson, as Secretary of the Bricklayers' Union, knows, if he is informed as 
to the by-laws and constitution of the Bricklayers' Union, that they place the Negro 
bricklayer on an equality with the white 
bricklayer both in the Lodge and on the job. 
The Bricklayers' Union of Jackson, as well 
as the Unions in other cities, elects both 
white and colored officers. A Mr. Glenn 
here, who is a brother of the Mr. Glenn, a 
bricklayer in Laurel, who stirred up considerable animosity about my working Negro 
bricklayers in Laurel, is the President of the 
Union here and has a Negro secretary under 
him. This same Mr. Glenn has been secretary under a Negro president in this lodge. 
"Mr. Anderson says that they were imbued 
with the Southern spirit and felt that they 
could not look their own wives and mothers 
in the face if they worked under a Negro 
foreman. 1 would like to ask this gentleman 
the difference between working under a Negro foreman on the job and sitting and associating with a Negro president in their lodge. 
Possibly the only reason they have not had 
Negro officers in the Bricklayers' Union in 
Laurel is because there are no Negro bricklayers living there. 
"I, too, am a Southerner, and everything 
equal, would always give the white man the 
preference, but in this case, am forced to say 
that as far as ability was concerned, everything was NOT equal, and from both a business and financial standpoint, I was unable 
to comply with their request for a local 
bricklayer foreman. It is my impression 
that the origin of the trouble with the bricklayers in Laurel was the fact that two or 
three of them wanted to be foreman on the 
job, and I did not consider them competent, 
as I had made previous inquiries as to their 
capability. 
"I have a Negro in my employ, whom I 
consider capable of handling any job and I 
did not care to discharge him and lose the 
bricklayers that I had organized in order to 
experiment with a few local 'would be boss' 
bricklayers. I have had several wdiite bricklayer foremen and will say that I have found 
this Negro far superior in every respect to 
the white men whom it has been my experience to employ in this capacity." 
The writer, I. C. Garber, concludes by 
saying: 
"The building now stands as a monument 
to 'Garber and his "niggers" ' and a good 
sample for the local bricklayers." 
CRIM E AN D RAC E 
The Greensboro (N. C.) 
Daily News has this from 
its Elizabeth City correspondent : 
"Judge Frank Carter finished his investigation of the management of the Pasquotank 
county chain gang this afternoon, and announced the findings of his inquiry to a large 
audience which packed the court room to 
hear the proceedings. He spoke from the 
bench and stated that his investigation had 
revealed to him that the chaingang had been 
grossly mismanaged; that the guards had 
drank enormous amounts of whisky, while 
on duty and had practiced the most revolting cruelties upon the prisoners, while the 
superintendent, Frank Weeks, had shown his 
inefficiency by permitting such a state of 
affairs to go on. He characterized the Pasquotank county chaingang as a disgrace to 
the civilization of the county, and not fit 
for the most desperate Negro criminal. He 
stated that while holding courts in the disINSTANCES OF 
DISCRIMINATION 20 TH E CRISIS 
trict, he would use every effort possible to 
keep from sending convicts to the chaingang 
until there had been a complete reorganization of its management with all the present 
officers eliminated. " 
The problem of crime in the South is il ­
lustrated by this clippin g from the Ne w 
Yor k Sun, who quotes S. F . Davis, a Mississipp i lawyer. 
On the subject of the Negro law on gamblin g the write r says: 
"Unde r our crimina l statute it is a misdemeanor for any person to wager any money 
or other valuable thing on any game of 
chance or to pla y for money at any game of 
cards, or dice, etc., but it is the unwritten 
law—an d the unwritten law applies i n this 
case—that all Negroes may pla y a game of 
chance with dice, commonly called craps, for 
money or any other valuable thing on Saturday nights or any time durin g the first day 
of the week, commonly called Sunday, provided, however, it is conducted i n a quiet, 
orderly manner i n a vacant cabin or cotton 
house on the back side of the plantation. 
But it is also the unwritten law of this State 
that a white person must not at any time or 
place, for either love or money or any other 
valuable thing, pla y a game of craps, that 
being recognized as a Negr o game exclusively. It is also the unwritten law of this State 
that all white persons may pla y a game of 
chance with cards, commonly called poker, 
for money or for any other valuable thing, 
provided, however, that said game is conducted in a quiet, orderly manner i n some 
private place after business hours, but a Ne ­
gro must not under any circumstances pla y 
a game of poker for love or money, that being recognized as a white man's game." 
Concerning the homicide law in its application to a Negro Mr . Davis says: 
"I f he kills a white man and is caught he 
is hanged, the time and place of his execution depending altogether on who caught 
him, the Sheriff's posse or the friends of the 
deceased. If the Sheriff's posse were the 
first to get possession of him he is hanged 
the third Frida y after court adjourns; i f the 
friends of the deceased are the first to get 
possession of him he is hanged at once, at 
or near the place where the killin g occurred. 
Whe n a Negro is indicted for killin g another 
Negro he is seldom if ever tried. The usual 
practice is for the court to appoint some 
young and inexperienced attorney to defend 
him : then partly out of sympathy for the 
Negro and partl y for the youn g attorney, 
the State's attorney allows him to plead not 
guilt y to the murde r charge, but guilt y of 
manslaughter and take sentence to the penitentiary," where he stays until he is pardoned 
a few years later. This pla n always works 
very satisfactorily to all parties concerned— 
the State saves the expense of a trial, the 
Negro is saved from being hanged and the 
State gets another cotton produce r on the 
State farm. " 
The followin g editoria l from the Pittsburgh (Pa.) Courier is quite to the point: 
"Twent y years ago a Negr o of Alabama 
was convicted on a charge of larceny. It 
was shown that the Negr o had stolen 50 
cents. The judge sentenced him to the penitentiary for 50 years, explainin g that the 
Negro should pay a year i n servitude for 
each penny stolen. The present governor of 
the State of Alabama has just recently pardoned the Negro, wit h the comment that the 
sentence was out of all proportion to the 
crime. 
"No t many months ago, i n the same State, 
a white man, holding an official position, 
stole $90,000 from the funds entrusted to 
him : he was given ten years to the penitentiary. Unde r the same system as practiced 
upon the Negro, this white man could have 
been given just nine millio n years in the 
penitentiary. 
"Bu t let us come nearer home. In Pennsylvania , not many months ago, a white 
woman lured some drunken men into an 
alley and robbed them of their money. She 
was paroled. Withi n the past year, a colored girl , charged wit h having stolen $7.00 
from her white consort, was given 18 months 
in the workhouse. Three white men plead 
guilty to burglarizin g a private residence. 
They were paroled. A Negr o pleaded guilty 
to playin g poker and was given three months 
to the workhouse. 
"The above instances are sufficient to in ­
dicate that there is an evident division of 
crime wit h respect to the color of the criminal. A white man commits the highest possible crime and there is always some loop 
hole for his escape. A Negro may commit 
a crime of any degree whatever, and the 
law is inflexible; he must serve the days and 
years prescribed in the books. This is in ­
variably the case. The exceptions are so 
few they do not merit mention. 
"T o add to this injustice, we get the report 
of the statistician on crime. H e uses the OPINIO N 21 
prison and court dockets for his information 
and makes his reports accordingly. The 
magazine writers base their arguments upon 
the figures, and the poor Negro gets a pic ­
ture of himself that beggars all description. 
H e leads i n crime, undoubtedly, he must lead, 
for the records so show, and who can dispute 
figures? 
"Bu t all of this is the white man's delusion, 
not ours. It is his civilization he is dissecting, not ours. H e may classify crime and 
make partia l reports to suit his necessity, 
but the truth of the situation rests undisturbed. To charge us with crime does not 
make us criminals; to give us long terms in 
prison does not subtract from the crimina l 
class who enjoy short sentences. In the longprocess of evolution the crimina l wil l classify 
himself. Then there wil l be no classification 
under the code, nor wil l the sentence of the 
crimina l have any significance. A t the present rate of his social and politica l disorder, 
the white man is destined to take the lead in 
all things criminal, and certainty he wil l not 
incur the envy of the Negro. " 
POLITIC S 
COLORE D OFFIC E THE Charlotte Observer 
HOLDER S , remarks that President 
Wilson has not been able 
to do much wit h Congress so fa r as the Ne ­
gro is concerned and continues: 
"Hithert o President Wilso n has not extended to such matters his mastery over Con ­
gress. Intent upon getting his reform measures through—having, as he said upon one 
well-remembered occasion, a single-track 
mind—he has given Congressmen their own 
way wit h patronage claimed by them. H e 
has wished not to handicap his program by 
any side-issues or frictions of this kind. 
Hence the Senators opposing any Negro appointments even secured from him the appointment o f a white man, a Missourian, as 
Ministe r to the Negro Republi c of Haiti — 
rather a queer proceeding for them, we must 
say. Bu t the issue is again up, the President 
has gotten through Congress all except the 
final round of his legislative program, and 
the elections are near at hand. Recently the 
President refused to turn down Attorney -
Genera l McReynolds' recommendation that 
Robert Terrell, colored, a municipa l judge 
of the Distric t of Columbia , be granted reappointment. An d now he may or may not 
appoint a Negro to the recordership o f 
deeds. The Northern Congressmen who have 
a considerable Negro electorate in their States 
or districts are concerning themselves, so 
that the Southerners no longer hold the field 
alone. II may develop into an unpleasant 
fight. Ou r own idea is that the belligerents 
should let the President appoint a Negro Recorder of Deeds if he shall so choose." 
ANOTHE R PUZZL E 
THE "NEW " Readers of TH E CRISI S have 
WILBERFORC E doubtless scanned with some 
perplexity the irate letters 
nearly three feet long by President Scarborough of Wilberforc e in the New Yor k Age 
and News. H e takes us to task for our article on the "New Wilberforce " in the Au ­
gust CRISIS . The incensed gentleman gets 
real good and mad and says: 
"I n such an article we are accustomed to 
seek at once the motives inspirin g it. In 
this case we are wondering whether it was 
inspired by a malicious desire to strike the 
college department in particular, to belittle 
what it has done and injure its standing and 
work for higher education; or, by a piqued 
spirit which sees an opportunity for retaliation ; or, by a spirit which thus repays personal favors through questionable eulogiums. 
Or, was it real unadulterated ignorance 
steeped in egotism? W e must leave it for 
readers and those generally acquainted with 
the situation to judge. " 
W e are greatly mystified by this astonishin g exhibition of temper and after re-reading what we considered at the time a most 
excellent and helpful article on an institution which we greatly admire, we are compelled to appeal to our readers: If any 
reader of TH E CRISI S can discover in the before-mentioned article anything calculated 
to make an otherwise mild professor of 
Greek tear his hair and "cuss," we wil l gladly give him a year's subscription to TH E 
CRISIS. Send in your answers soon. 
Dr. Slybur n C . Downing, a young colored 
man who graduated from Howar d Medica l 
School a few years ago, was awarded the 
first prize, $2 5 in gold, in a contest conducted by the New Yor k Medical Journal 
for the best essay on "The Treatment of Al ­
coholic Cirrhosis of the Liver. " Where Does Your Congressman Stand? 
A QUESTIONNAIR E 
We hear that darkest Russia promises national unity to Poland, autonomy to Fin ­
land and religious freedom to all. What is 
free America going to do for her ten million colored citizens? To find out the National Association has sent the following^ 
questionnaire to all candidates for Congress :| 
September 22, 1914. 
My Dear Sir: 
Wil l you kindly till out and return the attached questionnaire by October 12 ? This 
is being sent out by the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People to 
all candidates for Congress of the Republican, Democratic and Progressive parties. 
The results will be published in TH E CRISIS, 
the organ of the Association which reaches 
l50,000 readers, in the white and colored 
press of the country, and in handbills for 
distribution by our branches. 
The names of candidates not forwarding 
their answers by October 12 will also be 
printed and colored voters and their friends 
advised to vote against them. Very truly 
yours, J. E . SPINGARN. 
Chairman of Board. 
1. Wil l you, if elected, vote against any 
measure abrogating the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments? 
2. Wil l you, if elected, vote against— 
a. Segregation in the federal service? 
b. Residential segregation in the District 
of Columbia ? 
c. Segregation in Jim Crow cars in the 
District of Columbia ? 
.'!. Regardless of whether you advocate 
racial intermarriage, will you oppose the 
passage of a law making such marriage in 
the District of Columbia invalid, since the 
enactment by states of such laws has led to 
the degradation of Negro women and children ? 
4 . Do you under any circumstances justify lynching? 
5. Do you favor the enforcement of 
Clause 2 of the 14th Amendment to the 
Constitution? 
Many nominations have not been received 
as this goes to press and many to whom 
'questionnaires have been sent have not had 
time to reply. One hundred and thirteen replies have been received. Of these 49, listed 
below, gave favorable answers to all questions. We also give an analysis of the 64 
^unfavorable and doubtful replies. Replies 
received after to-day, October 8, will be 
printed in handbills for distribution to our 
branches before election. Over 1,400 candidates will receive the questions. 
Candidates Who Promise to Vote Right. 
The following give favorable answers to 
every one of the five questions: 
THOS E WH O ANSWE R "RIGHT " 
State 
Indiana 
Indiana 
Indiana 
Indiana 
Indiana 
Indiana 
Indiana 
Indiana 
Indiana 
Indiana 
Kansas 
Ka n sas 
Massachusetts 
Massachusetts 
Massachusetts 
Massachusetts 
Massachusetts 
Massachusetts 
Michigan 
Michigan 
Michigan 
Michigan 
Michigan 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Pennsylvania 
Rhode Island 
Washington 
Washington 
West Virgini a 
Name 
Shattuck 
Russell 
Moore s 
Hibben 
For d 
Purnell 
Stricler 
Widne y 
Lane 
Hickey 
Curtis 
Simmons 
Osgood 
Ranger 
:
 Dallinger 
Roberts 
. Newton 
Horgan 
, Probert 
; Bacon 
Harve y 
; Hamilton 
1
 Hitchcock 
Longworth 
Struble 
Brown 
Cunningham 
Whitney 
Martzolff 
Hogan 
Williams 
Cooper 
Miller 
Emerson 
Walter s 
Bur t 
Penrose 
, Weinstock 
Drake 
To m l in son 
| Stewart 
Stokes 
Heffner 
; Lockwood 
Ball 
: Jones 
Johnson 
Keim 
Party District 
Republican 
Progressive 
Republican 
Progressive 
] Progressive 
; Republican 
. Republican 
| Progressive 
\ Republican 
Republican 
, Republican 
Republican 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Rep. & Pro . 
Republican 
Progressive 
Democratic 
Progressive 
Republican 
Progressive 
Republican 
Democratic 
Republican 
Republican 
Republican 
Democratic 
Progressive 
Democratic 
Democratic 
Republican 
Republican 
Progressive 
Republican 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Republican 
Progressive 
Washington 
Washington 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Republican 
Republican 
Progressive 
5th 
6th 
7th 
7th 
9th 
9th 
11th 
12th 
12th 
13th 
Senator 
7th 
5 th 
7th 
8th 
9th 
9th 
11th 
2d 
2d 
4th 
4th 
10th 
1st 
2d 
3d 
4t h 
9th 
10th 
12 th 
14th 
19th 
21st 
22d 
at large 
1st 
Senator 
3d 
6th 
7th 
13th 
15 th 
16 th 
25th 
2d 
Senator 
3d 
2d where 
does 
your 
congress
stand 
to 
to 
WHA T TH E OTHE R CANDIDATES SA Y 
Stat e Nam e Part y Distric t 
1 
Abrogatio n o f 
14t h an d 15th 
Amendment s Federa l Servic e 
2 
SEGREGATIO N 
Residentia l Ji m Cro w 
Inter-Marriag e 
3 4 
Lynchin g 
5 
Enforcin g 14th 
Amendmen t 
Ill. 
Ill. 
Ill. 
Ind. 
Ind. 
Ind. 
Ind. 
Ind. 
Kans. 
Kans. 
Kans. 
Kans. 
Kans. 
Kans. 
Ky. 
Mass. 
Mass. 
Mass. 
Mass. 
Mass. 
Mich. 
Mich . 
Mich . 
Mich . 
Minn . 
Minn . 
Minn . 
Minn . 
Mo . 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohi o 
Ashton 
Harris 
Harmo n 
Seiler 
Bland 
Purwell 
Woo d 
Barnhar t 
Anthony 
Brady 
Bertch 
Welt y 
Dyke s 
Davidson 
Bristow 
Burdick 
Lewis 
Kincaide 
Lawrence 
Morris 
McCart y 
Smith 
Dodge 
Smith 
MacKintosh 
Nelson 
Jepson 
Swensen 
Akins 
Madden 
Matthews 
Baxter 
Progressive 
Republican 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Republican 
Republican 
Republican 
Democratic 
Republican 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Republican 
Progressive 
Republican 
Democratic 
Dem. & Pro g 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Democratic 
Republican 
, Republican 
Democratic 
Democratic 
Progressive 
Democratic 
Republican 
Democratic 
Republican 
Progressive 
Republican 
Progressive 
1st 
5th 
8th 
1st 
2d 
9th 
10th 
13th 
1st 
2d 
3d 
4th 
6th 
8th 
7 th 
1st 
2d 
4 th 
12th 
15 th 
1st 
3d 
6th 
8th 
3d 
8th 
10th 
10th 
Sen. 
1st 
5 th 
5th 
Unsatisfactory 
Unsatisfactor y 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
'Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactorv 
Satisfactory 
•Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
"Unsatisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory . 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
I Unsatisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
•Unsatisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
Vague 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
Vague 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactorv 
Vague 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Vague 
*Unsatisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
Vague 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
SatisfactorySatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
No answer 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
Unsatisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Vague 
Vague 
Vague 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
No answer 
Unsatisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
No answer 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
unsatisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactorv 
No answer 
No answer 
Vague 
No answer 
No answer 
No answer 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
SatisfactorySatisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactorv 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
SatisfactorySatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisiactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactorv 
No answer 
No answer 
SatisfactoryNo answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
SatisfactorySatisfactory 
Satisfactory WHA T OTHE R CANDIDATE S SA Y (Continued ) 
Federa l Servic e 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactorv 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactor y 
Satisfactorv 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
Satisfactorv 
No answer 
Satisfactorv 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Unsatisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
SEGREGATIO N 
Residentia l 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Unsatisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Ji m Cro w 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Unsatisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Inter- Marriag e 
No answer 
No answer 
No answer 
Unsatisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
No answer 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Vague 
No answer 
No answer 
No answer 
Unsatisfactory 
Sat isfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
Unsatisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
No answer 
No answer 
No answer 
4 
Lynchin g 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactor y 
Satisfactor y 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
No answerSatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Enforcin g 14th 
Amendment 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Vague 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Unsatisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
* Ther e are indications that these questions may have been misunderstood. 
f Sent letter stating principles broadly but declining to answer specific questions. 
1 
Abrogatio n of 
14th an d 15th 
Amendments 
Distric t Part y Nam e Stat e 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Ohio 
Okla. 
Okla. 
Penna. 
Penna. 
Penna. 
Penna. 
Penna. 
Penna. 
Penna. 
Penna. 
Penna. 
Penna. 
Penna. 
Penna. 
Penna. 
Penna. 
Penna. 
Va 
Wash. 
Wash. 
W. Va. 
Wis. 
Wis 
Wis. 
Fess 
Taylor 
Clark 
Cordill 
Westfall 
Irvine 
Hollingsworth 
Bathrick 
Campbell 
Alexander 
Watson 
Rutley 
Crago 
Mitchell 
McCrossin 
Stephens 
Dean 
Kiess 
Focht 
Kaufman 
Hood 
Hart 
Wolf e 
Mille r 
Campbell 
Flood 
Humphre y 
Drur y 
Harne r 
Stafford 
Esch 
Browne 
Republican 
Progressive 
Republican 
Republican 
Republican 
Republican 
Republican 
Democratic 
Republican 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Republican 
Progressive 
Democratic 
; Progressive 
; Democratic 
Republican 
Republican 
Democratic 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Republican 
Democ ratic 
Democratic 
Republican 
Democratic 
Progressive 
Republican 
Republican 
Republican 
7th 
7th 
8th 
9th 
12th 
17th 
18th 
19th 
6th 
8th 
at large 
: at large 
at large 
at large 
1st 
14th 
14th 
15th 
17th 
18th 
23d 
26th 
27th 
28th 
32d 
10th 
1st 
3d 
1st 
5th 
7th 
8th 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
No answer 
Satisfactor v 
. Satisfactorv 
; Satisfactory 
' Satisfactory 
: Satisfactory 
" Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Unsatisfactory 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
j Satisfactory 
No answer 
' Unsatisfactory 
, No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
No answer 
Satisfactory 
Satisfactory 
THE CRISI
3 
2 TH E N . A. A. C. P. 
TH E ASSOCIATIO N PI N 
Above is an enlarged drawing of the 
new pin of the N.A.A.C.P. This beautiful design is the work of Mr. John 
Howells, Jr., who generously gave his time 
and talent to the Association. Mr. Howells 
is a member of the well known firm of 
Howells and Stokes in New York. 
Made up in gold with a rich blue and 
white enamel, the pin may be secured at the 
offices of the Association by members at 25 
cents, postpaid 27 cents. A membership in 
the National Association which costs only 
one dollar, with one of these new pins, would 
make an appropriate Christmas remembrance for your friends. They may be also 
secured mounted on an artistic Christmas 
card at the rates quoted above. Send your 
order early. 
BRANCHE S 
Baltimore reports that the James Jenkins 
"Jim Crow" street car case has been appealed by the State and will come up before 
the Court of Appeals early in October. The 
attorneys for the Branch, Messrs. McGuinn 
and Hawkins, have the matter in charge. 
The Branch also reports that they arc taking steps to test the new segregation ordinance. 
The Chicago Bazaar: 
To raise funds for the establishment of an 
office where cases of discrimination against 
colored people may be investigated and adjusted, a summer tent festival was held 
August 28 and 29 Mr. Julius Rosenwald 
agreed to give one dollar for every two dollars raised. The carnival was a success, not 
only from a financial point of view, but In 
its effect upon the colored people of Chicago 
and their friends. Practically every colored 
artist in the city gave his services In the 
program. The Eighth and Twelfth Regiment bands likewise donated their services 
and paraded the streets on the South Side, 
drawing hundreds to the large lent where the 
carnival was given. Thirteen different organizations joined the Executive Committee 
and worked together harmoniously to make 
the affair a striking success. About twenty 
men employed in the post office and elsewhere in the civil service laid off for a day, 
at their own expense, and helped in the erection of the platform and booths. There 
seemed to be rivalry lo see which organization could make the best contribution in 
ideas and efforts. 
Al l the booths did a thriving business. (In 
Saturday night the tent was packed to capacity and about eight hundred people were 
turned away. The organizations which 
joined in the affair were: The Chicago Dental Club, Grace Presbyterian Sunday School, 
Phalanx Club, Tuskegee Club, Women's Aid 
Society, Appomattox Club, Young Matrons' 
Culture Club, Pandora Club, Coleridge Taylor Club, Entre Nous Club, Civic Protective 
League, Ipsilon Delia Pi, and Ipsilon Sigma 
Kappa. 
The festival closed with a mass meetingSunday afternoon held at the Institutional 
Church. Addresses were made by the Rev. 
R. W. Bagnall, of Detroit, Mr. Robert McMurdy, the Rev. Duncan C. Milner, Prof. 
H. T. Greener, the Rev. J. B. Massiah of St. 
Thomas Episcopal Church, Charles T. Hallinan, and others. Dr. Bentley presided. 
MEETING S 
Mass meetings with Mr. Villard, Mr. Studin and Mrs. Butler R. Wilson as speakers 
are announced for East Orange, Trenton 
and Newark during October. 
The Association desires lo thank the National Association of Colored Women for 
their donation of fifty dollars, voted at their 
annual meeting in Wilberforce. The good 
wishes which accompanied this gift, as well 
as the interest and sympathy shown toward 
our work at the Empire Slate and New England Federation meetings, were much appreciated. (Courtesy of L'lllustration, Paris) 
BLAC K SOLDIER S FRO M SENEGA L FIGHTIN G 
"OU T O F AFRI.E D M Y SON! " 
E CIVILIZATIO N O F EUROP E AGAINST ITSEL F WORL D WA R AN D TH E COLO R 
LIN E 
MAN Y colored persons, and 
persons interested in 
them, may easily make 
the mistake of supposing 
that the present war is 
far removed from the 
color problem of Americ a and that i n 
the face of this great catastrophe we 
may forget for a moment such local 
problems and give all attention and contributions to the seemingly more pressing cause. 
This attitude is a mistake. The present war in Europ e is one of the great 
disasters due to race and color prejudice 
and it but foreshadows greater disasters 
in the future. 
It is not merely national jealousy, or 
the so-called "race" rivalr y of Slav, Teuton and Latin , that is the larger cause 
of this war. It is rather the wild quest 
for Imperial expansion among colored 
races between Germany, Englan d and 
Franc e primarily , and Belgium. Italy, 
Russia and Austria-Hungar y i n lesser 
degree. Germany long since found herself shut out from acquiring colonies. 
She looked toward South America , but 
the "Monroe Doctrine " stood in her way. 
She started for Afric a and by bulldozing methods secured one good colony, 
one desert and two swamps. He r last 
efforts looked toward Nort h Afric a and 
Asia-Minor. Finally , she evidently decided at the first opportunity to seize 
Englis h or Frenc h colonies and lo this 
end feverishly expanded her navy, kept 
her army at the highest point of efficiency and has been for twenty years 
the bull y of Europ e wit h a chip on her 
shoulder and defiance i n her mouth. 
The colonies which Englan d and 
Franc e own and Germany covets are 
largely i n tropical and semi-tropical 
lands and inhabited by black, brown and 
yellow peoples. I n such colonies there 
is a chance to confiscate land, work the 
natives at low wages, make large profits 
and open wide markets for cheap European manufactures. Asia , Africa , the 
South Sea Islands, the West Indies, 
Mexico and Centra l Americ a and much 
of South Americ a have long been designated by the white world as fit field for 
this kin d of commercial exploitation, for 
the benefit of Europ e and with little regard for the welfare of the natives. One 
has only to remember the forced labor 
i n South Africa , the outrages i n Congo, 
the cocoa-slavery i n Portuguese Africa , 
the land monopoly and peonage of Mexico, the exploitation of Chinese coolies 
and the rubber horror of the Amazon to 
realize what white imperialism is doing 
to-day i n well-known cases, not to mention thousands of less-known instances. 
In this way a theory of the inferiority 
of the darker peoples and a contempt 
for their rights and aspirations has become all but universal i n the greatest 
centers of modern culture. Her e it was 
that America n color prejudice and race 
hatred received i n recent years unexpected aid and sympathy. To-day civilized nations arc fighting like mad dogs 
over the right to own and exploit these 
darker peoples. 
In such case where should our sympathy lie ? Undoubtedly, with the Allie s 
EDITORIAL EDITORIA L 29 
—wit h Englan d and France i n particular. Not that these nations are innocent. Englan d was i n the past bloodguilty above all lands i n her wicked and 
conscienceless rape of darker races. 
Englan d was primaril y responsible for 
America n slavery, for the starvation of 
India, and the Chinese opium traffic. 
Bu t the salvation of Englan d is that she 
has the ability to learn from her mistakes. To-day no white nation is fairer 
i n its treatment of darker peoples than 
England . Not that Englan d is yet fair. 
She is not yet just, and she still nourishes much disdain for colored races, 
erects contemptible and humiliating 
political and social barriers and steals 
their land and labor; but as compared 
with Germany Englan d is an angel of 
light. The record of Germany as a colonizer toward weaker and darker people 
is the most barbarous of any civilized 
people and grows worse instead of better. Franc e is less efficient than Eng ­
land as an administrator of colonies and 
has consequently been guilty of much 
neglect and injustice; but she is nevertheless the most kindl y of all European 
nations i n her personal relations with 
colored folk. She draws no dead line 
of color and colored Frenchmen always 
love France . 
Belgium has been as pitiless and 
grasping as Germany and i n strict justice deserves every pang she is suffering after her unspeakable atrocities i n 
Congo. Russia has never drawn a color 
line but has rather courted the yellow 
races, although with ulterior motives. 
Japan, however, instilled wholesome respect i n this line. 
Undoubtedly, then the triump h of the 
allies would at least leave the plight of 
the colored races no worse than now. 
Indeed, considering the. fact than black 
African s and brown Indians and yellow 
Japanese are fighting for Franc e and 
Englan d it may be that they wil l come 
out of this frightful welter of blood with 
new ideas of the essential equality of all 
men. 
On the other hand, the triump h of 
Germany means the triump h of every 
force calculated to subordinate darker 
peoples. It would mean triumphant 
militarism, autocratic and centralized 
government and a studied theory of contempt for everything except Germany— 
"Germany above everything i n the 
world. " The dispair and humiliation of 
Germany i n the eighteenth century has 
brought this extraordinary rebound of 
self-exaltation and disdain for mankind. 
The triumph of this idea would mean a 
crucifixion of darker peoples unparalleled i n history. 
The writer speaks without anti-German bias; personally he has deep cause 
to love the German people. They made 
him believe i n the essential humanity of 
white folk twenty years ago when he was 
near to denying it. Bu t even then the 
spell of militarism was i n the air, and 
the Prussian strut had caught the nation's imagination. They were starting 
on the same road with the southern 
America n whites toward a contempt toward human beings and a faith i n their 
own utter superiority to all other breeds. 
This feeling had not then applied itself 
particularly to colored folk and has only 
begun to to-day; but it is going by leaps 
and bounds.. Germany needs but the 
role of world conquest to make her one 
of the most contemptible of "Nigger " 
hating nations. Just as we go to press, 
the Berliner Tageblatt publishes a proclamation by "German representatives 
of Science and Ar t to the Worl d of Culture" i n which men like Harnack, Bode, 
Hauptmann, Suderman, Roentgen, 
Humperdink, Wund t and others, insult 
hundreds of millions of human beings 
by openly sneering at "Mongrels and 
Niggers." 
A s colored Americans then, and as 
Americans who fear race prejudice as 
the greatest of War-makers, our sympathies i n the awful conflict should be with 
Franc e and Englan d ; not that they have 
conquered race prejudice, but they have 
at least begun to realize its cost and evil, 
while Germany exalts it. 
If so great, a catastrophe has followed 
jealousies and greed built on a desire to 
steal from and oppress people whom the 30 EDITORIA L 
dominant culture dispises, how much 
wilde r and wider wil l be the conflict 
when black and brown and yellow people stand up together shoulder to shoulder and demand recognition as men! 
Let us give then our sympathies to 
those nations whose triump h wil l most 
tend to postpone if not to make unnecessary a worl d war of races. 
A CORRESPONDENC E 
H E General Federation of 
(white) Women's Clubs 
sent a representative to 
the meeting of the Na ­
tional Association of 
Colored Wome n at Wil -
berforce, and the magazine of the General Federation published an excellent 
article concerning that meeting. O n the 
strength of this the magazine has evidently obtained the mailin g list of the 
colored organization and is sending this 
letter broadcast: 
GENERA L FEDERATIO N MAGAZIN E 
Onl y official organ of the General Fed ­
eration of Women's Clubs 
Xe w York , N . Y. , Sept. 22 . 1914 . 
M y dear Madam : 
You r name has been sent to me by 
Miss Zona Gale, formerly Chairma n of 
Civic s of the General Federation of 
Women's Clubs, who recently spoke before your Colored Women's Convention, 
as being one of the prominent colored 
women i n this country who would without doubt be interested i n the General 
Federation Magazine, which is the 
official organ of the General Federation 
of Women's Clubs. 
I am using this month an account of 
your Convention by Miss Zona Gale and 
I know you wil l be interested to see that 
i n this important Magazine. Ma y I not 
hope for your support i n the way of at 
least one subscription to the Magazine ? 
I would like to add this also: If one 
woman could be appointed i n each club 
or organization to take subscriptions, she 
might find it profiable for herself or her 
organization to make a business of this 
matter. The price of the Magazine is 
$1.0 0 a year and we allow a discount of 
25% on each subscription. Ca n we not 
joi n our forces i n some way ? W e should 
be glad to give yo u publicit y i n the 
Magazine whenever yo u desire. 
W e are sending yo u a sample copy of 
our Biennia l number. 
Ver y cordially" yours, 
(Signed) HARRIE T BISHO P WATERS , 
General Federation Magazine. 
This letter has received the following 
reply from TH E CRISI S office: 
Dea r Madam : 
I have your circula r concerning a subscription to the General Federation 
Magazine. 
Do yo u think it is fair to ask a colored person to subscribe to the official 
organ of an organization which discriminates against them so outrageously as 
yours does? 
Ver y sincerely yours, etc. 
W e trust that similar letters wil l go 
from every colored woman approached. 
This is not a matter of hatred or complaint. It is a matter of self-respect. 
The General Federation of Women's 
Clubs has insulted every black woman in 
America . They have deliberately and 
openly put a bran d on her. Clubs composed of every race and nation i n America are welcome to this federation except 
those of black women. Against this contemptible action taken by northern white 
women to placate the petty spite of 
southern white women colored women 
cannot and do not wish to take any action. They are quietly and effectively 
doing their own club work. Bu t they 
refuse to forget the insult or condone it. 
Above all they resent on the part of 
these narrow-minded white women the 
assumption that-the exclusion of colored 
women's clubs from the General Federation has "helped" the colored organization. The stealing of my purse may 
make me careful and saving but I owe 
little gratitude to the thief, and at all 
events for the thief to demand gratitude 
is adding insult to injury . TH E BURDE N O F BLAC K WOME N 31 
TH E BURDE N OF BLAC K WOME N 
Dark daughter of the lotus leaves that watch 
the Southern sea, 
Wan spirit of a prisoned soul a-panting to 
be free; 
The muttered music of thy streams, the 
whispers of the deep 
Have kissed each other in God's name and 
kissed a world to sleep. 
The will of the world is a whistling wind 
sweeping a cloud-cast sky, 
An d not from the east and not from the west 
knelled its soul-searing cry; 
But out of the past of the Past's grey past, 
it yelled from the top of the sky; 
Crying: Awake, 0 ancient race!. Wailing : 0 woman arise! 
An d crying and sighing and crying again 
as a voice in the midnight cries; 
But the burden of white men bore her back, 
and the white world stifled her sighs. 
The White World's vermin and filth: 
Al l the dirt of London, 
Al l the scum of New York; 
Valiant spoilers of women 
An d conquerors of unarmed men; 
Shameless breeders of bastards 
Drunk with the greed of gold, 
Baiting their blood-stained hooks 
With cant for the souls of the simple, 
Bearing the White Man's Burden 
Of Liquor and Lust and Lies! 
Unthankful we wince in the East, 
Unthankful we wail from the westward, 
Unthankfully thankful we sing, 
In the un-won wastes of the wild : 
I hate them, Oh! 
I hate them well, 
I hate them, Christ! 
As I hate Hell, 
If I were God 
I'd sound their knell 
This day! 
Who raised the fools to their glory 
But black men of Egypt and Ind? 
Ethiopia's sons of the evening, 
Chaldeans and Yellow Chinese? 
The Hebrew children of Morning 
And mongrels of Rome and Greece? 
Ah, well! 
And they that raised the boasters 
Shall drag them down again: 
Down with the theft of their thieving 
And murder and mocking of men, 
Down with their barter of women 
And laying and lying of creeds, 
Down with their cheating of childhood, 
And drunken orgies of war— 
down, 
down, 
deep down, 
Till the Devil's strength be shorn, 
Till some dim, darker David a-hoeing of his 
corn, 
And married maiden, Mother of God, 
Bid the Black Christ be born! 
Then shall the burden of manhood, 
Be it yellow or black or white, 
And Poverty, Justice and Sorrow— 
The Humble and Simple and Strong, 
Shall sing with the Sons of Morning 
And Daughters of Evensong: 
Black mother of the iron hills that guard the 
blazing sea, 
Wild spirit of a storm-swept soul a-struggling to be free, 
Where 'neath the bloody finger marks, thy 
riven bosom quakes, 
Thicken the thunders of God's voice, and lo! 
a world awakes! TH E CRISIS 
TH E COLORED Y. M. C. A. BUILDING, WASHINGTON, D. C. TH E COLORE D Y . M . C. A. 33 
TH E COLORE D Y. M. C. A. 
B y C. H . TOBIA S 
THE first Young Men's Christian Association of colored 
men was organized in 
Washington, D. C , in 1853, 
two years after the first 
Association was organized 
on thi s continent, and 
eleven years after the parent Association 
was founded in London by George Williams. 
Anthony Bowen, a free Negro who worked 
in one of the government departments at 
Washington, was the first president. William Chauncy Langdon, afterwards founder 
of the International Convention, was then 
secretary of the white Association of Washington and an employee of the same government department in which Bowen worked. 
The two men were strong friends and mutually helpful to each other in Association 
work. From this beginning the Young Men's 
Christian Association work among colored 
men has had continuous existence and steady 
growth. The period of greatest growth, 
however, is covered by the last seven years, 
and the purpose of this article is to note 
the important achievements of that period, 
and to show how the movement has grown 
in such a short time from a few Associations 
widely scattered and owning property valued at less than $200,000 to a nation-wide 
brotherhood with modern buildings in all 
sections of the country valued at more than 
$1,000,000. 
Up to seven years ago there was not a 
single modern Y . M . C. A . for colored men 
anywhere in the country. There were buildings in New York, Louisville, Norfolk, Asheville, Atlanta, Orange, N . J., and other 
places, but they were, with the possible exceptions of Norfolk and Ashevillc, old residences turned into Association buildings. In 
1907 George Foster Peabody, a New York 
business man who had long been interested 
in Association work for colored men, offered 
to give $20,000 for a building to be erected 
in Columbus, Ga., his native city, on condition that $5,000 be raised by the citizens of 
Columbus, white and colored. The condition 
was met and a modern building was erected. 
This was the beginning of the forward movement. 
Shortly after the erection of the Columbus 
building, the Washington Association secured an offer of $25,000 from John D. Rockefeller on condition that a like sum be raised 
to erect a $50,000 building. In a popular 
subscription campaign the colored people of 
Washington subscribed $32,000. This result 
was so gratifying to all concerned that the 
objective was raised from $50,000 to $100,-
000. Of this amount, which was finally collected, the colored people paid $27,000. The 
building was completed and dedicated in 
1912. With its swimming pool, bowling alley, billiard parlor, cafe, gymnasium, reading room, Bible study courses, boys' department, and dormitories for fifty men, its appeal to the men and boys of Washington 
has met with a generous response. It has 
the distinction of having closed out its first 
year without a deficit, the obligations having 
been met from the year's receipts accruing 
from membership fees, room rent, and fees 
for use of swimming pool and game privileges. The last published report shows a 
membership of 675. 
Chicago was the next city to enter a building campaign. The result of this campaign 
for Chicago itself may be stated in a word 
—the largest and finest Association building 
for colored men in the United States was 
erected at a cost of $190,000. The feature 
of outstanding importance in the Chicago 
campaign, however, was the interest manifested by Julius Rosenwald, the Hebrew president of the Sears-Roebuck Company, who 
gave $25,000 to the Chicago building, and 
was so pleased with the investment that he 
extended the offer of a like amount to any 
city in the country that would raise $75,000 
to erect a $100,000 building for colored men. 
This was an offer of such wonderful generosity, and far-reaching significance, in view 
of the race and religion of the donor, that it 
stunned the Association world. A prominent Chicago business man declared that it 
was the greatest benefaction the Negro had 
received since the Emancipation Proclamation was issued. 
This remarkable challenge has been met 
by eleven cities, namely, Washington, Chicago, Atlanta, Indianapolis, Philadelphia, 
Los Angeles, Kansas City, Baltimore, Cincinnati, New York and Nashville. In four 34 TH E CRISIS 
FOUR COLORED DONORS TO Y . M . C. A . BUILDIN G FUND S 
Mrs. C. J. Walker, of Indianapolis, Ind., $1,000 
Henry W. Chase, of Washington, D. C , $500 James Tilghman, of Chicago, Ill., $1,000 
Mrs. D . Merchant, of Cincinnati, O. , $1,200 TH E COLORE D Y. M . C. A . 35 
of these cities—Washington, Chicago, Indianapolis and Philadelphia—the building's 
have been completed and are now in full 
operation. In the other cities buildings are 
either in course of erection or will be started 
soon. 
It is interesting to note that as many as 
eleven Negroes have contributed $1,000 each 
in these building campaigns, and that while 
men of Nashville will give $40,000 toward 
the Nashville building, and white men of Atlanta $25,000 toward the Atlanta building. 
Along with the forward movement in city 
work has come an awakening of interest on 
the part of many great corporations employing Negro labor. An Association has been 
established at a Newport News, Va., shipyard where 4,000 Negroes are employed. 
Buxton, Iowa, a colored mining community, 
has a $30,000 equipment for men and boys. 
The American Cast Iron Pipe Company of 
Birmingham, Ala., has a large and well appointed building where colored employees 
under a colored secretary occupy two floors, 
and white employees occupy one floor. 
There is a colored railroad Association at 
Bluefield, W. Va., supported by the Norfolk 
and Western Railroad. A county Association has been established at Lawrenceville, 
Brunswick County, Va . The secretary is 
supported by the Y . M . C. A . of Pennsylvania State College. 
In order to prepare leaders and furnish 
continuation school facilities for workers in 
the city and industrial centers, the Chesapeake Summer School is held annually at 
Camp Chesapeake, Arundel-on-the-Bay, Md. 
Dr. J. E . Moorland is dean, and has associated with him for class work and lecture 
courses some of the strongest educational 
and Association workers in the country. 
This fully equipped camp for colored men 
is conducted on property owned by colored 
men, and faces an exclusive water front a 
half mile long. 
Paralleling the city work almost from the 
beginning of its history, and keeping pace 
with it in growth and achievements, has been 
the student division of the Association. The 
first colored student Association was organized at Howard University in 1869. When 
the International Student Department was 
inaugurated at the Louisville International 
Convention in 1877, three colored Associations—Howard, Fisk and Walden—were 
represented in the Convention. There are 
now 104 colored student Associations with 
a total membership of nearly 7,000. The 
principal activities of the student Association, conducted under the direction of standing committees, are work for new students, 
Bible study, mission study, weekly religious 
meetings, social and recreative features, 
agencies for securing employment, and community social service. Tuskegee, Hampton 
and Howard employ salaried secretaries. 
Hampton has the distinction of having the 
only student Association building for colored men. This building was erected at a 
cost of $33,000 and was dedicated in February, 1913. The leadership of the student 
work is largely in the hands of voluntary 
workers, many of whom receive training in 
the Student Conference held annually at 
King's Mountain, N . C. 
The NegTO Christian Student Convention 
recently held at Atlanta was directed by the 
student Y . M . C. A. and Y . W. C. A. ; 500 
delegates from 88 schools and colleges, 24 
college presidents, and 175 religious and 
educational leaders, white and colored, were 
present at this Convention, the purpose of 
which was to study with thoroughness the 
responsibility of the Negro student for 
Christian work at home and abroad, and lo 
consider what light Christian thought might 
throw on co-operation between the races. 
The claims of Christian work were forcefulCOLORE D Y. M. C. A., CHICAGO 36 TH E CRISI S 
ly presented by representatives of the different life-callings, and questions of race relationships were discussed with frankness 
and sincerity by white and black alike. A 
noteworthy achievement of the Convention 
was the enrollment of 240 male delegates 
who expressed willingness to consider definite forms of Christian service as life-work. 
Joh n K . Mott, who presided at all the sessions, declared it to be one of the most significant conventions in the religious history 
of America . 
There are six secretaries of the International Committee whose business it is to supervise the work of colored Youn g Men's 
Christia n Associations. They are W . A . 
Hunton , J . E . Moorland , J. B. Watson. R. 
P. Hamlin . C. H . Tobias, and A . L . Jackson. Mr . Hunton , the senior secretary, has 
served continuously for 27 years. Mr . Jackson, the latest addition to the staff, was class 
orator at the 1914 commencement of Harvard University . H e takes the place of Mr . 
D. D. Jones, who recently resigned to take 
charge of the Colored Men's Branc h of St. 
Louis. 
COLORE D Y. M . C. A . SUMME R TRAININ G SCHOO L 
TH E GOLDEN-FACE D PEOPL E 
A Story of the Chinese Conquest of America 
By NICHOLA S VACHE L LINDSA Y 
I. Trouble with a Laundry man. 
H e was a laundryman who ironed shirts 
superbly, yet with that irritatin g air of bein g a little above his business. His picked 
English showed me that he aspired to be 
something more than a coolie. I thought 
we had been friends fur some months, but 
now old Yellow-arms clutched my week's 
washing because 1 had lost my half of his 
red ticket. I showed him for the tenth time 
the name on the linen. I was in a hurry to 
dress for the Lincoln's birthday banquet. 
Pushin g the money towards him, I jumped 
for the exit with my goods. He turned out 
the gas. I heard him scramble over the 
counter. H e was between me and the door. TH E GOLDEN-FACE D PEOPL E 37 
H e hit me wit h the handle of his broom. 
Then I was under the delusion that 1 made 
for the alley through the side entrance. 
II. Results of Being Hit With a Broom. 
I found myself i n a long, iron-floored 
passage, thick wit h yellow fog. Just as suddenly I was i n a packed assembly room 
where the walls blazed with dragon-embroidered lanterns. I turned around. The door 
of iron behind me was closed. M y pursuer 
was not i n sight. 
The place was like a sort of heathen temple. Bu t no, the next thing that caught my 
eye was the phrase : "I n the year of Christ. " 
It appeared that this fantastic gathering 
was about to dedicate with speeches and 
ceremonies a tablet inscribed: "In the gear 
of Christ two thousand eight hundred and 
nine Lin-Kon was born. This memorial is 
set up on the one hundreth anniversary of 
his birth in honor of his meritorious and superior career. He was the emancipator of 
the white man." 
Al l eyes i n the room were on this tablet. 
It was above the speaker's platform. 
The shirt-washer had hit me pretty hard. 
I di d not realize it all at once but he had 
knocked me through that iron door into the 
next millenium. H e had knocked the Chinese language into my head, for these in ­
scriptions were written i n that ideograph. 
An d now I was amazed to behold him, or a 
person quite like him sitting in a pew at 
one side of the platform. H e blinked there 
i n a majesty that was a tremendous expansion o f the streak of dignity with which he 
once ironed shirts. H e had somehow knocked 
another thin g into my head—that a China ­
man is so infinitely superior to a white man 
there is no comparison. I knew that was 
the meaning o f the empty bench, reserved 
for him exclusively, despite the crowded 
aisles. 
The audience was one-half Anglo-Saxon . 
The other half seemed Chinese, but it slowly 
dawned on me that they were not! They 
were Eurasians, half yellow, half white, who 
looked scornfully upon us who were so pure 
and pale. But , on the other hand, they 
glanced furtively i n the direction of their 
solitary Chinese visitor with eyes of abject 
abasement. 
III. How Chinese Superiority Came About. 
I was being patronizingly escorted toward 
the tablet by some of these half-yellow men. 
I knew I was being treated with honors because of my learning, and i n spite of my 
color. I was being delicately and deprecatingly introduced to half a score of half-yellow speakers of the evening, there grouped 
about the tablet. 
Then I was being proclaimed to the audience as one who had studied with zeal the 
Chinese conquest of America . I laid down 
my laundry bundle. I was in a whirlwin d 
of astonishing impressions. An d if was no 
longer a bundle, bill had shrunken into a 
manuscript, in Chinese characters which I 
knew I myself had written. I opened it and 
read and commented to the crowd—something after this fashion : 
"Whe n our fathers taught the Golden 
People mechanics in the sordid ages of the 
world, the white man was the leader of civilization. " There was a mighty cheer. Especially those almost white grew vociferous. 
Gongs were beaten. Fan s were thumped 
against the seats till they were splinters. I 
continued: "Ou r fathers were not scared 
when the Golden Me n instituted their thorough-going compulsory education, nor when 
they put up their immorta l universities from 
Canton to Lhassa. Bu t that was the crucial 
hour, the pivot of history. Then, i n the 
Chinese mind the Religion of Science took 
the place of the Religio n of Literature, 
which same had been wit h them from the 
days of Shen and Yao . No w in their laboratories were hatched the medical lodges and 
inventors of secret societies, infamous and 
sublime. They sent forth whirlwinds of 
tracts with sociological, hygienic and biological remedies for China . These became well 
nigh inspired i n the eyes of sects and subsects, who prayed over their crucibles in 
their little back-rooms, with the phrenzy of 
Mohammedans entering battle. 
"Privat e lists were compiled of high and 
low families prone to opium or vice or bad 
citizenship, and of many others with a tendency to crime or idiocy. Whe n the storm 
broke, these were sure to fall, whatever the 
apparent quarrel. Two provinces below the 
normal, were almost wiped out. Over every 
temple door and city gate appeared the quotation from the scientific conspirator Dah -
win : 'Science and Heaven are one.' An d 
revolutionary banners proclaimed his more 
terrible saying, 'None but Superior men are 
fit to live.' Ever y revolution aims at the annihilation of some class. Her e all perished 
but the subtle, the wise and the strong. 
"I n the counter-revolution Science apparently returned to her kitchen and work-38 TH E CRISI S 
bench. The simple worship of Heave n was 
restored, wit h high Christian elements. The 
scholar sipped his tea. quoted the Sermon on 
the Mount, quoted the Apostl e Paul , quoted 
Mencius again, and practically every China ­
man was a scholar. Machiner y was now the 
slave and not the master of Society. The 
Golden Ma n retained, indeed, the most scientific nationa l and famil y relations. Bu t 
he had learned to justif y them by the five 
classics. His revolution had not been i n 
vain. Whe n he nodded. Asi a had to kneel. 
H e dominated by no apparent conquest but 
seemingly by his sedate carriage, his level 
glance, his deliberate fan. 
"Their novelists showed to the judicious 
that the golden people were still human, and 
their deep-burrowing sociologists made 
their sins seem black, but how could we realize it. who met them i n public matters 
only ? Ho w could we resist the well-disposed, iron-boned gentlemen, when they 
came as the apostles of light and altruism? 
To be sure we had made great steps since 
the sordid ages, but beside them, we seemed 
to have been retrograding. To be sure we 
had sculpture and architecture greater than 
theirs, but they had taught us to apologize 
for them by showing at the right moment, 
dazzling textiles, ceramics and bronzes. W e 
had a power i n music they could not reach 
but they hinted our accomplishment i n this 
direction was a mark of nationa l effeminacy. 
They spoke lightly but confidently of their 
jades and mosaics, their new schools of pan -
tomine and drama. W e had a poetry of our 
own. but they made the poems collected by 
Confucius more loved by the world. 
" 'Indeed.' said one of their scholars to his 
prince, "in the presence of the well-rounded 
daily life of China , how brash seem the unclothed inventions of this whey-faced Democracy, where the weaklin g or diseased are 
tolerated for their votes and praised for 
their perverseness, where forever and forever the fairest things are tarnished wit h 
stupidity.' 
IV. How the White Man Was Enslaved. 
"The Golden-faced men came to our land 
with that apparent humilit y that hides one 
knows not what. They were ostensibly, 
hired servants of our public , scientific roadbuilders, park-architects, expert accountants, 
linguists, lecturers. Late r they came as the 
establishers of immemoria l ceremonies i n the 
courts of our governors, who found the 
ways of the Golden People indispensable for 
the glory of their administrations. They 
became valuable politica l advisers. Ceremony blended wit h intrigue . Politeness became the poisoned sword of politics, and 
left the puzzled voters out o f the government. 
"Man y Europeans, not i n the pa y of the 
Chinese, have maintained that our first fifty 
years as a Chinese provinc e were the greatest i n our history. Whe n the pagodas began to rise, when the so-called orange-toned 
school of city-building , first carried by the 
Japanese into China , was brought here with 
distinctly Chinese changes, all our best spirits felt the fertilizin g effect. Ou r young 
scholars, returnin g from Peki n wit h the 
highest degrees, had the faculty of finding 
every man of talent and firing his zeal for 
constructive reform til l he was lik e an amber 
flame. An d i n season and out these scholars 
were disposed to voice their gratitude to the 
eternal lights of China . 
"Ou r common people di d not fare as well 
as our cultured classes, but knew it not. In 
the words of one of our own historians, 
•They moved about, anemic and restless, like 
the petted white monkeys that eat sweetmeats i n the palaces of India. ' 
'Graduall y the strength of the Goldenfaced became an ingenious tyranny. They 
protested they meant us well, and, individuall y many of them did . but collectively we 
were the weaker because our social system 
was more impure . An d so we had to go 
down through caste and serfdom to slavery. 
Onl y when it was too late di d we know of 
the system of engines i n the Chinese laboratories especially constructed, to insure our 
obedience." 
V. The Praise of Lin-Kon. 
"I n our endless nightmare we scarcely 
noted the youn g sage who was traveling 
around the worl d wit h his group of students, 
like Confucius, seeking that magistrate who 
would allow him to set up his idea l government. Indeed, i n his majestic and superior 
doctrines, the great Lin-Ko n was nearer to 
Confucius than to any other teacher." 
A spiritua l win d swept through the audience. Agai n they burst through the shame 
of showing emotion. The y rocked i n their 
seats and wept and shouted. They thanked 
Heaven and thanked Go d for Lin-Kon . 
Indeed it was a curious audience. The 
wierdness and horror o f Eurasianism was 
over it all—that which would fain be white, 
and yet be yellow, never' knowin g its own TH E GOLDEN-FACE D PEOPL E 39 
mind. That audience was full of mixed 
tastes. A few still wore gowns according to 
the ancient fashions of white people, which, 
I somehow remembered, were permitted 
again when we were emancipated. But most 
of them were anxious to be in fashion rather 
than to be free, if their costumes told anything. The gowns of most of the women and 
children were embroidered with turkey-cocks, 
peach-blooms and demons, in the prevailing 
Chinese fashion. And the majority of the 
men were in stately impractical blue and 
grey scholars' gowns, which looked foolish 
on manual laborers. 
Now I found myself wandering from the 
text, often reading it mechanically, to reflect 
upon these things. There were all possible 
grades of half-breeds before me, and I noted 
with a kind of inward twitch that the heads 
of the men became more nobly formed in 
proportion as their eyebrows straightened 
and their hair approached Chinese black. 
The proudest of the women were plainly 
those with facial contours sleek as carved 
jade, with complexions neither gold nor 
silver, yet both. These were women, I somehow understood, who had no husbands of 
their own race, but had mysterious relations 
with certain leading Chinamen of the town, 
and their children, even prouder than they, 
sat beside them even more golden of face, 
even more reserved of manner, and loaded 
down with jewels. 
"It was in these provinces," I continued, 
"that Lin-Kon saw men and women chained 
to what was actually a state auction-block, 
though defended under a technical name. 
He saw our fathers sold into hard labor and 
our mothers into destruction. He had been 
born on the hardy plains of central China 
where the people have a rough sort of equality, being all one race. Kneeling before the 
sacred image of Equality in this very town 
he swore 'by the Justice of Heaven' that he 
would some time 'hit the curse of Slavery 
and hit it hard.' 
"An d the story will be told to-night by 
better orators than the one now speaking, 
how the celestial abolitionists looked upon 
their humbler brethren and resolved to make 
them equal with themselves or destroy the 
reigning dynasty in the attempt, and how, 
led and mastered and disciplined by the immortal Lin-Kon, they secured through bloody 
revolution an equal place for us before the 
Law. 
"But I must be brief. I leave these matters to these other gentlemen on the platform. I have been asked to say a few words 
on the issues of the hour. At the mass-meeting of the celestials of the whole city to 
celebrate Lin-Kon this afternoon, in the 
public Square, in the shadow of the statue 
of Equality, great pains were taken to keep 
white men and Eurasians off the platform or 
the committees, though it was a civic and 
not a social occasion. Naturally, but not 
wisely, we have been indignant. We have 
declared it was like playing Hamlet without 
the melancholy Dane. We have maintained 
that our voices would not necessarily have 
defiled their ears, neither should our rejoicings have made them sad. We were going 
to protest, but better councils prevailed. We 
can now celebrate here, in our own temple, 
in our own district of the city. We have 
privileges sufficient for rejoicing. Our right 
to political equality is written in the constitution, and as soon as we deserve it we will 
have it in fact. Already we have the full 
benefit of the law in many of our rights. Let 
us forget that we cannot wear swords. We 
do not need them. At least I can say we 
need money far more. Our next step is not 
sword equality but commercial equality. We 
must soberly and quietly look out for ourselves in business. There are no fatherly 
Chinese reformers watching over us. Lin -
Kon is fifty years dead, and the Abolitionists are under the sod, and all that generation. We must not ask for social equality, 
nor to have the color-line rubbed out. Our 
highest dream must be, by patience and dignity, by more care for ethics and ceremony, 
by a sweeter Christianity to attain to a sort 
of spiritual rank with the conservative, 
everlasting race that still dominates." 
There was a tremendous pandemonium of 
acclaim. I sat down deeply pleased and 
thrilled, for my last words had been pretty 
stiff medicine for the once proud AngloSaxon. 
VI. The Chinaman Treats Me as an Equal, 
Though I Am Not. 
I was sitting by the Celestial now. By 
an impreceptible gesture he had called me 
to his side as I put my manuscript into my 
pocket. I forgot not his resemblance to the 
laundryman I seemed to have known millions of years ago, yet it did not interfere 
with the intensity of my present exultation 
at his kindness. I knew that he shrunk from 
me as from a leper, yet his attention was an 
accolade. He whispered: "Servant, can you 40 TH E CRISI S 
come with me? " I answered: "Honorabl e 
sir, I am with you. " W e threaded the 
packed aisles, the people givin g way before 
him as before a demi-god. M y heart bumped 
like a tire-engine. M y cheeks seemed scalded 
with the blood in them. I knew that every 
speaker left behind envied me, that each one 
had planned a sentence or so that he had 
expected to roll out with special eloquence 
and make a hit with that Golden Man . No w 
I was stealing their audience. 
Ho w soft and cool was the night air. Un ­
der the dingy street-lamps of the white man's 
quarter there was a sad and radiant dig ­
nity about my companion that put a childish aching and choking i n my throat. I 
said in my heart, as his measured words 
came to me like balm: " I would be willin g 
to be skinned alive just to be like him. H e 
justifies the ages." Ye t he was simple 
enough in conversation. H e said : " I was 
anxious to hear your Lin-Kon's birthday 
celebration, and compare it with our own. 
I have been deeply gratified at the tone of 
your address." 
I was silent. I did not know how to 
thank him. Wit h just the right deliberation 
we entered the brillian t celestial streets, as 
though crossing that invisibl e line were 
crossing no line at all. I had an eye for 
the pageantry, and Lin-Kon's name in golden 
letters everywhere. The sage by my side 
was saying : "Servant, I was anxious to 
hear the rest of your speakers, but am due 
at the other banquet. I feel sure that the 
other men on your programme wil l adopt the 
same exalted tone that you used i n you r 
address." 
"Master, they will , they will, " I said 
hastily, and then blushed. " I mean they wil l 
not say anythin g violent or incendiary. 
They will" — 
" I understand what yo u mean, " he said 
with the greatest kindness. " I am going to 
proclaim, at our banquet to-night, as the 
watchword of reconstruction that saying of 
Lin-Ko u : 'The superior man shows malice 
toward none and charity for all. ' I n addition I shall read them, i f yo u are willing , 
the section of you r manuscript in which yo u 
counsel 'Sweet Christianity. ' It is good for 
both races to know such a word has been 
given to-night." 
I said : "I wil l feel a terrible shame, master, i f you become absurd for my sake." 
H e made a gesture as though my words of 
self-deprecation were tossed aside. His face 
glowed wit h a determination to be just. H e 
came of the oldest and the proudest of the 
Chinese clans. Aspiration s lofty and immemoria l had 'formed his forehead and 
purged his eyes of cunnin g and scorn. But. 
I went on : "Yo u cannot make me a hero 
i n you r assembly. Yo u wil l lose face, and 
more than lose face. Yo u and I wil l be misunderstood and vilified, now and hereafter. 
Whatever we say on Lin-Kon's Birthday, we 
know a white crimina l is made more famous 
i n a day i n the gold newspapers, than a 
white preacher can become by endless talk 
of 'Sweet Christianity. ' " 
W e paused before the statue of Equality . 
She was a vast Sphinx-lik e creature. The 
animals beneath her claws, supposed to represent Prejudice , and slain Tyranny , were 
carved like those on the avenue to the Min g 
Tombs. He r half-shut-eyes held unfathomable thought. Man y men who passed by 
saluted her gravely, so I presumed it was a 
custom. Bu t my noble friend di d more than 
that. H e turned and put both hands on my 
shoulders, made me look him i n the eyes, and 
shook me by the hand. Hi s inne r exultation 
must have been tremendous to overcome his 
natura l shrinkin g from my white and ghastly 
skin. I gave him the manuscript. I regretted it the moment it had left my hand. 
VII. I Almost Wake Up, Yet Dream On. 
W e were at the door of the banqueting 
hall. W e passed through long lines of white 
lackeys who bent respectful eyes on my companion, and supercillious eyes on me. I began to tremble. Indeed I loved the man for 
his unworldliness, but I wanted to get my 
manuscript from him before he absent-mindedly led me into the very presence of the 
revellers themselves. H e was expounding to 
me his views of the Anglo-Saxo n talent for 
Drama , glossing over the faults of Shakespeare and showing his rea l native worth. 
H e was talkin g rather loudly i n his generous excitement. 
AN D NO W H E HA D DON E IT . I 
WA S PROFANIN G TH E INNE R SANC ­
TUAR Y WHER E N O WHIT E MA N 
DARE D G O UNLES S ATTIRE D A S A 
SERVANT . There were the dazzling revellers. I had a confused pictur e of an enormous feast, many men drunk. An d all those 
men at those long tables turned from their 
god-like nectar-drinking to stare at us. I 
could not but note that my companion was 
the most majestic presence there. Bu t they 
scarcely saw him. They gazed at me as TH E GOLDEN-FACE D PEOPL E 41 
though they would never take their eyes 
away. I was the cynosure of a thousand 
reprovin g and astonished glances. They 
were as fascinated as they would have been 
had a giant jungl e elephant suddenly risen 
from the earth. An d just as they could not 
take their eyes away, so 1 could not help 
gazing at the endless phosphorescent crystals 
on the sword-hilts of these gentlemen. Fo r 
every one was armed with that death-dealing 
electrical blade that only the pure Chinese 
are permitted to carry. 
I seemed to be wakin g up. I struggled 
to cry out. I resolved to take any means 
possible to wake myself completely and irrevocably—as one often does i n the midst of 
a nightmare. I felt, i n the foolish logic of 
nightmares, that i f I could get my manuscript I could break the spell. I took it 
hastily from the hands of my companion as 
he was biddin g me farewell. Instantly it 
changed to my own bundle of laundry. I 
said to myself: " I am awake at last." 
Bu t instead, I faced the most terrible part 
of my dream. The face of my dear friend, 
that philosophic spirit, that guide through 
darkness, underwent a complete degradation. 
It shrivelled like a leaf i n a fire, it became 
petty and ful l of hate. Utterin g inarticulate cries he struggled wit h me for the 
bundle, and fell on one knee. H e was thoroughly angry because he had fallen, and because his robe of honor was flecked with 
dust. I still had the victory. 
"Woul d yo u put me into contempt, robber'?" he breathed. "Yo u shall be punished. " 
Then, turning , i n a voice that brought the 
whole company to their feet with grave and 
sobered concern, and finally set their swords 
whirrin g i n the air, he cried : "This is a 
robber, an insulter and an incendiary. H e 
has just been addressing a mob of his people. 
H e has said : 'The Whit e Race or the Chinese must perish. The whole white quarter 
wil l be armed i n an hour.' " 
A s he spoke, every face i n that company 
shrivelled to the pettiness and fury of his 
own. "Bur n him alive! " they shouted. 
"Bur n him alive! " 
I was fleeing through those time-worn 
splendid streets wit h the speed which we can 
only accomplish i n dreams. I had the wil d 
hope that I could reach my own people and 
war n them that the mob was coming. It 
seemed to me I could hear the whole yellow 
race roarin g just behind. I reached our assembly hall. The man on the platform was 
at the climax of his oration "Lin-Ko u has 
often been compared to Confucius. " . . . 
But even now blood was Mowing. M y Chinese friend who had once been so lofty and 
so kind was shouldering up the aisle layin g 
right and left with his fearful magic sword. 
Immediately behind him came a company of 
the banqueters, cutting and thrusting like 
mad. The leader was on the platform i n a 
flash. H e struck the miserable speaker on 
the mouth with the flat of his hand, and then 
beheaded him. 
The swordsmen appeared to grow impossibly emaciated and tall, yet with broad, 
square shoulders. They leaned over the audience like reapers. They mowed down my 
wailing people like weeds. 
I turned. I wrenched desperately at the 
rings i n those iron doors by which, early i n 
the evening, I came to this place. Now I 
was i n the yellow fog once more, crawling 
on the iron-floored passageway. 1 felt i f I 
could get to the other end I could awake. 
M y feet and hands were like magnets, clingin g to the floor. 
VIII. The White Race Still Supreme. 
"Well , well, you brought him to, doctor. I 
thought that broom had finished him. " . . . 
I was back i n the twentieth century, i n the 
laundry-shop. I was on the counter by the 
window. Friend s i n festive attire were flockin g round me, good fellows all, the blooded 
youth of the town. I said to myself: " I 
am awake at last." 
Three or four policemen held the door. 
Outside the mob howled and peered. Across 
the street dangled four men, hanged by the 
neck til l they were dead. A n officer pointed 
to the nearest. 
"That's your Chinaman, " he said. 
"Wh o hung him? " 
"The mob." 
"Wh o is the next man? " 
"Tha t is a Japanese." 
"Wh o is the next? " 
"Tha t is just a Greek. " 
"Wha t did he do? " 
The Irishman laughed. " I dunno," he 
said, "these foreigners have to keep out of 
the way, I suppose." Then by way of in ­
formation he added: "The Greeks are an 
awful ignorant people." 
"Wh o is the fourth man? " 
"Oh , that's just a nigger." 
"Wh y did they hang him? " 42 TH E CRISI S 
"Why, I suppose they did not want to 
burn him alive on Lincoln's Birthday." 
"But why did they hang him? What did 
he do?" 
"I dunno. I guess he was too free with 
his lip. The best nigger on earth is not as 
good as the worst white man. Niggers are 
all alike. There was a Negro in Indiana the 
other day." . . . And he told the usual story. 
"Yes," agreed a Southerner. "The best 
nigger is not as good as the worst white 
man. But we don't lynch 'em in our corner 
of Virginia unless we know they're guilty. 
And, squinting up his eyes at the mob: "We 
don't leave the dirty work to the poor white 
trash." 
I found myself able to stand and receive 
the congratulations of the company. "Now 
wash the blood off your head and hands, old 
man," continued' the Southerner, "and we 
"In Black and While: An interpretation of Southern Life." 
By L. H. Hammond. 
F. H. Revel Co., N. Y., 1914. 244 pages. 
MRS. HAMMON D has written an unusual book. It is the attempt of a southern white woman to apply the modern philanthropic attitude to the race relations of 
the South. Al l this is new. Usually the 
southern white woman is dumb and "pretty." 
When she has applied her intelligence to the 
race problem it has been to utter the most 
reactionary thoughts. It has been quite the 
fashion, too, to consider the southern race 
problem as so exceptional as to have practically nothing in common with problems of 
labor and uplift elsewhere. "You know we 
have no working class in the South," said 
one white girl student, innocently. 
Mrs. Hammond speaks from curious vantage ground. Her husband is the southern 
white president of a colored school—an exceptional position and very trying. It was 
reported that when his acceptance of this 
position was announced, a large part of his 
fashionable Nashville audience arose and 
left the church. 
Mrs. Hammond herself was the daughter 
of liberal parents, slaveholders, but not believers in slavery. She grew up with broad 
sympathies and saw the best side of slavery. 
One of the few debatable points in her book 
will go home with you and get you ready 
for the banquet yet." 
Sure enough there was my laundry bundle 
on the table. I opened it. The shirt was 
not soiled with blood where it would show. 
We managed to dodge the crowd by using 
the side door. In my room I made a quick 
change. We were only fifty minutes late. 
The banquet had gone on with none of the 
other guests knowing what was happening 
outside. 
The Southerner gracefully ended the evening by his speech on Lincoln as an example 
of the survival of the fittest, accompanied by 
a eulogy of Darwin. Like the rest of the 
speakers, he did not touch on the race question or the question of equality at all. But 
he had everything commendable to say of 
Lincoln, the self-made railsplitter and backwoodsman, the perfect pioneer type. 
is the insistance that "Thousands of slaveowners, like my own parents, thought slavery wrong, and confidently expected the 
time, not far distant, when the states would 
themselves abolish it. The South did not 
fight for slavery." 
The book is composed of eight chapters. 
The first is a passionate call to the South 
for a humanitarian outlook: 
"Are we the only folk on earth responsible 
for a 'submerged tenth?' But if the burden is not peculiar? If it is our part of a 
world-wide task? If everywhere men living 
under such conditions as do the majority of 
our Negroes are reacted upon by their environment just as the Negroes are? If we 
have mistakenly counted our poverty line 
and our color line as one?" 
She insists on the essential humanity of 
all races: 
"Skins differ in color, heads are shaped 
differently; one man's mind runs ahead of 
his sympathies, perhaps, and another man's 
mind may creep while his emotional nature 
runs rampant. But under all outward differences their fundamental humanity is as 
much the same as is the earth under the 
mountain and the hill. " 
She says of "race pride": 
"Life does not develop towards uniformTW O BOOKS TW O BOOK S 13 
lty, but towards richness of variety in a 
unity of beauty and service. Unless the Race 
of Man contradicts all known laws of life 
it will develop in the same way; and whether 
white, or yellow, or black, they who guard 
their own racial integrity, in a spirit of 
brotherhood free from all other racial scorn, 
will most truly serve the Race to which all 
belong." 
Other chapters take up specific evils: the 
injustice of southern courts and industrial 
relations, and the shame of the "Jim-Crow" 
car. Her husband tells her of his travel 
with a colored colleague. The wdiite man 
was exhausted even with sleeping cars, dining rooms, and decent day coaches, but the 
colored man! 
" 'How Gilbert stands it, physically or religiously, I cannot see,' he said. 'He goes 
half the time without lying down to sleep. 
If I were not with him, to dash into some 
white restaurant and buy him a cup of coffee 
and something to eat, he would often go 
hungry.' " 
The author particularly emphasizes the 
need of better housing and surroundings for 
Negroes and she slaps Mr. Washington's 
counsels of contentment with a ghetto full 
in the face with this: 
"When by their own efforts a few Negroes 
secure a respectable neighborhood, families 
of the better class building up a little community of their own, they are peculiarly 
liable to have saloons and houses of ill-fame 
thrust upon them by a low class of whites 
whom the upper classes do not restrain. 
The Negro owner of a city home, whatever 
his education or business success, whatever 
the sum invested in his property, cannot be 
sure, from month to month, of retaining for 
his family surroundings compatible with 
moral health and safety." 
• She goes on to say: 
" 'If you white people could only understand,' a Negro woman said to me not long 
ago, her face fired with feeling. 'We don't 
want our homes where we're not wanted. 
But we want to be decent, too. And it's the 
same all over the country—anything will do 
for a "nigger." You think we're all alike, 
and you don't care what happens to us just 
as we're out of your sight. My husband and 
I were living in Denver; and we had money 
to pay for a comfortable house. But there 
wasn't a place for rent to Negroes that a 
self-respecting Negro would have. And how 
will my people ever learn to be decent if 
they must live in the white people's vice 
district"?' " 
"We have no right to treat people like 
that. In one large southern city, with high 
taxes and a big revenue and an expensive 
health department, a white friend of mine 
counted one morning twelve dead cats and 
dogs, in various stages of decomposition, in 
one short Negro alley. It was not an uncommon sight, except that the corpses were 
rather numerous. The outhouses are vile 
beyond description, a menace not merely to 
the Negroes but to the entire community. 
Yet if a Negro tries to buy a home in a 
healthful part of town we think his one 
motive is to thrust himself upon us, socially, 
just as far as he dares." 
She touches the care of children and the 
awful canker of southern criminal methods. 
She calls for service and co-operation between white and black in social uplift work. 
She asks white and colored women to stand 
together in mutual defense and finally she 
visions the Great Adventure of those "who 
walk in love." 
It is a fine book. It spells "Negro" with 
a capital: 
"In obedience to the rule which requires 
all race-names to begin with a capital letter, 
e. g., Indian, Teuton, Zulu, Maori, AngloSaxon, Filipino, etc., etc." 
The book has, of course, its little faults— 
a tendency to emphasize philanthropy rather 
than self-expression, and evident limited 
knowledge of the better classes of colored 
folk; but then these detract but little from 
an author whose earnestness and sincerity 
and human breadth stands out splendidly. 
"Industrial Conditions Among: Negroes in St. 
Louis." By W. A. Crossland. (Washington University Studies in Social Economics, Vol. I, No. 1.) 75 
cents. 
Mr. Crossland's study of St. Louis' colored people, which inaugurates a series of 
social studies, is very well done. It is concise, readable, and the author knows his subject. We can best give an idea of the work 
by quoting his more important findings. 
"There are five colored districts, two of 
them located in the very heart of the city. 
Housing conditions are bad, over-crowding 
is common, but to no greater extent than 
exists in districts peopled by other races 
living on the same economic plane. Two of 
the residence districts are very desirable, 
both as to their location and the character 44 TH E CRISI S 
of the dwellings. The Negro wage-earning 
population is composed of 17,348 males and 
7,758 females, 10 years of age and over. 
An interesting feature of the population was 
the few wage-earners from 10 to 16 years 
of age, due to the exclusion of Negro boys 
and girls from factory work. 
"Over 226 different occupations were 
found in which Negroes were engaged. The 
occupations naturally fall into the following 
groups: Professional, Business, Clerical, 
Personal Service, Artisan, Factory, Common 
Labor, Boys and Women. Another division 
of groups may be made by taking the first 
three of those who earn their bread by mental toil, and the remaining six groups as 
those who live by manual toil. Nine-tenths 
of all the wage-earners are found within the 
last four groups. If the artisan group is 
included, the percentage rises to 96. Here is 
where the great mass of Negro wage-earners 
are to be found, engaging in unskilled occupations, none of which, with the exception 
of the factory group, offer any great possibility of advancement. The great problem 
in cities is to better the economic condition 
of this unskilled nine-tenths. Barely four 
per cent, of Negro workers earn their living 
by mental toil. A n encouraging shifting of 
Negro wage-earners from group to group 
was detected. The factory and common 
labor groups have grown at the expense of 
the personal service group, which includes 
the least desirable occupations of all. Still 
personal service claims 37 per cent., considerably over one-third of the total number of 
wage earners. The percentages for the other 
groups are: Factory, 20.3; common labor, 
29.1; boys, 6.2; artisan, 3.0; clerical, 1.7: 
business, l.S; professional, 0.5. The greatest chance to advance is to be found in the 
factory and artisan groups. 
"Wage statistics showed that the average 
weekly wage for different groups were: 
Professional, $29.76; business, $16.50; clerical, $19.26; artisan, $16.45; personal service, 
$10.86; factory, $13.76; common labor, 
$13.86; boys, $5.34; women, $5.88. Over 
three-fourths of the colored male workers 
receive an average weekly wage under 
$15.00; one-half of them average under 
$12.00. An estimate based on all available 
data showed that the total yearly earnings 
of St. Louis' colored wage earners totaled 
approximately $12,000,000, and certainly 
much in excess of eleven million. Of this 
amount two and one-tenth millions were contributed by the women; over nine-tenths of 
this income is earned and expended by the 
unskilled Negro laborers, who live on a low 
economic plane. A noteworthy fact is the 
ability of colored men to vary their occupations to suit conditions. Scanty data from 
the State Free Employment Bureau gave the 
Negro a good work record. There are very 
limited means open to the Negro for securing employment through the labor agencies. 
The unskilled Negro problem is only a part 
of that greater city problem, namely, the 
bettering of the industrial conditions of the 
poor. 
"The professional, business and clerical 
workers were considered together as they 
earn their livelihood by mental toil. The 
first group are the best paid members of 
the colored race. Most of them are well 
prepared in their chosen fields and compare 
favorably with professional workers among 
the whites. 
"The business group has greater possibilities for growth. The large majority of business enterprises have sprung up within the 
last ten years. Approximately a quarter of 
a million dollars is invested in St. Louis' 
colored enterprises, and this capital is distributed through many fields and not massed 
in a few lines of business. Entrepreneurs 
started with small capital and within a comparatively short time have built up their 
business to respectable proportions. The estimated yearly sales are in excess of $1,000,-
000, or about eight or nine per cent, of the 
estimated annual earnings of the colored 
people of St. Louis. Indications show that 
business growth will be more rapid in the 
future than in the past. 
"The lowest paid and least desirable group 
is composed of the personal service workers. 
Aside from the Pullman and hotel service 
the workers are engaged in menial, disagreeable tasks. The group is declining, probably 
losing its members to the factory and common labor groups. There is practically no 
chance for advancement in any occupation 
of the group. 
"The most skillful and well paid of all 
the manual laborers are the artisan workers. 
They are composed mainly of building laborers and chauffeurs. The number in the 
group could be increased if colored labor 
were more largely utilized through the 
agency of an employment bureau, similar to> 
the one in operation in Kansas City. Addi--TH E BURDE N 4 5 
tions to the group are few because of the 
hostility of white labor unions." 
m 
The excellent work of Dr. S. C. Fuller, 
the pathologist of the Westboro Insane Asylum, Massachusetts, is further shown by his 
latest pamphlet on "Amyloid Degeneration 
of the Brain," reprinted from the American 
Journal of Insanity for April, 1914. Dr. 
Fuller's standing as a scientist is equal to 
that of Dr. C. H . Turner of St. Louis, and 
yet J. McKeen Cattell says in Science (Vol. 
39, No. 1004, P. 5), "There is not a single 
mulatto who has done creditable scientific 
work." 
Of course, Mr. Cattell did not know, etc., 
etc. But it was his business to know. 
TH E BURDE N 
South Carolina, Oct. 7, 1914. 
Dear Mr. Editor: 
In addressing this letter to you I am endeavoring to find a friend who is willing to 
aid a worthy one in need. I do not feel that 
this letter will interest you very much, as, 
no doubt, you have already received many 
such letters. 
But I realize that there is always a possibility of an honest effort being crowned with 
success. Hence, my determination to continue. I am not asking alms. I am simply 
seeking aid to carry me over this crisis, 
which you will better understand when I explain further on. The situation is this: I 
am sole owner of 110 acres of good farming 
land in Cokesburg Township, Greenwood 
County, this State, 50 acres of which I 
bought three years ago. I have made improvements on the place to the amount of 
several hundred dollars, including the drilling of an artisian well, building fences, barn 
and dwelling house, besides live stock and 
farming implements. I have been compeled 
to borrow money to do this. And the last 
three years have been very unfavorable" on 
account of droughts. Now we can get only 
7 cents per pound for cotton, which this 
year cost me 9 cents to make, not counting 
my own time. Our notes will be due soon 
and unless we can get aid from somewhere, 
will be compelled to give our cotton away 
for 7 cents, though it would little more than 
pay the interest. I want to give some one 
who will give me a chance to pay him, a 
mortgage on all of my belongings for sufficient money to pay off my indebtedness. 
Can you point me to such a one? Or, can 
you point me to one or many who will buy 
our 15 bales of cotton at 10 cents per 
pound1? If you can, or if you cannot, you 
will confer a great favor on me to even 
just write a letter of encouragement in 
answer to this. 
This is not intended for publication, but 
should you desire to do so, please withhold 
my name and oblige, 
Yours sincerely, 
P. S.—The buy-a-bale movement that is 
advertised so extensively, does not reach we 
colored people at all. We do not and need 
not expect any help from that source. 
Whatever happens, I will be glad to write 
yon more in detail if you so desire. 
COLORE D ME N AN D WOME N 
LYNCHE D WITHOU T TRIA L 
Total 2,698 
1885 78 
1886 71 
1887 80 
1888 95 
1889 95 
1890 90 
1891 121 
1892 155 
1893 154 
1894 134 
1895 112 
1896 80 
1897 122 
1898 102 
1899 84 
1900 107 
1901 107 
1902 86 
1903 86 
1904 83 
1905 61 
1906 64 
1907 60 
1908 93 
1909 73 
1910 65 
1911 63 
1912 63 
1913 79 
1914. 9 months.. 35 4 6 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
SCHOO L O F BEAUT Y CULTUR E AN D HAI R DRESSIN G 
Kelsey's Hair Dressing, Hair Grower, Scalp Tonic and Face Lotion have no equal. Price, 50c. each. 
Guaranteed under Food and Drug Act, June 30, 1906. 
Manicuring, Shampooing, Hair Dressing, Marcel Waving. Facial and Body Massage, Hair Making, Chiropody, 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimited practice in parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summer Course, $7.50 up. Send for 
booklet. Mme. A. Carter Kelsey, Gen'l Instr.; Dr. Samuel 
A. Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen'l Manager. 
KELSEY' S 
Telephone, Morningside 8162 • 
143 West 131st St. 
NEW YOR K 
Teachers The new efficiency era calls 
I L \ V . 11 I . I\ . J fo r th e modern way of 
selecting teachers, through a live agency that furnishes 
the connecting medium in a business way, saves time 
of school officials, relieves teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting and covers the whole country. 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode 
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia 
and West Virginia, 
Our list of teachers covers even a wider territory. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1335 T Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 
Onl y 
$65.00 
No. 24 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A Value Unequaled. Sold on $i.oo 
Front Margin From 
Factory to User 
Write for prices 
and other styles. 
Send for catalogC. R. PATTERSO N 
& SONS . 
Greenfield, Ohio 
Largest Negro Carriage concern In the United States. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
You can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU . Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Why can't you? By our method you can 
start with $5 and up. We offer you thirty live, 
money-making mail order plans. You can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. We furnish circulars, printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today—Now ! 
MAIL DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
517 Dearborn Street Chicago, Ill. 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PER MONT H acting as AGENT S 
for the sale of our properties in MUSKOGE E 
and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . The real coming 
country where there are opportunities and 
openings for all. Write us to-day, giving 
your age and experience, and we will offer 
you a FIN E PROPOSITIO N WHIC H 
WIL L MAK E YO U MONEY . Address 
REEVE S REALT Y CO. 
Department C 
217 FLYNN-AMES BLDG. MUSKOGEE, OKLA. 
Made-to-Measure 
Express $27 5 
Prepaid 
Pants cut i n th e latest 
style . Made-to-you r in ­
dividua l measure . Fit , 
workmanshi p an d wea r 
guaranteed . 
N o Extr a Charg e 
for peg tops, no matter how 
extreme you order them. 
Agents Wante d 
A good live hustler in every 
town to take orders for our 
celebrate d made-to-measure clothes. Samples of all 
the latest materials FREE. 
W e Pa y Bi g Mone y 
to our agents everywhere. 
Turn your spare time into 
cash by taking orders for our 
stylish clothes. Write today 
for beautiful FREE outfit. 
TH E PROGRES S TAILORIN G CO. 
Department 129 CHICAGO 
$25.0 0 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War" combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. 
154 Nassau Street 
A. JOHNSON 
NEW YORK 
REGALI A 
N. E. Corner 8th 
the crisis 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalog upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALIA CO. 
Jos. L. Jones, Pro., 
and Plum Streets, Cincinnati, Obio TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 47 
A NE W WA Y 
To Get Your Clothes free 
A NEW PLA N TO MAK E 
BIG MONEY DURING 
YOUR SPARE TIME 
Something different — better, 
bigger, more liberal than any 
offe r eve r made. Lowe r 
prices—bette r clothes — 
bigge r cas h profits — Ex ­
press paid on everything. 
Double Pay 
FRE E clothes and cash profits 
besides. W e don't ask you 
to use your cash profits for 
your own clothes. Our s is a 
new and better plan. 
A n Extr a Presen t with every order. Not a prize 
scheme. Choose what you want, work tor it and get 
it besides your Cas h Profits. Agent' s Com ­
plet e Outfi t FREE , fifty-six stylish, real cloth 
samples — fifty Fashion Plates. Inside wholesale 
prices. Everythin g FREE . Ge t into the bi g 
money-makin g class. Just put your name on a 
post card and mail it to us today . 
SPENCER MEAD CO., Dept. 620, Chicago 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
1 7 Monograph s Sol d Separatel y 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY ATLANTA , GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
B y Jame s F . Morton , Jr. , A . M . 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAME S F . MORTON , JR . 
211 Wes t 138th Stree t -:- Ne w York , N . Y . 
FRE E TO MINISTERS ONLY 
Swedenborg's "Arcana Celestia," Vol. I., and one 
of the following for 30 cents to cover postage: 
"The True Christian Religion," "The Apocalypse 
Revealed," "Divine Love and Wisdom," "Heaven 
and Hell," "Divine Providence," and "Biography of 
Swedenborg," by Worcester. 
These books are cloth bound and run in pages from 
277 to 1100. 
REV . L. G . LANDENBERGE R 
3741 Windsor Place -:- St. Louis. Mo. 
The Poems of Phillis Wheatley 
th e ea rl y Negr o poetess collecte d b y 
RICHAR D R. WRIGHT, JR., and 
CHARLOTT E CROGMA N WRIGHT 
and arranged in an attractive volume suitable for a Xmas 
gift. 
Price, One Dollar 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: :: New York 
MANY MORE TEACHER S 
are needed to supply the demands upon us. Hundreds of 
experienced or well-prepared teachers can join us to their 
advantage. We can place you if you can be placed. 
TH E NATIONA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
B . F . BOWLES , Manager 
2739 CONVERS E AVE . EAST ST. LOUIS. ILL. 
The Crisis Calendar for 1915 
Containin g a quotatio n fro m a Negr o write r fo r 
eac h wee k i n the ne w yea r an d histori c dates i n 
eac h mont h whic h wil l be o f especia l interest t o 
you . 
Price. Twenty-five Cents 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :; :: New York 
TEACHERS—ATTENTION ! 
Competent teachers can secure good positions in the South. The demand for teachers who can hold 
positions as Principals or Department Heads is greatly in excess of the supply. We make it our business to 
find the place for you that you have prepared yourself to fill. Send stamp for further information with 
registration blank and contract. Address: 
TEXAS COLORED TEACHERS' AGENCY, P. 0. Box D 1099, DALLAS, TEXAS 
Ship your Ya m Sweet Potatoes, Poultry, Eggs and other Farm Products to 
GHOLSO N & COTTMA N 
THE MOST RELIABLE PRODUCE HOUSE 1S32 South St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 48 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
MILES M . WEB B 
School of Practical Photography 
Al l branches of photography taught. 
Terms reasonable. Service efficient. 
Three courses: Amateur, intermediate, 
professional. REGISTE R NOW . 
3519 So. STAT E STREE T CHICAGO , III . 
Telephone Douglass 668 8 
HOTEL COMFORT AND CAFE 
Open all the Year 
Corner Second Street and Bay Avenue 
Ocean City, New Jersey 
Mrs. M . • B . Comfort, Proprietress. 
Beautiful location, fine view of Great 
Eg g Harbor Bay, the Inlet and the At ­
lantic Ocean. Boating, bathing, fishing 
and tennis. Thirty minutes to Atlanti c 
City by electric cars or steamboats. 
GEORGIA STATE COLORED FAIR 
NOVEMBE R 18-28 , 191 4 
Want s Colore d Entertainers 
$5000.0 0 IN PREMIUM S 
Write R. R. WRIGHT, President, SAVANNAH , G A 
Let Me Start You in the, 
Mailorder Business 
$25 a Week For Your Spare Time 
$40 to $75 Weekly For Your Entire Time 
That is the money yo u shoul d make i n 
the mail-orde r business. I wan t an ambitious man i n you r communit y to act as m y 
Branc h Manager, and buil d u p a successful, 
prosperous mail-orde r business, just as I 
have. I wil l help yo u to do it, show you 
how fortune s are made i n this fascinatin g 
business, an d suppl y yo u wit h everythin g 
needed to start. 
N o Experienc e Needed . I Sho w Yo u How . 
Yo u need no experienc e to become m y 
Branc h Manager. I wan t honest men of 
determinatio n wh o are ambitiou s to succeed, 
and I wil l teach such a ma n al l he needs to 
kno w to handl e the business successfully. 
If yo u are one of the thousands of slaves 
to the pay -check , grindin g awa y the best 
years of your life for some other man's profit, let me show 
you how to embar k i n a business tha t should free you forever fro m this grinding , body-wrackin g wage slavery. 
Let me show you the wa y to financial independence and 
happiness. A few dollar s starts you. Then by putting1 
your profits each week back into the business you should 
grow rapidly . 1 show you how to mak e a start wit h jus t 
a few dollars and the postman should soon wear a path to 
your door laden wit h letters, orders, and moneyed mail. 
Yon Need No Office. Your Own Home Will Do.
 m 
Th e beaut y of it al l is, yo u need no office, 
n o expensiv e office equipment . Yo u don't 
even need to quit you r regula r job ; just 
wor k i n you r ow n home, evenings, spare 
time, etc. Le t you r wife , sister, mothe r or 
relative s help you . Yo u need no outside 
help. Thin k of it ! A chance to buil d up a 
big , successful, mail-orde r business righ t at 
hom e i n you r spare time . Isn't that great? 
Isn't tha t wonderful? RISE, GO ON AND UP! The road is 
clear. A glorious futur e summons you to the battle of betterment. Pare on, yo u whose souls are bruised wit h past 
defeats. Twis t your frow n into a smile, because fortune 
awaits you N< >W. Let me show yo u bow to BE more, DO 
more. HAVE more i n this life. Don't be a WISHER and a 
HOPER and a HESITATOR, held down by foolish doubts 
and empty fears. Don't be timid , clinging; wit h a drowning 
man's grasp to your slender salary, jus t because you 
thin k money-makin g is a myster y tha t you can never 
learn. I wil l do my level best to pu t you on the quick road 
to independence and show you how to get a look-in at luxur y and happiness. Don't be a boss-seared, job-hugging, 
wage-cowed slave; stop doin g the dul l drudge lock-step to 
and from work . Let me set off the sky-rocket of your 
ambition NOW. Pardon m y plain talk , bu t plai n talk , like 
the arnica yon put on a burn, stings lik e blazes bu t goes 
straight to the spot. Plain tal k stings good men to action; 
prods their pride and put s them on the primrose pathway 
to prosperity. 
Make Profits For Yourself—Not For Others. Start Now. 
Writ e m e at once and begi n pullin g out 
of 1 h e wag e rut. N o reason wh y yo u canno t hav e peopl e everywher e remittin g money 
t o yo u whil e yo u sit in you r home or office, 
gathering in BIG PROFITS. Mine is the ideal proposition 
for Aspiring Success Seekers and Aspiring Money Makers. 
You should quickl y become a dail y bank depositor and 
see your profits pile up and bring you al l those wonderful, 
long-wanted, wished-for luxuries of life, whic h wil l give 
you priceless independence and enable you to bid your 
pay-check pals good-bye forever. Remember I supply 
everythin g you need to start, including my $10 Correspondence Instruction Course which I furnis h you FREE. 
Write me. as you value vour futur e success, NOW' T 
alla n C. Butler , 14 6 Factories Bldg., Toledo. Ohio 
PROFITABLE SPAR E TIME WORK 
Colored agents wanted to take orders for our high 
grade calling cards. Big demand everywhere. Exclusive territory. Write now for samples and terms. 
TH E HOUSE O F CHOWNING. Indianapolis. Ind. 
D O YO U BU Y BOOKS ? 
See Special "List, Page 51 
Mention T m CRISI S 
iAgents $60 WEEKLY 
e&EgP Robinson Folding Bath Tub. Big seller. Costs little, 
111 1
 plumbing, litte water. Weight 15 pounds, 
T ^^^^fold s Into small roll. Ful l length baths, far better 
than ten tubs guaranteed 10 years. $10 a day easily made. Write 
for free tub offer. Robinson Cabinet Mfg. Co., 334 factories Bldg.,Tolodo,O. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 49 
To the Masonic Fraternity 
The CRISIS has the honor to announce the 
publication of the most important book on 
Negro Masonry since Upton's epoch-making 
work; and the only book written by an authority from our own point of view. 
TH E AUTHO R 
is 
George W. Crawford, 32° 
A graduate of Tuskegee, Talladega and Yale, formerly 
clerk of the Probate Court of New Haven and now a 
practicing lawyer there. Mr. Crawford is one of the best 
informed masons in the country. 
TH E BOO K 
is 
Prince Hal l and His Followers 
An d is a carefully argued defense of the legitimacy of 
Negro Masonry in the United States, with notes and 
documents. 
READY NOW 
Price One Dollar. Postage Extra. 
ORDER NOW AGENTS WANTE D 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: New Yor k 
Mention TH E CRISIS 50 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LEGA L DIRECTOR Y 
Telephones: 
/Central 104-W 
(Main 61 
HARR Y E. DAVI S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW NOTARY PUBLIC 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland, Ohio 
Office L . D. Telephone 3297 Market 
Kesidence L . D. Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORG E A. DOUGLA S 
COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRIS 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn. 
GEORG E W. MITCHEL L 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia Pa. 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
34 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
ATTORN EYS-AT-LAW 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
PERSONA L CARD S 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUD E E. CURTIS 
SURGEON DENTIST 
188 W. 135th Street New York City 
WILLIA M L. BEL L 
ARCHITEC T 
138 1/2 Auburn Avenue Atlanta, Ga. 
E. ALDAM A JACKSON 
Graduate Institute of Musical Art, Organist and Director 
of Music St. Mark's M. E. Church 
Teacher of Theory and Piano 
Theory course embraces elementary and advanced 
Harmony or Counterpoint. 
Private or Class Work 
Studio : 30 W . 132d STREET , NE W YOR K CITY 
Phones: Office, Bell 4059; New 420-M 
Residence, New 733-A 
THOS. E. GREENE , JR. 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELOR-AT-LAW 
NOTARY PUBLIC 
Maloney Block Youngstown, Ohio 
B. F. BOOT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
57 N . Second Street 
Memphis Tenn. 
THOMA S W. HOLME S 
ATTORNEY AT LAW 
43 1/2 Decatur Street Atlanta. Georgia 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August 
Box 25, Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, O. 
Telephone 4214 Greeley 
BRANIC'S EXPRESS 
ANDRE W J . BRANIC , PROPRIETOR 
Packing and Shipping—Goods Forwarded to All Parts 
of the World 
Orders by mail or 'phone receive prompt attention. 
Trunks stored, 25c. per month. 
459 Seventh Avenue New York 
WANTE D 
Agent s fo r TH E CRISIS . Dignifie d work . 
7 0 Fift h Avenue , Ne w York . 
Mak e $35 to $65 a week showing this great Tailor-Book. , 
Goods so much finer and prices 
SO much lower, everyone sees 
the difference at a glance. 
Specia l Offer 
To prove our unequal led quality, 
we will let you order at the 
wholesale price, a Sample Suit or 
even a pair of pants as low as $2.48 
—and no extra charges even forthe 
biggest peg top styles. You can 
now make more quick money and buy your 
own fine tailored clothes cheaper than you ever thought possil e We prepay the charges on every order and don't keep a cent of 
any customer's money unless he is well pleased. Lot us send you 
this fine sample outfit and show you how to take the most perfect 
measures for the finest tailoring on the market. Write . 
The Chicago Tailors' Association 
Dept. 9 4 1 • Van Buren and Market Sts.. CHICAGO 
Mention TH E CRISIS A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
TH E QUES T O F TH E SILVE R FLEECE . (W . E . B . D U Bois) $1.3 5 
HOUS E BEHIN D TH E CEDARS . (Charles W . Chesnutt) 1.50 
HAZEL . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) 1.00 
TH E AUTOBIOGRAPH Y OF A N EX-COLORE D MAN . (A nonymous).... . 1.20 
LYRIC S O F LOWL Y LIFE . (Pau l Laurence Dunbar) 1.25 
TH E MARRO W O F TRADITION . (Charles W . Chesnutt) 1.50 
TH E SPOR T O F TH E GODS . (Pau l Laurence Dunbar) 1.50 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . (Mau d Cuney Hare ) 1.50 
A NARRATIV E O F TH E NEGRO . (Leil a Amo s Pendleton) 1.50 
SOUL S O F BLAC K FOLK . (W . E . B . D u Bois) 1.25 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . (Kell y Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTOR Y O F TH E NEGRO . (B . G. Brawley) 1.25 
HAL F A MAN . (Mar y Whit e Ovington) 1.00 
MIN D O F PRIMITIV E MAN . (Franz Boas) 1.50 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
JOH N BROWN . (W . E . B . D U Bois) 1.25 
NEGR O I N AMERI CA N HISTORY . (J. W . Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W . Crawford) 1.00 
LIBERIA . (Frederick Starr) 1.00 
FACT S O F RECONSTRUCTION . (John R . Lynch ) 1.50 
STOR Y O F TH E NEGRO . 2 Volumes. (Booke r T . Washington) 3.0 0 
MASTERPIECE S OF NEGR O ELOQUENCE . (Alic e Moor e Dunbar, Editor) 2.5 0 
POEM S O F PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2 .0 0 
TH E AFRICA N ABROAD . 2 Volumes. (William H . Ferris) 5.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T O F TH E HOUS E O F BONDAGE . (Kell y Miller) 1.50 
TH E COLORE D INVENTOR . (Henr y E . Baker) 1 5 
A C HILD' S STOR Y O F DUNBAR . (Julia L . Henderson) 2 5 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: New York City 
Mention TH E CRISIS Provident Hospital and Training School 
for Colored Nurses 
Aim: To keep its technic equal to the best 
Founded 1891 
The first training school for colored 
nurses in this country, Freedman's 
excepted. 
Comprises a training school for 
nurses, hospital, dispensary, and 
thoroughly equipped children's department; when funds are ample, postgraduate work may be undertaken. 
The hospital is open to all. The 
races co-operate in the board of 
trustees, in the medical staff and in 
administration; the institution is the 
only one of its kind in which a colored 
man may act as interne. 
Cost of buildings and equipment, 
$100,000; free from debt. Endowment, 
$50,000, contributed mostly by wills 
made by colored men. Additional endowment needed, $50,000. 
The nurses' course covers three 
years; training and instruction given 
by both races, according to the highest 
36th and Dearborn Sts., Chicago, ILL. modern standards. 
PRINTIN G AN D ENGRAVIN G 
We are especially prepared to print 
Catalogs of Institutions, Reports 
of Institutions and Organizations 
Books, Pamphlets and Programs 
Superior Workmanship Prompt Attention 
We Print THE CRISIS 
ROBER T N. WOOD , Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T Telephone: Lenox 6667 NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISIS 