CHRISTMAS 
CRISIS 
1911 Those Xmas Gifts 
•J O f course it's early, but after all Christmas is but three little weeks 
away. 
tf Now we've prepared a Christmas card with one of TH E CRISIS girls 
on it. Yo u know the one—with wistful face and the shadow of songs 
in her eyes. 
<J This we've printed daintily in delicate brown on fine cardboard, 
together with a sprig of holly, naturally, and that sort of thing. We've 
added some words like these: 
DEA R FRIEND : 
T o wish you MERR Y CHRISTMA S I have 
ordered TH E CRISIS sent to you throughout the 
GLA D NE W YEAR . 
CJ Al l this, of course, in deep old gothic type with initials illuminated— 
CRISIS way. Quite a lovely card in itself. 
^ Really, now, haven't you several friends of varied color who would 
appreciate this gift? W e hope our supply will last. 
i][ A postcard mill bring you as many of these cards as you wish. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RAGE S 
Published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, at 
20 Vesey Street, New York City. 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS . Editor ( OSWAL D GARRISO N V1LLAR D 
M . D . MACLEAN , Managing Editor Contributing J c HARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
FRAN K M . TURNER . Circulation Manager Editors ) W S BRAITHWAIT E 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY , Advertising Manager ( KELL Y MILLE R 
CONTENT S FOR DECEMBER , 1911 
COVE R DESIG N AN D DEPARTMEN T HEADINGS . By Louise R. 
Latimer. 
COVE R PICTUR E AFTE R ALBRECH T DURER' S "ADORATIO N O F 
TH E THRE E WIS E MEN. " 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 51 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 58 
OPINIO N 60 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 64 
EDITORIA L 65 
WENDEL L PHILLIPS : Portrait 66 
WENDEL L PHILLIPS . By Charles Edward Russell 67 
JESU S CHRIS T I N GEORGIA : A Story 70 
TH E STOR Y O F A "DESPERADO. " By William Pickens 74 
HISTORI C DAY S IN DECEMBER . By L . M . Hershaw 75 
TH E BURDE N 76 
NATIVITY : Poem by M . W. Ovington 76 
WHA T T O REA D 77 
CIRCULATION , 16,00 0 COPIE S 
Agents wanted who can furnish references. 
Entered as second-class matter in the post office at New Yor k City. 4 8 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
FORWAR D 
MARC H YOU R SON OFF T O Wilberforce University 
Th e only school in the country for 
Negro Yout h which has a Militar y Department equipped by the National 
Government, and commanded by a detailed 
United States Arm y Officer. 
DEPARTMENTS 
MILITAR Y SCIENTIFI C 
NORMA L TECHNICA L 
COMMERCIA L THEOLOGICA L 
CLASSICA L MUSICA L 
PREPARATOR Y 
Bankin g taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank . Twelve 
Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, 
Te n Buildings. Healthful surroundings, 
exceptional community. Maintained in 
par t by the State of Ohio which supplies 
facilities for the thorough training of 
teachers. 
Fal l term began September 19th, 1011. 
Writ e for Catalog. 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH, President 
WM . A . JOINER , Superintendent, C . N. 
I. Department. 
Address all communications to 
BO X 36 WILBERFORCE , OHI O 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
The courses of study include Hig h School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work 
Offers full courses in the following departments: College, Normal, High School, 
Grammar School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fall Term Opened Sept. 27, 1911. 
For information address 
President R. W. McGranahan 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND, VA. 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological 
seminaries. 
A n Academy, with manual training, giving 
a preparation for life or for college. 
The positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of 
class work, its fine new buildings and wellequipped laboratories and library , prepare a 
faithful student for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY , President 
Shaw University 
This institution of learning, established in 1865, 
has industria l departments for both young men 
and young women, as well as college, normal and 
preparatory departments. Ther e are also Schools 
of Law , Medicine , Pharmac y and Theology. 
Th e facilities have recently been increased. 
Othe r improvements are being planned that wil l 
be. completed within the next two years. 
Applications should be made several months or 
a year i n advance, for it has become impossible 
during the last few years to receive all who 
apply. Th e present enrollment is over 600. 
Th e academic year begins on the Thursda y 
nearest the first day of October and continues for 
thirty-two consecutive weeks. Th e charges are 
moderate. Catalogues furnished upon application. 
Address TH E PRESIDEN T 
Shaw University, Raleigh, N . 0, 
Mention The Crisis THE CRISIS 
Atlant a Baptist College 
ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Established 1867 
A School for Boys and Men 
DEPARTMENTS : 
GRADE S FIN E EQUIPMEN T 
ACADEM Y STRON G FACULT Y 
COLLEG E DIVINIT Y SCHOO L 
Societies, Debating Clubs and Athletics. 
For further information address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
American Church Institute 
for Negroes 
SI X SCHOOL S 
The Bishop Payne Divinit y School, Peten -
burgh, Va. , Warden , the Reverend O. B . Bryan , 
D.D. ; St. Augustine's School, Raleigh, N . C., for 
normal and collegiate training, the Reverend A . 
B . Hunter , Principal; the St. Pau l Norma l and 
Industrial School, Lawrenceville , Va. , the Reverend Jame s S. Russell, Principal; St. Atha -
nasius' School, Brunswick, 6-a., Mr . A . N . Perry , 
Principal: St. Mark's School, Birmingham, Ala. , 
the Reverend C. W . Brooks, Principal; the 
Vicksbur g Industrial School, Vicksburg , Miss., 
the Reverend W . H . Marshall, Principal. Fo r 
information apply to the principa l at any school 
or to the Reverend Samue l H . Bishop, General 
Agent, 416 Lafayett e Street, New Yor k City . 
BOOK S 
Publications of the N A. A. C. P. 
Th e N . A . A . C P. has for sale the following 
pamphlets: 
1. Disfranchisement: A powerful argument by 
the Rev. John Hayne s Holmes. 
2. Education in the South: Facts about the 
discrimination against the Negro. By the Rev. 
Horac e Bumstead, former president of Atlanta 
University. 
3. Th e Real Race Problem: A scientific comparison of the black and the white man by 
America's foremost anthropologist, Prof. Boas, of 
Columbia University. 
4. Social Control. By Jane Addams, of Hul l 
House . 
5. Th e Negro as a Soldier. B y BrigadierGeneral Burt, U . S. A . 
FIVE CENTS EACH, THREE DOLLARS A HUNDRED 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
JAME S F . M ORTON , J R., A .M. , Author and Publisher 
Forceful, rational, comprehensive. A n arsenal 
of facts and unanswerable arguments. Invaluable 
for propaganda. Rea d the chapter on "Th e Bug ­
bear of Social Equality, " which is a veritable 
eye-opener. Thousands already Bold. Agents 
wanted everywhere. 
PRIC E 25 CENT S 
Address the Autho r at 244 West 143d Street, 
New York , N . T . 
Do you like the 
CHRISTMA S CRISIS? 
If so, write us. 
Mention 
ADVERTISER 49 
" A noteworthy book of the epoch." 
The Souls of 
Black Folk 
By W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS 
Eighth Edition 
"It is one of the noteworthy 
books, not merely of a year, but of 
the epoch. Its every page is filled 
with vigor, spontaneity and spirituality. ''—Boston Transcript. 
'' A stripping bare of the moral 
and mental anatomy of the African 
in America so as to reveal the naked 
soul in its primitive simplicity, 
seared and scarred by ages of suffering. ''—New York Age. 
With Author's Portrait, $1.20 Net 
At book stores or from the publishers 
A. C. McCLURG & CO. 
CHICAGO 
PUBLICATION S 
A. M . E . Book Concern Philadelphia, Pa. 
TH E POEM S O F PHILLIS WHEATLEY . 
Reprint of first edition 1773; a valuable book. 
Price , $1.00. 
TH E NEGR O PROBLEM . A n analysis: Wha t 
It Is Not and Wha t It Is; by R . K. Wright, Jr . 
I n pamphlet form, 15 cents. 
TH E COLORE D REGULARS . B y T . G. 
Steward, Chaplain U . S. A. , retired. Price , $1.50. 
EVOLUTIO N AN D LIFE . B y Algernon B . 
Jackson, Surgeon-in-chief Merc y Hospital. Price , 
75 cents. 
TH E NEGR O I N PENNSYLVANIA . A Study 
in Economi c History ; B y R. R. Wright, Jr. , 
Sometime Research Fellow in Sociology in the 
Universit y of Pennsylvania. (Ready Nov. 16th.) 
Price , Paper , $2.00; Cloth, $2.50. 
Address 
A . M . E . BOO K CONCER N 
631 Pin e Street, Philadelphia, Pa . 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
15 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A. G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
THE CRISIS. 50 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
TH E LIF E AN D WORK S O F 
Paul Laurence Dunbar 
Containing his complete poetical works, his best short 
stories, numerous anecdotes and a complete biography of 
the famous poet. 
By 
LIDA KEC K WIGGINS 
And an introduction by 
WILLIA M DEA N HOWELL S 
From "Lyrics of Lowly Life 
Profusely illustrated with over half a hundred full-page 
photo and half-tone engravings. 
Cloth $2 Half Morocco $2.75 Full Morocco $3.75 
SALE S AGEN T 
J . G . GUILE S 
214A St. Antione Street Montreal, Can. 
National Negro Doll Company's Special Price List of 
NEGRO DOLLS 
FOR TH E CHRISTMAS SEASON, 1911-1912 
CLASS A 
Size Price 
12 inch $1.00 
15 inch 1.50 
17 inch 2.25 
18 inch 2.75 
20 inch 3.00 
21 inch. . . $3.50 
26 inch 5.25 
30 inch 6.25 
32 inch 8.00 
36 inch , 8.50 
No Order will be sent C. O . D. , unless a part of the price accompanies 
the order, as people often order C . O . D . and do not take them from the 
express office. 
The company has on deposit at the One-Cent Savings Bank, in Nashville, 
Tenn., sufficient funds to guarantee the return of all moneys where orders 
cannot be filled. 
You will be allowed to examine dolls at express office. Send 5 cents 
for a Doll Book. 
NATIONA L NEGR O DOL L COMPAN Y 
R. H . BOYD , President H . A . BOYD , Manager 
519 Secon d Avenue , North NASHVILLE , TENNESSE E 
Mention TH E CRISIS, TH E CRISI S 
Volume Three DECEMBER , 1911 Number Two 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
Th e Negr o population i n the Unite d 
States has grown as follows, according 
to the latest census figures: 
1790 .. . 757,208 — 
1800 .. . 1,002,037 — 
1810 .. . 1,377,808 — 
1820 .. . 1,771,656 
1830 .. . 2,328,642 
1840 .. . 2,873,648 
1850 .. . 3,638,808 : 
1860 .. . 4,441,830 
1870 .. . 4,880,009 
1880 .. . 6,580.793 , 
1890 .. . 7,470,004 . 
1900 .. . 8,833,994 
1910 .. . 9,828,294 __ _ 
^ Great increase in circulation is shown 
in the report for the year ending Au ­
gust 31, of the colored branch of the 
Louisvill e Publi c Library ; 65,175 being 
the numbe r of books loaned. Th e circulation for the past six years is as follows: First year 17,838; second year, 
30,259; third year, 35,910; fourth year, 
50,386; fifth year, 58,870; sixth year, 
65,175. 
<B I n Indianapolis and Columbus, O., 
efforts are being made to erect colored 
branches of the Y . M . C. A . I n Indianapolis the colored people secured i n ten 
days subscriptions of $104,726.18. A site 
is now being sought and the construction of the buildin g wil l be rushed. In 
Columbus, O., the colored people expect 
to raise $8,000 to supplement the $12,000 
furnished by the Centra l Y . M . C. A . 
q Th e Hospita l and Healt h Boar d of 
Kansa s Cit y has turned over the old 
Cit y Hospita l to a colored staff of physicians and surgeons after a fight of several years. Abou t $20,000 has been spent 
in remodeling the buildings. Th e hospital wil l have four internes annually and 
a training school for about twenty 
nurses. 
•J Th e Genera l Educationa l Boar d reports that it has contributed since its 
founding between $600,000 and $700,000 
to forty-one schools for Negroes. In 
only one case has money been given 
to an institution for higher training, 
although funds have been promised Fis k 
Universit y if it meets some very difficult 
conditions. 
<J Th e Mohon k conference on dependent people has had another meeting at 
Mr . Smiley's hotel, where the above-mentioned people are not expected to stop. 
<J Th e Whit e Ros e Industria l Associa ­
tion of Ne w Yor k reports 1,182 free 
lodgings given during the year 1910; 960 
paid lodgings and 795 meals. It has 
helped 226 persons to find work ; has 
given forty-three meetings and entertainments. Th e total receipts have been 
$3,625. 
«J Th e Commo n Well-Far e Clu b of the 
Distric t of Columbi a is a movement 
among colored people and white friends 
for better housing conditions, elimination 
of the alleys, the strengthening of colored social settlements and simila r work. 
IJ Th e inscription to be placed on 
the new Cit y Hal l in Oakland , Cal., was 
written by P . J. Randall, a colored 
lawyer. 
<J Colore d people in many parts of the 
country have been holding meetings to 
honor the memor y of the late Justice 
Harlan . 52 THE CRISIS 
*l A Musi c Schoo l Settlement for Ne ­
groes began classes Monday , Novembe r 
20, at 202 West 63d Street. Th e school 
is under the direction of Davi d Mannes, 
Davi d Irwi n Marti n and Miss Hele n 
Elis e Smith . Careful instruction is given 
daily at twenty-rive cents a lesson. 
f& Th e colored congregational churches 
and Straight Universit y are tryin g to 
establish a social settlement in Ne w 
Orleans. 
<J Charle s C. Atwater, of Springfield, 
Mass., left a number of charitable bequests, among whic h was $5,000 to the 
Brookly n Hom e for Age d Colore d 
People. Elizabet h K . Steele has left 
$1,000 to the Hom e for Age d Colore d 
People at Philadelphia . 
<| Th e Texa s organization of colored 
physicians wit h fifty members has met 
and discussed questions of health and 
sanitation. 
«J Abou t $70,000 wil l be distributed to 
various institutions for colored people 
according to the wil l of An n M . Fisher, 
a colored woman of Brooklyn . Hampto n 
and Tuskegee each get $10,000; $5,000 
goes to the Siloam Presbyterian Church , 
and there are various other charitable 
and personal bequests. Th e large residue 
of the estate wil l go to Francis H . Gil ­
bert, a colored lawyer, who acts as executor of the will . 
Phili p Brookins, a colored man wh o 
recently died at Richmond , Ind., gave 
$2,250 to the Reed Memoria l Hospital. 
Th e gift was made on account of a favor 
done Brookin s several years ago by a 
Ne w Yor k millionaire , formerly of 
Richmond . 
•J Representatives from twenty-five 
counties in the State of Oklahoma have 
met and formed a Negr o La w and Orde r 
League. 
<J Thre e organizations in Ne w Yor k 
City—the Associatio n for Improvin g the 
Industrial Conditio n of Negroe s in Ne w 
York , the Nationa l League for the Pro ­
tection of Colore d Wome n and the Com ­
mittee on Urba n Conditions Amon g Ne ­
groes—have united into the Nationa l 
League on Urba n Conditions Amon g 
Negroes. Th e purpose of the new organization is to do constructive and preventive social wor k for improvin g the 
social and economic conditions among 
Negroes in urban centers, to secure and 
train social workers and to make certain 
social studies. 
Durin g the last year these organiza ­
tions have collected facts concerning 
twenty local societies and institutions, 
made a survey in the Harle m district, 
superintended fresh-air wor k among 
Negroes, operated a mode l camp and 
secured funds for a playground. Pro ­
fessor E . R. A . Seligman is chairman of 
the executive committee of the new organization, and Mr . Eugen e K . Jones is 
the field secretary. 
<I I n Indianapolis a memoria l is being 
planned for the late Judge Stubbs. Tw o 
small colored boys stood in front of the 
memoria l headquarters lately. Fo r . a 
lon g time they examined carefully the 
pictures in the window, and then one of 
them timidl y thrust his head through the 
door. 
"Is dis de place where yo ' all give 
money to Judge Stubbs? " he asked. 
Miss Alic e Graydon , wh o has charge 
of the headquarters, invited the boys in 
and endeavored to make clear to them 
the purpose of receiving contributions. 
Finall y they indicated that they understood what it was all about and started 
to leave the room. A t the door they 
stopped and discussed the matter in low 
tones. The n they returned to Miss Gray -
don's desk and handed her six cents. 
"Dis am all we can dig up jis' now, " 
explained one of them. "We'l l see de 
other newsies. Mayb e dey all wil l gib 
something. " 
«J Th e colore d Y . M . C. A . of Philadelphia has started to raise $25,000 to purchase and equip a building . 
<| A t Tampa , Fla. , the whit e people recently built a fine hospita l for themselves, but made no provisio n for the 
Negroes. A s a result the Dunba r Lit ­
erary Society has started a Negr o hospital movement. 
POLITICAL . 
Th e statements of several of the parties during the campaign show here and 
there the extent to whic h colored men 
in the Nort h hol d politica l office. In Ne w 
Yor k City , for instance, it is said that 
Tamman y Hal l in the last fourteen years 
has appointed the followin g Negr o officials: Assistant Distric t Attorney , As ­
sistant Corporatio n Counsel, Deputy 
Commissione r of Taxes, 27 inspectors of 
various kinds, 19 clerks and stenographers, 20 messengers and some 400 
laborers. 
I n Cleveland, O., there are said to be 
175 colored men under the city administration, drawin g the sum of $87,560 a 
year in wages. Thes e men include a 
membe r of the city council and seven 
clerks and inspectors. 
<I Whe n the Republica n Nationa l Com ­
mittee meets in Washingto n in December, Senator Jonathan Bourn e wil l revive 
the old plan of basing representation in 
the nominatin g conventions on the party 
vote cast rather than on population. This 
woul d reduce the representation of the 
Southern States approximately as follows: Alabama , 24 to 7; Arkansas, 18 to 
10; Florida , 12 to 5; Georgia , 28 to 9; ALON G THE 
Louisiana , 20 to 5; Mississippi, 20 to 5; 
Nort h Carolina , 24 to 17; Oklahoma , 20 
to 16; South Carolina , 18 to 4; Tennessee, 
24 to 17; Texas, 40 to 11 and Virginia , 
24 to 10. 
Kentucky , Marylan d and Missouri, all 
border States, woul d receive increases as 
follows: Kentucky , 26 to 31; Maryland , 
16 to 17; Missouri , 36 to 43. 
<J Th e white Republican politicians of 
Georgi a held a meeting in Maco n from 
whic h colored men were excluded. Th e 
white men claim that the blame for this 
was on the hotel; but the Negroe s say 
that this is an attempt to start a "Lil y 
White " Republican organization in 
Georgia . 
<J Careful organization among Negroe s 
tn Marylan d did much to defeat the disfranchisement amendment. Sixty-five 
colored wome n volunteered their aid to 
teach the Negroe s how to manipulate the 
difficult ballot. 
q Th e colored voters of Memphis have 
been questioning the candidates for 
mayo r to know what they intend to do 
after election. Bot h candidates were 
asked if they woul d give colored people 
police protection in the use of public 
parks; if they woul d eliminate saloons 
from Negr o residence districts; if they 
woul d allow colored physicians and 
nurses to attend colored patients in city 
hospitals; if they woul d have colored 
physicians to examine the children in 
colored schools, and if they woul d close 
policy shops. Bot h candidates, with some 
evasions, practically promised all these 
things. 
q In Philadelphi a a considerable portion 
of the colored vote helped elect Rudolp h 
Blankenbur g as reform Mayor. Th e ma ­
jorit y of the Negr o vote, however, went 
to the Republican machine candidate. 
«J In Pueblo, Colorado, Lero y James, 
the only Negr o candidate in the first election under Pueblo's new charter, drew 
first position on the ballot. Th e eightyseven candidates drew lots for positions. 
q In - the proposed reorganization plan 
of West Virgini a two members of the 
Republican State Committee-at-Large 
are to be colored men. 
q Mayo r Howse , of Nashville , Tenn. , 
owes his re-election very largely to the 
Negr o vote. 
q In Chester, Pa., Willia m H . Mack , a 
well-known colored man, was candidate 
the select council. 
q One hundred and fifty delegates of 
the Coalitio n League met in Springfield, 
Illinois, and adopted resolutions declarin g themselves opposed to all present 
politica l parties. The y urge the seventyfive thousand colored voters of the State 
to vote independently. 
COLOR LINE 53 
q Th e Negr o vote played an important 
part in the Norfolk , Va. , election. In ­
deed, there are growin g signs throughout the South of the revival of the political importance of colored men. 
EDUCATION . 
Fis k University , the Negr o college of 
Nashville , Tenn., has secured $119,000 of 
the $300,000 to be raised in order to receive the Genera l Edu catio n Board's 
appropriation of $60,000; $200,000 of this 
lund is for endowment. This effort to 
put a first-class college on its feet deserves the co-operation of all. 
Mr . Julius Rosenwald, the Chicago 
merchant who has given so'muc h to colored Y . M . C. A . work, has been makin g 
a trip to the South. H e visited Fis k 
University , Meharr y Medica l College and 
Tuskegee. Whil e at Fis k he said, " I 
wis h to express my optimism upon the 
future of the colored people in America . 
W e have every reason to feel that they 
are makin g strides forward. I am very 
glad to have the' opportunity of seeing 
a wor k that I had no idea existed in the 
manner it does exist." 
q Th e entire student body of the State 
Agricultura l and Mechanica l College at 
Greensboro has been in open rebellion 
on account of the increase of industrial 
work at the expense of academic work, 
and the introduction of Saturday class 
work. 
q O n Tuesday, Octobe r 10, the Rev. M . 
W . Gilbert was inaugurated president of 
Selma University . Representatives of 
many colored institutions of the South 
were present and made addresses. 
q Th e Missouri Negr o Teachers' Asso ­
ciation convened in Hannibal. Th e State 
Teachers' Association of Florid a wil l 
meet at Jacksonvill e during the Christmas holidays. Th e South Alabama Col ­
ored Teachers' Association met in Mo ­
bile with several hundred people in attendance. 
q In South Carolin a Negr o school children outnumber the whites; the cost of 
the respective school systems is, however, as follows: Whites, $1,684,976; 
Negroes, $368,802. 
q In Texa s there are 199,915 Negr o children of scholastic age, for each of whom 
the State apportions $6.80, or a total of 
$1,359,422, and there are 791,494 white 
children, for whom there is apportioned 
$5,382,159, makin g a total apportionment 
of the State available school funds by 
the State Boar d of Education for the current year of $6,741,581. This is the largest apportionment of State available 
school funds ever made in the history 
of the State for any scholastic year. 
q Th e new colored school at Iv y City , 
Distric t of Columbia , has been presented 54 THE CRISIS 
wit h a life-size portrait of Alexande r 
Crummell , after who m it is named, by 
the Negr o Society for Historica l Re ­
search. 
<J Th e new superintendent of Ne w Orleans has recommended that all the colored public schools have colored teachers, but so far his recommendation has 
been ignored. Several of the Ne w Orleans colored schools have white teachers. 
<I Th e large increase of students at the 
colored high schools i n Washingto n wil l 
lead to seven companies i n the cadet 
battalion instead of six. It is possible, 
therefore, that the battalion may be organized as a regiment. 
<J Th e cornerstone of Berea's new school 
for Negroes, to be known as the "Lin ­
coln Institute of Kentucky, " was laid in 
Shelby County, Ky. , by the president of 
Berea. Th e school has 440 acres of land 
and the first buildings wil l cost $110,000. 
Othe r buildings wil l bring the cost up to 
over a million . 
•J Th e Negr o Baptists of Texa s have 
raised more than $17,000 for their own 
educational institutions during the last 
year. 
<J Miss Bessie Bruington , a colored girl, 
has been appointed to the public schools 
o i Lo s Angeles, Cal . 
CHURCH . 
Th e Christian Recorde r says: "Whe n 
Bisho p Walters rose before the Ecu ­
menica l Conference at Toront o and said 
that the statistics of his church had alway s been wrong , and that the church 
<lid not want to publish the correct statistics because they woul d show many 
thousand fewer members than it was pretended the church had, we all hung our 
"heads. Ye t we all knew the statement 
of the bishop was true, not only of the 
A . M . E . Zio n Church , but our own 
church as well. W e claimed 800,000 members at the Genera l Conference, whil e the 
census gave us less than 500,000, and 
Bisho p Le e is unable to find now more 
than 600,000." 
<I Th e eighteenth annual session of the 
Afro-America n Presbyterian Counci l was 
held in Philadelphia . It is composed of 
ministers and laymen i n Ne w York , 
Pennsylvania , Ne w Jersey, Delaware , 
Marylan d and the Distric t of Columbia . 
*J Plymout h Congregationa l Church , 
Washington , D . C., has celebrated its 
thirtieth anniversary. 
€| Joh n R. Hawkins, secretary of education of the A . M . E . Church , reports that 
during the last year the colored people 
have raised $32,660 for the colored 
schools. Tha t these schools have 210 
teachers and 5,718 pupils. 
MEETINGS . 
Amon g the Negr o fairs recently held 
the most important was the Georgi a colored State fair at Macon . Amon g the 
attractions were a colored aviator, an 
education day and a woman's day. Ther e 
was a display of models of battleships 
sent by the Unite d States Government. 
A t Raleigh , N . C , the fair was a great 
success. 
Othe r fairs were held at Dyersburg , 
Tenn.; Tuscombia , Ala. ; Trou p County , 
Ga. ; Limeston e County , Ala. ; Nanse -
mon d County , Va. ; Augusta , Ga. ; Mont ­
gomery, Ala. ; Datesburg, S. C ; Chester 
County, S. C ; Charlotte , N . C , and Utica , 
Miss. 
•I Meetings of protest against lynchin g 
have been held in Milwaukee , Wis. ; Jersey City , N . J., and Hoboken , N . J. 
A memoria l service for the late Sarah 
J. Garnet was held in Brooklyn . 
ECONOMICS . 
Man y colored men wh o are in favor 
of labor unions are finding that after they 
get into the union they are discriminated 
against. 
<J Th e Marin e Cooks' and Stewards' 
Unio n of the Atlanti c Coast is forcing 
the Negroe s to join , and then "Jim-crowing " them in all possible ways. 
<I One of the most outrageous cases is 
the attempt of the Pavers' Unio n in Ne w 
Yor k to get ri d of the colored pavers. 
Durin g the panic of 1907 the colored 
pavers got behind in their dues to the 
Nationa l Union . Th e constitution says 
that if a union is three months i n arrears 
it may be suspended, but may appeal to 
the executive committee or to the nationa l meeting, and be reinstated on payment of dues. Th e colored union got 
three months in arrears on Friday ; on 
Monda y they tendered their dues in full. 
Th e treasurer not only refused to receive 
the dues, but the whit e unio n immediately got an injunction against the colored pavers, and this injunction took 
away from them even the right to appeal 
to the executive committee or to the 
national meeting. Fo r three years and 
four months the Negroe s have been fighting this monstrous injunction, but the 
white lawye r who m they hired took their 
money and did nothing. Finall y they got 
a colored lawyer, and the court imme ­
diately raised the injunction, but on condition that they pay $348 to the white 
union as reimbursement for the expense 
of the injunction. Wit h some help from 
the Nationa l Associatio n for the Ad ­
vancement of Colore d People, the colored 
union paid this sum and is now taking 
full steps to get back its rights, 
q Th e report of the chief of the State 
Bureau of Industria l Statistics of Penn -ALONG THE COLOR LINE 5 5 
sylvani a shows that in 150 selected industries there are 475,453 native American s 
employed, 325,489 foreigners and 6,862 
Negroes. Th e latter, whil e few in number, have increased, especially in industries requiring skill. Ther e are 2,663 Ne ­
groes in the bituminous coal mines and 
1,585 in iron and steel industries. In fertilize r plants there are also a good many 
Negroe s employed. 
1} Charle s Richie , of Washington , D . C , 
has invented a device for registering telephone calls, whic h is being considered by 
various companies. 
*J Negr o secret societies are about to establish the Fraterna l Ban k and Trust 
Compan y of Texas, with a capital of 
$100,000. 
<I Publi c Printe r Samuel B. Donnell y is 
being antagonized by the labor unions of 
Washington , D . C. Th e difficulty arose 
over the strike of bricklayers employed 
on a garage whic h is being built under 
Donnelly's supervision. Th e union men 
refused to wor k wit h a Negro , who, the 
Publi c Printe r said, had been certified 
by the Civi l Service Commissio n as a 
bricklayer. Non-unio n men were taken 
on by Donnell y to complete the work . 
Persons interested i n fair play ought to 
writ e to President Taft commending 
Donnelly's position. 
<J Heretofor e colored men have not been 
employed in the anthracite coal mines. 
A t present about 3,000 are being imported 
into the anthracite region of Pennsylvania. 
<J Moun d Bayou , Miss. , is about to open 
an oil mill . A frame warehouse and a 
two-story brick structure have already 
been erected at a cost of nearly $80,000. 
The y expect to have the wheels turning 
about January 1. 
<] Th e colored people of Jackson, Miss. , 
pay taxes on $1,000,000 wort h of property. Th e Jackson Dail y News adds that 
the home-ownin g class are "quiet, and 
as a rule good citizens." 
<J A great many accidents are reported 
to Negr o workmen , showin g that very 
little precaution is taken by employers 
where a large number of colored men are 
employed. This mont h 17 deaths are reported in various industrial establishments. 
ART . 
September 28, at the Worceste r (Mass.) 
Festival, the first public performance in 
Americ a was given of the Fourt h Sym ­
phony, Op . 64, in D minor, "North , East, 
South and West, " by Henr y Hadley , the 
America n conductor-composer. This symphony was written for the Norfol k Festival and was originally performed there 
last June. Th e third movement of the 
symphony, the South, is a scherzo and is 
of Negr o character throughout, whim ­
sical and full of good humor. It does 
riot touch the more sombre or plaintive 
aspects of the Negr o character, 
q Brindis de Salas, a colored violinist of 
concert fame in Europe , has died in poverty in Buenos Ayres. H e was a Cuban, 
sixty years of age. Foun d among his 
effects were many decorations, including 
tokens of appreciation from the Germa n 
Empero r and the Kin g of Italy. 
*I Miss Haze l Harrison , pianist, of L a 
Porte , Ind., is now in Germany, and is 
to appear in Berli n and other European 
cities. 
<J Th e Washingto n (D. C.) Conserva ­
tory of Musi c announces the appointment of Miss Grcgori a Fraser, pianist, 
wh o wil l teach the Burrowe's kindergarten method of music study. Miss 
Frase r is a graduate of the Conservatory 
of Syracuse, Ne w York . 
f$ Octobe r 18 the violinist, Mr . Clarence 
Camero n White , virtuoso in the command of his instrument and feeling for it, 
gave a recital at the Oberli n Conserva ­
tory of Music , the institution of whic h 
he was formerly a student. 
<I "Fro m the Green Heart of the 
Waters, " a chorus for ladies' voices, by 
Samuel Coleridge-Taylor, was one of the 
•test pieces sung at the Roya l Nationa l 
Eisteddfod of Wales, August 8-11. Mr . 
Coleridge-Taylor was delegated to 
deliver the awards. 
<J Th e Albert a Musica l Competition Festival of 1911, open to musicians of the 
Fa r 'Northwest, was held in Edmonton , 
Canada, in May . Th e festival concluded 
with "Hiawatha's Weddin g Feast," by 
Mr . Coleridge-Taylor, the cantata chosen 
for the choral competition. 
<I Mme . Mau d Powell , the distinguished 
and remarkable violinist, has transcribed 
for the violi n and piano the piano transcription "Deep River, " a Negr o melody 
secured from America n sources by Mr . 
Coleridge-Taylor. It is a brilliant concert number, played wit h success by 
Mme . Powell , and lately furnished by 
her as a record for the Victo r talking 
machine. 
1$ Th e Schirme r Company, one of the 
leading musical publishing houses, announces among their recent publications 
"Poeme Erotique, " for piano, by Mr . 
Mellvill e Charlton. Mr . Charlton is assistant organist at Templ e Emanu-E l in 
Ne w Yor k City . 
1$ "Scenes from an Imaginary Ballet, " a 
suite of imaginative subtlety composed 
for the pianoforte by Mr . Samuel Cole ­
ridge-Taylor, is another of the Schirme r 
publications. It has been declared by 
the reviewers that the composer has 
never written anything more rarely distinctive than this poetically conceived 
suite. 56 THE CRISIS 
<I Th e annual concert of the Cle f Clu b 
of Ne w York , under the leadership of 
James Reese Europe , took place Novem ­
ber 9 before an audience of several thousand. Th e new compositions by Europe , 
Burleig h and others showed remarkable 
power. A sketch of the work- of this 
club wil l appear in a later number of 
TH E CRISIS. 
TH E COURT . 
A t Shreveport, La. , a judge has decided 
that a colored woma n cannot occupy a 
berth in a sleeper, even as a servant. 
1$ A police magistrate has decided that 
the segregation ordinance of Suffolk is 
unconstitutional. 
In Columbus, O., Graham Duell, a colored lawyer, went into a confectionery 
store for soda water and was refused by 
the proprietor. Mr . Duel l brought suit. 
Sections 4426-2 of the Revised Statutes 
of Ohi o provide in part "Tha t any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the foregoing section by denying to any citizen, except for reasons applicable alike to all citizens of every race 
and color, and regardless of color or 
race, the full enjoyment of any of the 
accommodations, advantages, facilities or 
privileges in said section enumerated, or 
by aiding or inciting such denial shall, 
for every such offense, forfeit and pay 
a sum of not less than $50 nor more than 
$500 to the person aggrieved thereby, to 
be recovered in any court of competent 
jurisdiction in the county where the said 
offense was committed. " 
Th e case was tried before a jury, but 
the judge took it out of the hands of the 
jury and ordered a verdict of acquittal. 
Mr . Duell will , however, take the case to 
the Circuit Court. 
<I It is said that the colored Elk s have 
wo n their right to exist in Virginia . 
<J In Indianapolis, Ind., a justice of the 
peace has decided that no restaurant may 
refuse the patronage of Negroes. This 
is the first decision in a crimina l case 
of this kin d ever given in Indiana. 
CRIME . 
O n Marc h 19 Mr . Booke r T. Washing ­
ton, principa l of Tuskegee Institute 
while seeking admittance to an apartment 
house on West Sixty-thir d Street, Ne w 
York , was severely beaten by a white 
man named Ulrich , helped by several bystanders. Ulric h was about to have Mr . 
Washingto n arrested, when Mr . Wash ­
ington revealed his identity and the 
police arrested Ulric h for felonious assault. A t the hearing the charge was 
changed to simple assault. Afte r much 
delay and many postponements the case 
was finally tried by three justices in Special Sessions on Novembe r 6. Th e main 
facts as to the beating were admitted by 
both sides, but Ulric h justified the attack 
on the ground that Mr . Washingto n had 
no business at the house and had insulted 
the woma n wh o lived wit h Ulrich , but 
wh o was not his wife. Mr . Washingto n 
contended that he was tryin g to find Mr . 
D . C. Smith, auditor of Tuskegee, who m 
he thought was livin g at the house wit h 
a family whose name Mr . Washingto n 
had forgotten. Mr . Smit h did not appear 
as witness. B y a vote of two to one 
Ulric h was acquitted. 
<J I n Oklahoma there has been a race 
war, the cause of whic h is difficult to 
know. Colore d papers say that it started 
in a gamblin g hell wit h colored and white 
gamblers. Whit e papers report that the 
trouble was caused by a colored man running against a white woma n and pushing 
her off the sidewalk. Th e whites tried to 
lync h a Negro, but were scared to hear 
that the colored people were rising. Th e 
result was a widespread panic and the 
report that 10,000 Negroe s were marching on the town. Th e militi a were immediately sent to the town, and they pro ­
ceeded to disarm the colored people. In 
all it seems that two were killed , one 
white and one colored man, and three 
wounded in this affair. 
<I A t Honeapath, S. C , a Negr o named 
Willis Jackson was lynched on Octobe r 
10 under circumstances particularly 
shameless, even for this shameless year. 
H e was accused of attacking a ten-yearold child and was hanged to a tree by 
his feet and riddled wit h bullets. His 
fingers were cut off for souvenirs afterward. Th e little girl had been takin g a 
cow to pasture when she said the man 
assaulted her. She "got away from the 
brute," says the account, and on her way 
home met a man to who m she told the 
story. Th e lynchin g followed. Th e mob 
was led by the loca l membe r of the State 
Legislature , Joshua W . Ashley , and his 
son, while Victo r B. Cheshire, editor of 
the local paper, the Intelligencer, and one 
of Governo r Blease's staff, took part and 
got out a special edition of his paper to 
tell about it. "Th e lynchin g took place 
at midnight, " he wrote, "and two hours 
later the big press was grindin g out 
papers telling of the happy event." ' I n 
his account of the crime he tells how "the 
Intelligencer man went out to see the fun 
and wit h not the least objection to being 
a party to help lync h the brute." Th e 
coroner's jur y found that the Negr o had 
come to his death "at the hands of persons unknown, " but the better element of 
South Carolin a is stirred and demands an 
investigation. Th e Anderso n Count y 
Ministers' Conference passed resolutions 
hotly condemning the lynching . In a recent speech Governo r Blease said he had 
been informed by the sheriff of the situation and had wire d instructions to the 
sheriff. ALONG THE COLOR LINE 57 
"Th e telegram to Sheriff King, " said 
the Governor, "said: 'Kee p in touch with 
the Honeapath affair and send me a report to-morrow mornin g telling me what 
is goin g on.' 
"Sheriff Kin g received that telegram, 
and he understood its meaning. Nex t 
mornin g I received his report, and it was 
exactly what I expected. A s a matter of 
fact, if it had been any different I woul d 
have been greatly disappointed. " 
Th e Governo r went on to say that 
rather than use the powe r of his office in 
deterring white men from "punishing that 
nigge r brute," he "woul d have resigned 
the office and come to Honeapath and 
led the mob. " 
q A t Washington , Ga., a Negr o charged 
wit h murde r was lynched Octobe r 28. A t 
Caruthersville , Mo. , two Negroe s were 
lynched. Th e reason seems to be that 
they were suspicious characters, and were 
found hidin g in the shrubbery by two 
white girls. 
I n Manchester, Ga., a Negr o was 
lynched. Someone had assaulted the 
yardmaste r wit h a brick and he was suspected. 
A t Marshall , Tex., a colored man 
choked a white woma n and demanded 
matches of her daughter-in-law. H e was 
lynched. 
A t Dublin , Ga., a Negr o was accused 
of assaulting a white woman . H e was 
lynched. 
A t Forest City , Tenn., a Negr o was 
lynched. H e was charged with attempting to assault a farmer's wife. 
A t Clarkesville , Tex., a colored man 
was accused of attacking a white woma n 
and her mother. H e was lynched. 
A t Meridian , Miss. , a colored man was 
lynched for strikin g a white man wit h 
a stick. 
A t Irwinton , Ga., a colored man wh o 
entered a white woman's room and fled 
at her cry was lynched. 
Fo r abusive language to a woma n a 
Negr o was lynched at Hope , Ark . 
Othe r unsuccessful attempts at lynch ­
in g have been made at Arkansas, South 
Carolina , Nort h Carolina , Kansa s and 
Ne w Yor k City . 
I n Ozark , Ala. , a colored man pursued 
by a mob committed suicide, 
q Policeme n have kille d their usual 
quota of colored men. 
I n Houston , Tex., a Negr o shot by a 
policeman is at the point of death. 
A t Cambridge , Md. , another Negr o was 
shot. 
q A t Estherwood , La. , a Negr o was acquitted by the Unite d States Court, but 
had to be put back in jail to keep him 
from being lynched. 
q O n a Ne w Orleans ferryboat a Negr o 
announced that he could whip any white 
man on the boat. Afte r a whil e several 
whit e men started after him. Th e result 
is that two white men and the Negr o 
are dead, and two other white men seriously wounded. 
q Joseph Dunlap, a white man, killed 
Charles Middleton , a colored man, in 
Sumter, S. C. Ther e was no charge 
against the murdered man, but the murderer was angry at somebody else, 
q In Lewisbur g and Arcadia , small 
towns near Birmingham, Ala. , six white 
men and eleven Negroes have been killed 
during the past eighteen months. Th e 
reason seems to be unknown , but the 
sheriffs are at last threatening to look 
into the matter. 
q In Brunswick , Ga., L . O. O'Berry , a 
white man, has been sentenced to hang 
for killin g a colored woma n and her 
daughter. 
q Tw o white men have been indicted 
for the lynchin g of six Negroes at Lak e 
City , Fla. , last spring. 
AFRICA . 
B y the terms of the Morocc o agreement between Franc e and Germany a 
portion of the Frenc h Cong o somewhat 
larger than Kansa s has been turned over 
to Germany. It contains 1,000,000 
Negroes. 
q Th e report of the Lago s West Afric a 
Railwa y shows that the gross revenue 
last year was over $1,000,000, and the 
net profit $450,000. These are the largest 
figures in the history of the railway, 
q Serious news is being received from 
Angola , the Portuguese possession in 
Wester n Africa . 
A revolt of the natives is spreading 
rapidly, and they are burning and pillaging everything in their path. 
Notwithstandin g the efforts of the government to conceal the situation from the 
public, it is known to be precarious. 
Tribe s have attacked settlements and 
massacred a number of Europeans, after 
subjecting them to terrible tortures. Th e 
number and nationality of the victims 
are not known . 
PERSONAL . 
Th e Honorabl e T. McCants Stewart, 
judge of the Supreme Court of the Re ­
public of Liberia , has been makin g a 
short business visit to the Unite d States, 
q Mr . L . H . Godma n has been appointed special counsel in the Attorney -
General's office in Columbus, O. Mr . 
Godma n was born in Nort h Carolin a in 
1880, and had his training at Ohi o State 
Universit y and Howar d Universit y La w 
School, and was admitted to the bar in 
1906. Th e appointment comin g from a 
Democrati c official is regarded as very 
significant. 
q Mrs. Mar y Churc h Terrel l spoke at 
the convention of the World's Purit y 
Federation, at Columbus, O. 
q Mr . J. Q. Adams, editor and manager 
of the Appeal, has just celebrated his silver jubilee at St. Paul, Minn . TH E LAT E JUSTICE H A ELA N 
TH E FRIEN D A T COURT . 
Th e death of Justice Joh n Marshal l 
Harlan , of the Unite d States Supreme 
Court, removes one of the best friends 
of the Negr o in this country. Th e 
great Kentuckia n had always stood, usually alone among the justices, against 
any discrimination based on race. It 
was he wh o gave the splendid dissentin g opinion as to the constitutionality 
of the "Ji m Crow " laws. If it was legal 
to draw a line between white and colored persons, he said, in the schools 
and on the railroads, it woul d be equally 
legal so to separate Catholic s and 
Protestants, native born and immigrant. 
H e was old fashioned enough to believe that the declaration of the equality 
of men before the law should be main ­
tained. Since 1877 this good friend has 
served on the Supreme Court bench, 
and he died at the age of seventy-eight. 
A N OL D FIGHTER . 
W e are glad to be able to give our 
readers this month a photograph of Mr . 
Pete r Woods, eighty years of age, and, 
so far as is known , the onl y livin g survivo r of those wh o were indicted for 
ME N OF TH E 
MONT H 
treason after the Christiani a riot. A t the 
unveiling of the monument whic h marks 
the historic spot of the "first bloodshed 
of the Civi l War " Mr . Wood s was given 
a commemorative medal. 
W e have received a numbe r of letters 
concerning the article on the Christian a 
riot published in the Octobe r numbe r of 
TH E CRISIS. Mr . E . H . Murray , of Chatham, Ontario , tells us that Willia m Parker, after the fight in whic h he played 
so heroic a part, settled in that town. Mr . 
Pinckney , Parker's associate, also settled 
there. 
BISHO P C. S. SMITH . 
Th e colored Methodists of this country 
were gratified at the Fourt h Ecumenica l 
Methodist Conference, held in Toront o 
Octobe r 4-17, by the honors shown to 
various colored bishops. Perhaps the 
most strikin g distinction was the conferring of the degree of Docto r of Divin ­
ity on Bisho p C. S. Smit h by Victori a 
College of Toronto . 
PETER WOODS MEN OF THE MONTH 59 
BISHO P C . S. SMIT H 
Bisho p Alexande r Walters of Ne w 
York , wh o succeeded in getting the 
conference to pass a resolution deplorin g lynching , was the guest of honor 
at a dinner given by the Methodist 
Canadian Union . It was the first time 
a colored delegate had been so distinguished. 
A NEGR O COUNCILMAN . 
Fo r the first time i n twenty-five years 
Nashvill e has chosen a colored man as 
city counsellor. Mr . Solomo n Parke r 
Harris, in the last election, defeated his 
white opponent by a vote .of 244 to 194. 
Th e last Negr o to serve in Nashvill e was 
S. P. PARKE R 
the Hon . J. C. Napier, now Registra r of 
the Treasury. 
Mr . Harris was born in Mississipp i in 
1864 of parents sold to that State from 
Virginia . H e entered the public schools 
at the age of ten and continued his 
studies until he was graduated from Rust 
University , Mississippi, in 1889 with the 
degree of B. A . His father had died when 
he was a little boy, and he was obliged 
to wor k every step of the way up. In 
1891 he was graduated from the University of Michiga n law school. Afte r practicing his profession for five years he entered the Nationa l Baptist Publishin g 
Hous e in Nashville , where he is now 
employed. 
[The blind editor of the New Yor k Worl d 
"Leise , ganz leise!" His paper always treated 
New Yor k dailies.] 
Softly, quite softly— 
Fo r I hear, above the murmu r of the sea, 
Fain t and far-fallen footsteps, as of One 
Wh o comes from out beyond the endless 
ends of Time , 
Wit h voice that downwar d looms thro' 
singin g stars; 
Its subtle sound I see thro' these long -
darkened eyes, 
I hear the Ligh t H e bringeth on his 
hands— 
Almight y Death ! 
Softly, oh, softly, lest he pass me by, 
An d that unquivering Ligh t toward 
whic h my longin g soul 
An d tortured body through these years 
have writhed, 
Fade to the dun darkness of my days. 
Softly, full softly, let me rise and greet 
Th e strong, low luting of that long -
awaited call; 
Swiftl y be all my good and going gone, 
An d this vast veiled and vanquished 
vigo r of my soul 
died October 29, 1911, murmuring in German, 
black folk fairly, in marked contrast to most 
Seek somehow otherwhere its rest and 
goal, 
Wher e endless spaces stretch, 
Wher e endless time doth moan, 
Wher e endless light doth pour 
Thro ' the black kingdoms of eternal 
death. 
The n haply I may see what things I 
have not seen, 
The n I may know what things I have not 
known ; 
The n may I do my dreams! 
Farewell! N o sound of idle mournin g 
let there be 
T o shudder this full silence—save the 
voice 
O f children—little children, white and 
black, 
Whisperin g the deeds I tried to do for 
them; 
Whil e I at last unguided and alone 
Pass—softly, full softly. 
—W . E . B. D . in the N . Y . World . 
JOSEP H PULITZE R LYNCHER S TRIUMPHANT . 
This is the headline of a stirring editoria l in the Evenin g Post. Th e failure 
of justice at Coatesville, it says, is complete. Th e lynchers are triumphant, but 
not only in Coatesville . 
"Befor e us," says the Post, "lies the 
Topek a Plaindeale r wit h the horribl e 
story of the lynchin g at Durant. Okla ­
homa—on the same day as the Coatesvill e burning—of an unknown Negro . 
Her e the white fiends wh o shot down the 
man without givin g him a chance to defend himself were so proud of their 
wor k that they bound the body to some 
planks, and, as the picture before us 
shows, posed around their victim whil e 
the photographer recorded the scene. 
Eve n with such proof, we are sure, a 
Coatesville jur y woul d acquit. I n Okla ­
homa apparently nobody has stirred, despite this convincin g evidence. Th e 
lynchers are on top. Their victim was 
a stranger in a strange land; the woman 
in the case identified him after the 
mob had kille d him—what else could she 
do, in the presence of a half-drunken and 
violent mob? The n these exponents of 
America n civilization piled fagots around 
the body and danced around the fire as 
it consumed their victim. Is it any won ­
der that the Plaindealer begs every Ne ­
gro newspaper in the country to reprint 
this cut, that 'the worl d may see and 
know what semi-barbarous Americ a is 
doing;' and may know how they scorn 
the 'white ministers and Christian work ­
ers wh o are bent on Christianizin g the 
heathen Chinese? " 
"The lynchers are on top—near 
Charleston, South Carolina . Ther e a 
despicable wretch was lynched two 
weeks ago. It was done, says the 
Charleston Evenin g Post, in the 'most 
approved and up-to-date fashion.' Auto ­
mobiles filled wit h 'prominent citizens' 
took part in the chase. 'Amon g those 
present' was a Representative in the 
Genera l Assembly , the Honorabl e 
Joshua Ashley , wh o wit h his son took 
the prisoner from the Sheriff. But, of 
course, now that the event is over, nobody knows anythin g about the crime. 
"Th e lynchers are almost on top in 
Ne w York . Tw o police officers have recently shot innocent Negroe s without 
the slightest excuse, seeking revenge apparently for the wanton killin g of a 
policeman by a Negr o last spring. In 
one case the victim is probably crippled 
for life; the detective wh o shot him has 
been suspended for three months—and 
the majesty of the law is upheld! Th e 
other day a Negr o wh o got into a dispute in a drug store was so frightfully 
beaten by the police that the magistrate 
before who m the victim was brought 
protested hotly. Wit h such official sanction for abusing men because of their 
color, is it any wonde r that a mob the 
other night tried to lync h a colored man 
who, for all they knew, was but using 
his revolve r in self-defense? A n actual 
killin g in the streets may take place any 
day, as it did in the draft riots of 1863. 
Wh o shall say when, in a gust of passion, a street crowd in Ne w Yor k wil l 
not slay guilty and innocent alike? 
"Is it any wonde r that the colored people are lookin g to Washingto n for aid? 
Th e Topek a Plaindeale r declares that it 
must seem, to foreigners the height of 
hypocrisy for President Taft to be talking about peace amon g nations when 
such diabolica l acts of private wa r at 
home go on unchecked. A s for TH E 
CRISIS, whic h speaks for the educated 
colored man, it asks the President how 
he can keep silent, 'in the face of a record of murder, lynchin g and burnin g in 
this country whic h has appalled the civilized world. ' Certainly, there are no 
topics the President has discussed on 
his present trip that are of equal moment wit h the question of the rule of 
the mob. Th e lynchers are on top, 
North , South, East and West. " 
Th e Ne w Yor k Worl d once again 
champions the Negr o in an editorial entitled "Th e Crime of Bein g a Negro. " 
It says: 
"I n a Georgi a town widel y know n as 
a mode l communit y a mob last week 
took a Negr o from jail and lynched him 
for the offense of strikin g a white man. 
In an Oklahoma city on Sunday a Negr o 
was taken from the hands of a deputy 
sheriff and riddled wit h bullets for kill ­
ing the Cit y Attorne y and shooting two 
other white citizens in a riot provoked 
by a Negr o wh o pushed a white woma n 
from the sidewalk. 
"I n neither case had 'the usual crime ' OPINION 61 
been committed by the victim of the 
mob's vengeance and in neither was 
there the excuse that the honor of 
wome n had to be protected by makin g 
an example of the culprit. Ther e was no 
occasion to fear that either malefactor 
would escape justice. Th e Negr o 
lynched in Georgi a was in a cell awaiting punishment, and the Negr o lynched 
in Oklahoma was in safe custody. 
"The mobs whic h have made these additions to the ghastly record of blood 
vengeance in a civilized country may at 
least be credited wit h tearing the veil 
of pretense from the plea that Negroe s 
are lynched in defense of America n 
womanhood . Whe n Negroe s are summarily put to death without tria l and 
without discrimination for offenses as 
far removed in heinousness as simple 
assault and murder, the theory is enforced that justice in this country is 
for the white man and not for the Negro. 
"It is something to have lynchin g freed 
of its hypocrisy : but wit h what a sardonic commentary on the equality of all 
American s under the law without distinction of color. " 
Th e Lincol n (Neb.) Journa l remarks 
that white people "unconsciously assign superiority" to the black man by 
expecting him perpetually to show a 
self-restraint the whites cannot attain. 
"But, " says the Journal, "the Negr o is 
probably no better than the white man. 
Whe n he is reviled he is tempted, even 
as ourselves, to revile again. Fo r the 
last three months there has been an 
epidemic of lynchings of Negroe s in 
various parts of the country. One of 
the most brutal of these occurred some 
time ago in Oklahoma . Confidently assuming that the Negr o would love his 
enemies, we are surprised now to find 
the Negroes about Cowet a showin g a 
rebellious spirit, one of them committin g 
murde r and the rest inclined to back 
him up and wipe out the whites thereabout." 
Th e Washingto n (D . C ) Heral d 
strikes a true note in an editorial on two 
Missouri lynchings: "W e are in danger 
of becoming a happy-go-lucky nation, 
filled wit h a confiding trust that everything wil l wor k out for the best, 'and 
indulgin g in an optimism that is more of 
a menace than a blessing. Wha t we 
need is something more than sublime 
hope. W e need leaders wh o wil l take 
hol d of our great problems and help to 
solve them, men wh o wil l study how to 
supplant the mob spirit with respect for 
law, wh o wil l offer practica l remedies for 
the grave sociologica l conditions that 
make life a burden, wh o wil l not content themselves wit h merely hoping that 
human ills wil l disappear, but wil l 
steadily labor toward accomplishing that 
end. No t optimists are wanted, but 
workers. " 
SOUT H CAROLINA ' S PROTEST . 
In South Carolin a the better papers 
are much stirred over the peculiarly 
shameless lynchin g at Honeapath, in 
which Joshua Ashley , an assemblyman, 
and a local editor, Victo r B. Cheshire, 
wh o is on Governor Blease's staff, played 
a prominent part, and the clergy of the 
county have protested warmly. The 
Sumter Southron quotes editorially a sermon by the Rev. Joh n F . Vines, pastor 
of the First Baptist Church , apparently 
in Sumter. "Dr. Vines' remarks," says 
the Southron, "were anything but general 
or vague. H e made local and specific 
applications of his text and did not hesitate to call names. Dr. Vine s said among 
other things that the people wh o mainly 
compose lynchin g mobs talk much of defending virtue but are not themselves distinguished for virtue. Man y of them, 
indeed, live in a fashion to make a mock 
of all virtue and some of them are not 
guiltless of relations with the black race 
which are directly provocative of the 
crime that leads to lynchings. " 
Th e Spartanburg Journa l fears an attempt to indict the murderers would be 
worse than useless. "It woul d be impossible to convict the lynchers, even 
if Josh Ashle y (the assemblyman), the 
leader, woul d stand up before the jury 
and make full confession and give the 
names of all who were in the party. If 
a verdict of guilty should be brought 
in, a pardon woul d be granted as soon 
as it could be written. A n arrest and 
trial would make heroes of the lynchers 
and eminently qualify them for public 
office in the opinion of many voters. 
Josh Ashle y is the logica l successor to 
Governo r Blease, for he boldly and fearlessly executed what the governor had 
suggested and advised. 
"The events of the last few days in 
this State," continues the Journal, "are 
sufficient to indicate that the people feel 
that they have license to violate the laws. 
In Greenville and Unio n at the close 
of the week there were homicides that 
were savage in their nature. In this 
county a twelve-year-old boy shoots and 
kills his brother. Fro m many counties 
come reports of homicide and attempts 
to kill . It is time for the governor and 
all in authority to advise and urge the 
people to obey all the laws without exception. " 
Th e Charleston Post thinks the attempt to indict should be made even if, 
as at Coatesville, the result is failure. 
Th e leaders in the crime are well known 
and "it is not so easy as the members 
of mobs pretend to stand in the open 
light of publicity as accused authors of 
a crime, in the definition of the statute, 
no matter how overwhelmin g the approva l of public opinion of the neighborhood may be of the act. Th e 
lynchers, who were so bold before and 62 THE CRISIS 
have been so boastful after the deed, 
should be given the opportunity of showin g their mettle." 
Th e Charlott e Observe r demands an 
investigation and so does another just 
newspaper, the Columbi a State. "Ther e 
has not," says the State, "been a lynch ­
in g in South Carolina for the one crime 
that has not bred a lynchin g for other 
crimes. Ther e has not been a lynchin g 
in South Carolin a that has not increased 
the chances of every man, white and 
black, to die at the hands of a manslayer. 
"O f course the Anderso n lynchers 
should be prosecuted. Th e law may be 
flouted, the law may be insulted and 
trampled upon, but that is no reason for 
the sworn defenders of the law, by 
silence and inaction, to proclaim that the 
law is dead." 
TH E COLLEGE-BRE D NEGRO . 
"Th e Atlant a Universit y Negr o Con ­
ference," says the Ne w Yor k Tribune , 
"has made its second investigation into 
the activities of the college-bred Negroe s 
in this country. A s a result of its in ­
quiries it estimates that there are 5,000 
Negroe s who are graduates of colleges in 
this country, including institutions for 
the whites and the blacks. O f the latter 
there are thirty-two; thirteen only, however, being institutions of importance. 
Th e interest of the inquiry lies in what 
it discloses about the occupations of the 
Negr o college graduates. O f those replyin g to its communications the conference found that 53.8 per cent, were engaged in teaching, 20 per cent, were in 
the ministry, whil e 3.8 per cent, practised 
law and 7 per cent, medicine. 
"Thus 84 per cent, of the Negr o graduates, if these figures are true generally 
of the 5,000, are devoting their energies 
where their race needs the services of 
better educated men—in teaching, 
preaching, medicine and law. Th e race 
has suffered much in the past from ignorant teachers, ignorant preachers and 
foolish, superstitious healers. It requires 
the leadership of educated Negroes, and 
apparently higher education is supplying 
this need. 
"The statistics showin g the section of 
the country in which the college-bred 
Negr o finds his wor k are also instructive. 
Th e conference found that of 103 collegebred Negroe s of Norther n birth 34 per 
cent, went South to wor k among their 
own people, whil e of 682 graduates born 
in the South all but 15 per cent, remained in that section. Thu s the bettereducated Negr o finds his occupation 
where the race most needs him to help 
in its advancement. Th e tendency of the 
day is to look upon industrial training as 
the hope of the Negr o race, and this is 
no doubt wise, but the race wil l always 
need for its leaders, teachers, preachers 
and physicians more liberally educated 
men. This is the justification for the 
higher education of the Negro , and the 
statistics collected by the conference 
show that it is serving this end." 
Th e Bosto n Advertise r quotes the 
same report and concludes: "Tha t the 
college-bred Negr o prospers is apparent 
from the estimate that they are to-day 
i n possession of $15,000,000 wort h of 
property. So they offer a good example. 
I n learned societies and in literature they 
figure well, as the report shows in some 
detail. In public office they are worthil y 
conspicuous. I n charitable wor k they 
have played a large part. I n ambitio n to 
educate their children and make them i n 
turn leaders of, and examples for, their 
people, they are constructive elements. 
Th e conference reports finds these suggestions i n the replies it has obtained 
to questions of fact and of ideas: 
"Equalit y before the law; 
"Ful l citizenship rights and privileges; 
"Th e right to vote ; 
"Unrestricte d educational opportunities; 
"Well-traine d leadership. 
"These suggestions we are told, 'are 
not to be ignored nor even treated lightl y 
if we hope to brin g the Negroe s of 
Americ a to a higher place in the scale 
of social values; and that not alone for 
their own sake, but for the sake of the 
America n people as a whole.' Tha t is 
a point whic h must not be missed i n 
viewin g the broad possibilities of ultimate nationa l development. " 
It is interesting to compare these carefully compiled figures wit h the statement of Dr. Maur y M . Stapler, a 
Georgi a physician writin g to the Outlook, wh o says that as soon as a Negr o 
is educated, he "treks back to Boston, " 
for the Nort h thinks that it wants the 
Negr o educated, whereas the South 
thinks it woul d prefer to keep him i n " a 
state of nature." Th e "trek" is the other 
way, but sociologists of the Stapler 
school do not appear to concern themselves wit h mere facts. 
Th e Buffalo News comments on the 
replies from colleges asking whether 
colored men were received. "Frankl y 
it must be said that the consensus of 
opinion seems to be that the Negr o is 
not desirable as a student and, of course, 
the reasons for this undesirability are 
many. Yale , whil e it says that it .has 
never felt justified i n refusing admission 
to Negr o students, frankly declares that 
it has never sought to attract them. 
Lelan d Stanford says that it has no 
hostility towar d Negroes, but it fails to 
set forth how man y of them are registered. Fordham, in this State, says that 
it has never had any Negr o applicants 
for admission and it cannot, therefore, OPINION 63 
say what sort of reception such applications woul d receive. St. Vincen t College , 
in Pennsylvania , says that it has never 
deemed it wise to accept colored students. I n many of the Ne w Englan d 
colleges Negr o students are accepted and 
may be counted amon g the graduates, 
but when yo u get to Missouri the line 
is drawn rather sharply, and the president of a Missouri college writes that 
he has not found a student in the State 
wh o woul d tolerate a Negr o in the 
college. " 
TH E "MENACE " O F EDUCATION . 
Th e America n Missionary , a Norther n 
publication whic h stands for justice to 
the Negro , quotes and answers the Rev. 
Dr. Leavell, of Mississippi, the gentleman whose conception of Christianity 
leads him to agitate against Negr o education. 
"Dr . Leavell, " says the Missionary , 
"whil e a pastor in Massachusetts ably 
advocated the education of the Negr o 
people. H e now publishes a pamphlet 
whic h says as to Negr o education: 
" 'Ther e is a great and increasing hesitation amon g us to go further, and amid 
present conditions do that whic h woul d 
inevitably tend toward equalizing the 
situation between the races, make the 
Negr o a mor e efficient citizen, and render him a positive, influential, equal and 
permanent factor in our politica l life.' 
"Dr . Leavel l thinks also that 'there 
has been a change in the general public 
sentiment of the North, ' brought about 
by the agitation of such men as Senator 
Tillma n of South Carolina , and ex-Gov ­
ernor Vardama n of Mississippi, which 
has brought Norther n sentiment into 
sympathy wit h this questioning whether 
on the whol e it woul d not be better to 
keep the Negr o in ignorance, lest by 
education he really prove himself a man, 
to demand the rights of a man. 
"H e adds: 'So lon g as it is possible 
for him (the Negro ) to be a voter in the, 
South he wil l be a menace, and so long 
as he is a menace "we cannot and we 
wil l not extend to him the aid he needs 
to make him more 'worth while ' to himself and to us," and so discharge toward 
hi m the duty whic h in the nature of 
things the higher owes to the lowe r conditions of human life.' Dr. Leavell undoubtedly represents the popular feeling 
of Mississippi. 
"Le t us say to this: This country wil l 
never consent to the permanent disfranchisement of Negr o citizens. Thos e wh o 
agitate for this and those wh o effectuate 
this through methods that they themselves pronounce to be immora l wil l 
eventually find themselves as thoroughly 
at wa r wit h Providenc e as were those 
wh o agitated the dissolution of the 
Union. " 
LABO R ALLIANCES . 
Recently the white union carpenters 
of Ke y West went on strike in sympathy 
wit h two discharged colored men. Th e 
Ne w Yor k Nation , telling the story, continues: "The y were restored to work, 
and, says a Ke y West account, 'the white 
and colored laborers are on much better 
terms.' This is certainly refreshing reading when one recalls the bitter and costly 
strikes in Georgi a and elsewhere of white 
men to prevent .Negro workme n on railways from rising above the humblest 
positions, and if it can be taken as a 
sign that labor is awakening to the fact 
that it least of all can indulge in race 
prejudice, it should give genuine reason 
for rejoicing. Th e other attitude particularly to be noted here in the Nort h 
of excluding the colored man from 
unions is doubly wron g from the union 
point of view: it makes the Negroe s 
ready to act as strikebreakers, and it 
makes most of their arguments as to 
the brotherhood of all labor highly nonsensical. Bu t this is one of the issues 
whic h Mr . Gompers finds it difficult to 
wa x eloquent over." 
Th e Bosto n Transcript notes another 
encouraging sign : "Th e alliance of 
Southern whites and Southern Negroes 
in a labor dispute is one of the occurrences that help to make 1911 annus 
mirabilis. Th e colored firemen on the 
Georgi a & Florid a Railroa d have gone 
out in sympathy wit h the white firemen 
wh o struck for higher wages." 
Bishop Guerry, of South Carolina , at 
the Missionar y Counci l of the Episco ­
pal Church , scored the church for its 
neglect of the Negro . "Th e question is 
no longer a Southern one," said the 
bishop, "but is one of national scope. 
Ther e are to-day more Negroes in Ne w 
Yor k than there are in Ne w Orleans 
and as many in Philadelphi a as in any 
city outside of Ne w Orleans. Yo u lynch 
Negroes up here the same as we do in 
the South. It is a national crime. W e 
need yo u and yo u need us and we must 
wor k together in doing our duty to these 
people. It is the greatest blot on,th e 
America n church to-day that we have 
trifled wit h this great missionary question at our own doors." 
<J Some Negroes of Oklahoma meeting 
in Boley, at the call of G. A . Hogan , 
passed resolutions condemning the- lawless Negroe s of the State. Whereupo n 
the Oklahoma Safeguard, a colored paper, remarks: "Wh y did yo u not also 
condemn the lawless whites of Okla ­
homa? Th e Negr o race is not the onl y 
race that have lawless elements in it. 
Wh y did you not also pass a few resolutions praising the law-abiding, respectable and cultured class of Negroe s in our 
race? No , yo u hold your peace when it 
comes to this class, and advertise onl y 
one class. Now , John, yo u stop that 
kind of stuff and come clean. " Th e Nationa l Associatio n for the Ad ­
vancement of Colore d Peopl e feels that 
it has reason to rejoice at Christma s 
time in the increased interest and enthusiasm of its membership. Fro m every 
part of the country and from all classes 
and races come letters of congratulation 
on the association and TH E CRISIS. 
Th e Ne w Yor k branch of the 
association on. Novembe r 15 opened 
headquarters at 268 1/2 West 135th 
Street. Th e office has been placed in a 
Negr o neighborhood that it may be 
easily accessible to those it is designed 
to help. Cases of discrimination, of in ­
justice to men because of their color, 
are to be given immediate attention, and 
a clerk wil l be at the office during week 
days. Tw o telephone numbers are given 
for night cases: 4660 Chelsea and 152 
Columbus. 
Th e Ne w Yor k branch wil l not encroach upon the wor k of the Ne w Yor k 
Lega l Ai d Society, an association whic h 
gives legal aid to the needy of all races, 
taking up cases involvin g claims for 
wages, damages in case of accident, 
etc. No r does it expect to deal wit h 
questions of economic discrimination. It 
purposes to stand for the rights of the 
colored man withi n the law of the State, 
to see that he secures justice in the 
courts, and to aid him when his civil 
rights are assailed. 
Th e significance of Hamlet's exclama ­
tion concerning "the law's delay" is 
keenly appreciated by the editor of the 
N . A . A . C . P. notes. Cases are a 
good whil e in comin g up in court, and it 
may be difficult for our readers to remember them from month to month. 
One case, not yet mentioned in TH E 
CRISIS, is just finished. Tw o white men 
ran out of a restaurant without paying 
their bill. Th e cry of "thief" was raised, 
and a policeman, appearing in sight, shot 
at a black man who was also running 
but who had had nothing whatever to 
do with the robbery. Th e black man, 
named Bell , was severely hurt, and was 
taken to the hospital. It is doubtful 
whether he ever regains his full strength. 
Th e association was active in at once 
getting the facts before the Polic e De ­
partment, and the officer was suspended 
for three months. Such discipline, however inadequate it may seem to the 
Negr o sufferer, is of immense value to 
our cause. 
Th e Ne w Yor k branch has another 
case of the shooting of an innocent man 
by a policeman, that of Willia m Mingo , 
mentioned in the August CRISIS. Th e 
case wil l shortly come up again. 
«J Th e Wendel l Phillip s centenary, No ­
vember 29, wil l be celebrated in many 
cities throughout the Unite d States. Th e 
Bosto n branch plans to hold its meeting 
on Novembe r 28 at the Par k Street 
Church , Judge Wendel l Phillip s Stafford, 
one of the association's warm supporters, givin g the principa l speech. Mr . 
Francis Garrison , in charge of the meeting, is plannin g a beautiful and interesting programme momento, illustrated by 
new and attractive pictures of Phillip s 
at his home and at his work . 
In Brookly n the association wil l hold 
a meeting at Plymout h Churc h Novem ­
ber 29, the speakers, our tried friends, 
Mr . Charles Edwar d Russell and the 
Rev. Reverd y Ransom. Henr y War d 
Beecher offered his platform to Phillip s 
after the latter had been mobbed at the 
Broadwa y Tabernacle, and Mr . Russell 
and Mr . Ransom wil l have the honor of 
standing on the very platform that was 
shared in by these two great anti-slavery 
leaders. 
Q A meeting T O PROTES T AGAINS T 
LYNCHIN G was held at Ethica l Culture 
Hall , Ne w York , on the evening of No ­
vember 15. Th e extent of America's 
murderous lawlessness was shown in a 
circular scattered through the seats. 
Mr . Oswal d Garriso n Villar d was in 
the chair and made a strong plea for justice. Mr . W . E . B. D u Bois showed that 
attacks of colored men on women are 
grossly exaggerated and that punishment of crime in the South is makin g 
criminals. Dr. Joh n L . Elliot t appealed 
for a fund of $1,000 to investigate lynch ­
ing and the audience gave $260. Th e 
rest wil l undoubtedly be raised in a week 
or two. Mrs. Florenc e Kelle y and the 
Rev. Hutchin s Bisho p made the closing 
speeches. Resolutions were adopted declaring that the assembly "Solemnl y 
record our belief that the reign of lynch 
law in this country, Nort h and South, 
constitutes the worst indictment of 
America n democracy that can be drawn. " 
President Taft was criticized for his 
silence and a Congressiona l investigation 
demanded. CHRISTMAS . 
CHRISTMA S is the festival of 
little children—the Holyday of 
the Sons and Daughters of 
God. It is the day of the little Saviors 
of the Worl d whom the Fathers so 
love that they send them to the world 
that the world may not perish but have 
Everlasting Life . 
Therefore it is meet that the Shepherds abiding in the Field, keeping 
watch over their Flock by night—the 
long and dreadful night that lowers 
over the world's darker peoples— 
should search the heavens for a Star, 
and should strain their weary ears for 
the Voic e of Angels with Good Tid ­
ings of great Joy which shall be to all 
people, with glory, not simply to other 
worlds, but on Eart h Peace, Good Wil l 
toward men. 
An d so to-day, as i n other days, 
above the little babies of the world 
shines the Star. Three kings come 
toiling heavily across the seas and 
sands to the far-shot glory of 
that little star. One Kin g is black; 
one Kin g is yellow; one Kin g is white; 
all three are kings; all three seek salvation in the justice, mercy and truth 
which wil l rekindle the worn and 
wicked earth. Some would dispute the 
kingship. Some want one king and 
two servants or at most two kings. 
But three King s and one Black? Must 
the Race Problem greet the cradle of 
the Savior of the World ? It must; 
and upon the awful majesty of the 
three kings must dwell equal reverence and social equality. 
But why should kings bow to babies 
in order to save the world? An d if 
to babies, why to babies in mangers 
and tenements and rookeries? Wh y 
not bring this mighty embassage to the 
frilled and dainty babies of Fift h 
Avenue or the Plaz a Hote l ? Fo r two 
reasons: First, there are few babies 
in these latter places, and those of little account; and, secondly, because 
Black men are not welcome there, even 
though they be kings. So the homage 
we pay to the low-lying Savior of the 
Worl d to be is carried to the lower 
East Side and the upper West Side, 
to Black Harlem and yellow China ­
town, to the low, the despised, the offscourings, the "dagoes" and the "niggers." An d there the Kings of the 
Earth shall bow and open their treasures and present unto the Babes three 
gifts: Gold and Frankincense and 
Myrrh . 
An d so we to-day in the mystic 
rhythm of this world-old ceremony 
bow before our children with the three 
gifts. First, Gold! W e must spend 
_ money on our children. Children 
are costly and we must pay the price. 
The price to have them born well, to 
have them clothed and fed and sheltered. 
Then Frankincense, the ointment 
and balm of health. Not simply food, 
but the right sort of food, regularly 
and properly prepared. Lon g and 
quiet sleep from the first darkness to 
late dawn. Not simply clothes to look 
pretty, but clothes to be warm, comfortable, easy to run and play in, 
strong and not spoiled by good honest 
dirt; a physician, a dentist, out-ofdoor life, out of the Hel l of life in 
flats—all this Frankincense on the 
altar of childhood. 
Finally, Myrrh—the perfume and 
inspiration in the nostrils of a living 
human soul. Knowledge and goodness—discipline and home life, reverence for parents, honesty, a hatred of 
lying lips, a love of honest work. 
Al l those are the gifts of kings on 
the altar of childhood. 
Why ? WENDEL L PHILLIPS 
A t the Age of 48 
66 THE CRISIS THE CRISIS 67 
WENDEL L PHILLIP S 
Bor n Novembe r 29, 1811 
<J O f all the strong characters in America n history, Wendel l Phillip s is 
the most profitable for study by this generation, for the reason that he 
was absolutely unselfish, always conscientious, devoted his life to the 2 
cause of oppressed humanity and sought for no reward, except to feel * 
withi n himself that he had followed the right wherever it led and without Y 
regard to the consequences. A 
<J H e was endowed by nature wit h gifts that put withi n his reach the 4* 
highest offices in the nation. H e refused to pursue in the slightest degree % 
his own interests or advancement, and gave himself and all that he had * 
to the rescue of the victims of the most monstrous crime in history. V 
Y 
I 
<J H e never considered whether a cause was popular; he only con - X 
sidered whether it was right. 4» 
*J I n behalf of .the abolition of Negr o slavery he risked his life, sacri- Y 
ficed his friendships, gave up every chance of worldl y success, subjected X 
himself to twenty-five years of incessant abuse and vilification, became 
a social and professional outcast, and never wavered once in his service 
to the great cause he had undertaken. ^ 
H e was one of the first American s broad minded enough to see that <?« 
the color of a man's skin has nothing to do wit h his manhood or wort h T 
any mor e than it has to do wit h his rights. ,£ 
<J H e believed that all the so-called races of men are equally the * 
children of Go d and equally brothers. H e utterly repudiated the hideous Y 
doctrine that Go d made some of his children to be the serfs and inferiors !£ 
of others. • 
Y 
<J H e was the ideal democrat. T o his min d freedom was mocker y Y 
unless all were free; equality a mocker y unless all were equal, and X 
brotherhood a mocker y unless all were brothers. H e dedicated his life * 
to that faith. Y. 
<| Woul d there were a Wendel l Phillip s to-day! Lookin g upon the * 
present condition of a large part of our colored Americans, disfranchised, £ 
preyed upon and denied every right, what burnin g indignation woul d % 
fall from his lips! Looking upon the perversion and ruin of so much of * 
the exalted aims of the Abolitio n cause, with what indomitable courage ¥ 
he .would attack the survivin g feudalism that still denies his just place % 
in the human family to the man that happens to have a dark skin ! * 
T 
<J W e have overdone in our national memorials the expression of Y 
admiration for soldiers and politicians. Her e was a man that believed in % 
saving life, not in taking it; whose appeal was to the conscience of a <y 
nation and not to brute force. Th e worl d is ruled by ideas, not by the Y, 
sword. Th e sublime mora l idea that inspired Garriso n and his friend <§> 
Phillip s made the public sentiment that alone enabled Emancipatio n to ¥ 
become an accomplished fact. A thousand monuments and memorials Y 
testify to Italy's veneration for Mazzini . O f Wendel l Phillips, the * 
America n Mazzini , the only monument is the record of his unequaled ¥ 
influence upon history and his enduring service in the purgin g of the % 
nation from a foul sin. This year, the centenary of the beginning of «|» 
his useful life, ought not to pass without some fitting tribute to a career 
so blameless and filled wit h such unique achievement for the cause of 
man. 
t CHARLES EDWAR D RUSSELL 68 THE CRISIS 
Because to childhood we look for 
the salvation of the world. To childhood we look for the triumph of Justice, Merc y and Truth. A s the children of this generation are trained, so 
will the hope of all men in the next 
generation blossom to fruition, and 
the song of Angels above the Christ 
Chil d will be heard again in this old 
world : 
Peace on Earth, Good Will Toward 
Men. 
CHRISTMA S GIFT. 
THE November elections come 
as a sort of Christmas gift 
to black folk. First, the 
Digges amendment to disfranchise 
colored people has been defeated in 
Marylan d by a decisive majority of 
20,551 votes. This is the third time 
that the Democratic machine has attempted to get rid of the colored vote. 
Secondly, the Democratic Legislature 
that neglected to amend and reconsider the colored regiment bill in 
New Yor k has been sent home; but 
Cuvillier, the Democrat who introduced the bill, has been retained in his 
seat by the black voters of Harlem. 
It may easily be granted that Cuvillier is no ideal statesman, but is it 
not significant that he was the only 
man in this or former legislatures 
willing to do his colored constituents' 
demand? Ma y we not respectfully 
assure Governor Di x that he himself 
will need the black vote soon and that 
this vote "follows the regiment?" 
Third , the Socialists, the only party 
which openly recognizes Negro manhood, has been signally triumphant. 
Is it not time for black voters to 
carefully consider the claims of this 
party? Fourth, we call the attention 
of contented lovers of democratic 
government in this land to the fact 
that while 400,000 votes were cast for 
governor in the little State of Massa ­
chusetts, it took only 40,000 votes to 
elect the governor of Mississippi, the 
pioneer State of disfranchisement. 
Ho w long will democracy stand in 
Americ a with one white man in Mississippi casting the equivalent of ten 
votes? 
Finally, there is every indication 
that the election of 1912 wil l be a 
close election. If Mr . Taft succeeds 
himself after his tariff record, his 
silence on lynching and his treatment of colored officials, it wil l be 
by a margin that will call for every 
black vote in the North . Wil l he 
get these votes? Maybe—perhaps. 
TH E SIN AGAINS T TH E HOL Y 
GHOST. 
"HE doesn't really believe what 
he says—he wants the 
same things that you want, 
but you see he has to talk this way." 
"Tillman ? Oh , Tillma n is a good 
friend of Negroes—his anti-Negro 
talk is just for political effect." An d 
so forth. The young man then sits 
back and eyes us pleasantly. H e considers that what he says is explanation 
and excuse. Is it not perfectly clear 
that men are often "i n a position" 
where they must say what they do 
not for a moment believe ? Well , does 
not this fact explain and excuse their 
actions and utterances? 
It does not. Such action is the one 
unforgiven and unforgivable sin. It 
is the sin against the Hol y Ghost for 
which neither the world nor the makers of the world ever forgive a human 
soul, and (what is far more important) for which in the end a man 
never forgives himself. 
Wha t is this strange, lightly tossed 
doctrine which young black men and 
young white men are to-day so easily 
handling? Done into plain English it 
is this: Whenever a man considers 
that it is to his advantage to deceive 
the public he is at liberty to do so. 
Whenever a lie serves a gentleman's 
purpose better than the truth, he may 
lie. An d if at any time thereafter he 
is accused of deception or charged 
with lying it is a good and sufficient 
answer for him to allege that his in ­
terests required a falsehood, or his 
position in the world demanded deception, or that his bread and butter 
called for a lie. 
This is a counsel of destruction. It 
is a doctrine of death. It will , if persisted in, damn any individual and it EDITORIAL 69 
will utterly destroy any race. The 
individual may escape visible punishment, for life is short. But the immortal race cannot escape. 
The Negro race in Americ a is today being offered every inducement to 
lie and deceive. It is asked to lie 
about its desires and ambitions. It is 
asked to lie about its own human feelings. It is asked to give lying testimony as to the goodness of its neighbors. If it wil l consent to lie, there 
are money, position and applause for 
the chief liars and winks and promises 
for the fools that follow. Ye t the end 
is death. The end is first bewilderment 
among honest people. M y God ! they 
say, if a people who have had twentyfive hundred of their fellows lynched 
without trial in twenty-five years; who 
have seen nine-tenths of their voters 
disfranchised; who cannot travel, sit 
or walk without danger of public insult—if such a people do not believe 
in "complaint" or "agitation" and 
merely are ambitious to be "useful" 
to their neighbors, why should we 
strive to help them? N o sooner have 
they reached this conclusion than some 
obsequious colored gentleman explains 
in lowered tones: "W e are not really 
satisfied, we are just lying to appease 
our enemies and keep our jobs." 
Wha t is the result ? Contempt and suspicion. Contempt for a people who 
place their jobs above their souls, and 
well-grounded suspicion that the man 
who wil l lie under such circumstances 
will lie under others. 
Thus the result of the sin against 
the Hol y Ghost is suspicion and contempt from others and lack of faith 
in one's self. Wha t black man in 
Americ a to-day who is preaching contentment to ten million slaves does 
not in his heart despise himself for 
doing it? 
TH E COS T O F EDUCATION . 
A FAVORIT E argument i n the 
South is that the white people "pay for" the education 
of colored children. Fo r instance, an 
alderman i n Lexington, Ky. , argues 
this way, i n answer to a complaint 
about poor colored schools : 
The Negroes of Lexington hold 
$774,735 worth of property, on which 
the school tax is $4,415.99. The white 
people pay taxes on $22,000,000, on 
which the school tax is $77,000. The 
colored schools cost $24,971.35. 
"These," concludes the Richmond 
Times-Despatch, "are very striking 
figures and dispose of the complaint 
made by the Negro leaders." 
Le t us see. In the first place the 
alderman gracefully includes in the 
"white" property all the property of 
corporations and public-service companies, because their stockholders are 
mostly white. In addition to this, it 
credits to the white taxpayer all property rented to colored tenants. But 
who pays the taxes on rented property? To settle this point let us turn 
to the criticism of the New Yor k City 
Budget Exhibit made by the Committee on Congestion of Population. 
"The budget exhibit fails to show 
the fact that the assessed value of 
tenements and buildings used for 
dwelling purposes in New Yor k is 
about $1,250,000,000, and that the 
taxes on these buildings, at the average tax rate of $1.75, amount to 
$21,875,000 this year. New Yor k 
is the great 'tenant' city. 
"No r is the fact shown that these 
taxes on buildings are paid by the 
tenants, and that a good tenement 
apartment unit of four rooms is worth 
at least $1,250, and that taxes on this 
at a rate of $1.75 per $100, full value, 
amount to $21.87, or more than a 
month's rent. Approximately this 
amount is paid in taxes by the poorest 
of the poor, the sick and consumptives, 
and those families trying to exist on 
from $100 to $300 less than the recognized standard of living. " 
Wha t is true in New Yor k is mere 
than true in Lexington, Ky . Indeed, 
throughout the South, in most cities 
outside of Texas, the Negro in direct 
and indirect taxation is not only paying for his own wretched schooling accommodations, but is also contributing 
to the schools of the rich whites and 
then double-taxing himself by contributions to decent colored private 
schools. THE convict guard laughed. 
"I don't know, " he said, "I 
hadn't thought of that •" 
H e hesitated and looked at the stranger curiously. In the solemn twilight he 
got an impression of unusual height and 
soft dark eyes. 
"Curiou s sort of acquaintance for the 
Colonel, " he thought; then he continued aloud: "Bu t that nigger there is bad; 
a born thief and ought to be sent up for 
life; is practically; got ten years last 
time •" 
Her e the voice of the promote r talking withi n interrupted; he was bending 
over his figures, sitting by the Colonel. 
H e was slight, wit h a sharp nose. 
"Th e convicts, " he said, "woul d cost 
us $96 a year and board. Well , we can 
squeeze that so that it won't be over 
$125 apiece. Now , if these fellows are 
driven, they can build this line withi n 
twelve months. It wil l be runnin g next 
April . Freights wil l fall fifty per cent. 
Why , man, yo u wil l be a millionair e in 
less than ten years." 
Th e Colone l started. H e was a thick, 
short man, wit h clean-shaven face, and 
a certain air of breeding about the lines 
of his countenance; the wor d millionair e 
sounded well in his ears. H e thought— 
he thought a great deal; he almost heard 
the puff of the fearfully costly automobile that was comin g up the road, and 
he said: 
" I suppose we migh t as well hire 
them. " 
"O f course," answered the promoter. 
Th e voice of the tall stranger in the 
corner broke in here: 
"It wil l be a good thin g for them?" 
he said, half in question. 
Th e Colone l moved. "Th e guard 
makes strange friends," he thought to 
himself. "What's this man doing here, 
anyway? " H e looked at him, or rather, 
looked at his eyes, and then somehow 
felt a warmin g towar d him. H e said: 
"Well , at least it can't harm them— 
they're beyond that." 
"It wil l do them good, then," said the 
stranger again. Th e promote r shrugged 
his shoulders. 
"It wil l do us good, " he said. 
Bu t the Colone l shook his head impatiently. H e felt a desire to justify him-JESUS CHRIST IN GEORGIA 71 
self before those eyes, and he answered: 
"Yes, it wil l do them good; or, at any 
rate, it won't make them any worse than 
they are." 
The n he started to say something else, 
but here sure enough the sound of the 
automobil e breathing at the gate stopped 
him and they all arose. 
"It is settled, then," said the promoter. 
"Yes, " said the Colonel, signin g his 
name and turning toward the stranger 
again. 
"Ar e yo u goin g into town? " he asked 
wit h the Southern courtesy of white man 
to white man in a country town. Th e 
stranger said he was. 
"The n come alon g in my machine. I 
want to talk to yo u about this." 
The y went out to the car. Th e stranger as he went turned again to look 
back at the convict. H e was a tall, 
powerfully built black fellow. His face 
was sullen, wit h a low forehead, thick, 
hangin g lips, and bitter eyes. Ther e was 
revolt written about the mouth, and a 
hangdog expression. H e stood bending 
over his pile of stones pounding listlessly. 
Beside him stood a boy of twelve, yellow, wit h a hunted, crafty look. Th e 
convict raised his eyes, and they met the 
eyes of the stranger. Th e hamme r fell 
from his hands. 
Th e stranger turned slowl y toward 
the automobile, and the Colone l introduced him. H e could not exactly catch 
the foreign-sounding name, but he mumbled something as he presented him to 
his wife and little girl, wh o were waiting . A s they whirle d away he started 
to talk, but the stranger had taken the 
little girl into his lap, and together they 
conversed in low tones all the way 
home. 
I n some way, they did not exactly 
kno w how, they got the impression that 
the man was a teacher, and of course 
he must be a foreigner. Th e long cloaklike coat told this. The y rode in the 
twiligh t through the half-lighted town, 
and at last drew up before the Colonel's 
mansion, wit h its ghostlike pillars. 
Th e lady in the back seat was thinkin g 
of the guests she had invited to dinner, 
and wondered if she ought not to ask 
this man to stay. H e seemed cultured, 
and she supposed he was some acquaintance of the Colonel's. It woul d be 
rather a distinction to have him there, 
wit h the Judge's wife and daughter and 
the Rector. She spoke almost before 
she thought: 
"Yo u wil l enter and rest awhile? " 
Th e Colone l and the little girl insisted. 
Fo r a moment the stranger seemed 
about to refuse. H e said he wa s on his 
wa y North , where he had some business 
for his father i n Pennsylvania . Then , 
for the child's sake, he consented. U p 
the steps they went, and into the dark 
parlor, and there they sat and talked a 
long time. It was a curious conversation. Afterwar d they did not remember 
exactly what was said, and yet they all 
remembered a certain strange satisfaction in that lon g talk. 
Presently the nurse came for the 
reluctant child, and the hostess bethought herself: 
"W e wil l have a cup of tea—you wil l 
be dry and tired." 
She rang and switched on a blaze of 
light. Wit h one accord they all looked 
at the stranger, for they had hardly seen 
him well in the gloomin g twilight. Th e 
woman started in amazement and the 
Colone l half rose in anger. Why , the 
man was a mulatto, surely—even if he 
did not own the Negr o blood, their practised eyes knew it. H e was tall and 
straight, and the coat looked like a Jewish gabardine. His hair hung in close 
curls far down the sides of his face, and 
his face was olive, even yellow. 
A peremptory order rose to the Colo ­
nel's lips, and froze there as he caught 
the stranger's eyes. Thos e eyes, where 
had he seen those eyes before? H e remembered them lon g years ago—the 
soft tear-filled eyes of a brown girl . H e 
remembered many things, and his face 
grew drawn and white. Thos e eyes kept 
burning into him, even when they were 
turned half away toward the staircase, 
where the white figure of the child hovered with her nurse, and waved goodnight. Th e lady sank into her chair and 
thought: "Wha t wil l the Judge's wife 
say? Ho w did the Colone l come to 
invite this man here? Ho w shall we be 
rid of him? " She looked at the Colone l 
in reproachful consternation. 
Just then the door opened and the old 
butler came in. H e was an ancient black 
man wit h tufted white hair, and he held 
before him a large silver tray filled wit h 
a china tea service. The stranger rose 
slowly and stretched forth his hands as 
if to bless the viands. Th e old man 
paused in bewilderment, tottered and 
then, with sudden gladness in his eyes, 
dropped to his knees as the tray crashed 
to the floor. 
"M y Lord! " he whispered, "and M y 
God! " But the woman screamed: 
"Mother's china! " 
Th e doorbell rang. 
"Heavens! Her e is the dinner party! " 
exclaimed the lady. 
She turned toward the door, but there 
in the hall, clad in her night clothes, was 
the little girl. She had stolen down the 
stairs to see the stranger again, and the 
nurse above was calling in vain. The 
woman felt hysterical and scolded at the 
nurse, but the stranger had stretched out 
his arms, and wit h a glad cry the child 
nestled in them. "O f such," he whispered, "is the Kingdo m of Heaven, " as 72 THE CRISIS 
he slowl y mounted the stairs wit h his 
little burden. 
Th e mother was glad ; anythin g to be 
rid of the interloper even-for a moment. 
Th e bell rang again, and she hastened 
toward the door, whic h the loitering 
black maid was just opening. She did not 
notice the shadow of the stranger as he 
came slowl y down the stairs and paused 
by the newel post, dark and silent. 
Th e Judge's wife entered. She was an 
old woman , frilled and powdered into a 
caricature of youth, and gorgeously 
gowned. She came forward, smilin g wit h 
extended hands, but just as she was 
opposite the stranger, a chill from somewhere seemed to strike her, and she 
shuddered and cried: "Wha t a draft!" as 
she drew a silken shawl about her and 
shook hands cordially; she forgot to ask 
wh o the stranger was. Th e Judge strode 
in unseeing, thinkin g of a puzzlin g case 
of theft. 
"Eh ? What ? Oh—er—yes—good-evening, " he said, "good-evening. " 
Behin d them came a youn g woman in 
the glor y of youth, daintily silked, wit h 
diamonds around her fair neck, beautiful 
in face and form. She came in lightly, 
but stopped wit h a little gasp; then she 
laughed gaily and said: 
"Why , I beg your pardon. Wa s it not 
curious? I thought I saw there behind 
your man"—she hesitated ("but he must 
be a servant," she argued)—"the shadow 
of wide white wings. It was but the 
light on the drapery. Wha t a turn it 
gave me—so glad to be here!" An d she 
smiled again. Wit h her came a tall and 
haughty naval officer. Hearin g his lady 
refer to the servant, he hardly looked at 
him, but held his gilded cap and cloak 
carelessly toward him; the stranger took 
them and placed them carefully on the 
rack. 
Last came the Rector, a man of forty, 
and well clothed. H e started to pass the 
stranger, stopped and looked at him in ­
quiringly. 
" I beg your pardon, " he said, "I beg 
your pardon, I think I have met you? " 
Th e stranger made no answer, and the 
hostess nervously hurried the guests on. 
But the Rector lingered and looked perplexed. 
"Surely I know you ; I have met you 
somewhere," he said, putting his hand 
vaguely to his head. "You—yo u remember me, do yo u not? " 
Th e stranger quietly swept his cloak 
aside, and to the hostess' unspeakable 
relief moved toward the door. 
" I never knew you, " he said in low 
tones, as he went. 
Th e lady murmured some faint excuse 
about intruders, but the Recto r stood 
with annoyance written on his face. 
" I beg a thousand pardons," he said 
to the hostess absently. "It is a great 
pleasure to be here—somehow I thought 
I knew that man. I am sure I knew 
him, once." 
Th e stranger had passed down the 
steps, and as he went the nurse-maid, 
lingerin g at the top of the staircase, flew 
down after him, caught his cloak, trembled, hesitated, and then kneeled in the 
dust. H e touched her lightl y with his 
hand and said, "Go , and sin no more. " 
Wit h a glad cry the maid left the house 
wit h its open door and turned north, 
running, whil e the stranger turned eastward to the night. A s they parted a lon g 
low howl rose tremulously and reverberated through the town. Th e Colonel's 
wife withi n shuddered. 
"Th e bloodhounds, " she said. Th e 
Rector answered carelessly. 
"Anothe r one of those convicts escaped, I suppose; really, they need 
severer measures." The n he stopped. H e 
was tryin g to remember that stranger's 
name. Th e Judge's wife looked about for 
the draft and arranged her shawl. Th e 
girl glanced at the white drapery in the 
hall, but the youn g officer was bending 
over her, and the fires of life burned in 
her veins. 
How l after howl rose in the night, 
swelled and died away. Th e stranger 
strode rapidly along the highwa y and out 
into the deep forest. Ther e he paused 
and stood waiting, tall and still. A mile 
up the road behind him a man was running, tall and powerful and black, wit h 
crime-stained face, wit h convict's stripes 
upon him and shackles on his legs. H e 
ran and jumped in little short steps, and 
the chains rang. H e fell and rose again, 
while the howl of the hounds rung 
harder behind him. 
Into the forest he leaped and crept and 
jumped and ran, streaming wit h sweat; 
seeing the tall form rise before him, he 
stopped suddenly, dropped his hands in 
sullen impotence and sank panting to 
the earth. A bloodhound shot into 
the woods behind him, howled, whined 
and fawned before the stranger's' feet. 
Houn d after hound bayed, leapt and lay 
there; then silent, one by one, wit h 
bowed head, they crept backward toward 
the town. 
Th e stranger made a cup of his hands 
and gave the man water to drink, bathed 
his hot head, and gently took the chains 
and irons from his feet. B y and by the 
convict stood up. Da y was dawnin g 
above the treetops. H e looked into the 
stranger's face, and for a moment a gladness swept over the stains of his face. 
"Why , you'se a nigger, too, " he said. 
The n the convict seemed anxious to 
justify himself. 
" I never had no chance," he said furtively. 
"Tho u shalt not steal," said the stranger. 
Th e man bridled. 
"Bu t how about them? Ca n they steal? JESUS CHRIST IN GEORGIA 73 
Didn't they steal a whole year's wor k 
and then, when I stole to keep from 
starving " he glanced at the stranger, 
"No , I didn't steal just to keep from 
starving. I stole to be stealing. I can't 
help stealing. Seems like when I sees 
things I just must—but, yes, I'll try! " 
Th e convict looked down at his striped 
clothes, but the stranger had taken off 
his lon g coat—and put it around him, 
and the stripes disappeared. In the openin g mornin g the black man started toward the low lo g farmhouse in the distance, and the stranger stood watchin g 
him. Ther e was a new glory in the day. 
Th e black man's face cleared up and the 
farmer was glad to get him. 
Al l day he worke d as he had never 
worke d before, and the farmer gave him 
some cold food toward night. 
"Yo u can sleep in the barn, " he said, 
and turned away. 
"Ho w much do I git a day? " asked the 
man. 
Th e farmer scowled : 
"If you'll sign a contract for the season, " he said, "I'l l give yo u ten dollars 
a month. " 
" I won't sign no contract to be a 
slave," said the man doggedly. 
"Yes, yo u will, " said the farmer, threateningly, "or I'll call the convict guard." 
An d he grinned. 
Th e convict shrunk and slouched to the 
barn. A s night fell he looked out and 
saw the farmer leave the place. Slowl y 
he crept out and sneaked toward the 
house. H e looked into the kitchen door. 
N o one was there, but the supper was 
spread as if the mistress had laid it and 
gone out. H e ate ravenously. The n he 
looked into the front room and listened. 
H e could hear low voices on the porch. 
O n the table lay a silver watch. H e 
gazed at it, and in a moment was beside 
it, wit h his hand on it. Quickl y he 
slipped out of the house and slouched 
towar d the field. H e saw his employe r 
comin g along the highway. H e fled back 
stealthily and around to the front of the 
house, when suddenly he stopped. H e 
felt the great dark eyes of the stranger 
and saw the same dark, cloaklike coat, 
where he was seated on the doorstep 
talkin g with the mistress of the house. 
Slowly , guiltily, he turned back, entered 
the kitchen and laid the watch where he 
had found it; and then he rushed wildl y 
wit h arms outstretched back toward the 
stranger. 
Th e woma n had laid supper for her 
husband, and goin g down from the house 
had walked out toward a neighbor's. She 
was gone but a little while , and when 
she came back she started to see a dark 
figure on the doorsteps under the tall 
red oak. She thought it was the new 
Negr o hand until he said in a soft voice : 
"Wil l yo u give me bread?" 
Reassured at the voice of a white man, 
she answered quickly in her soft Southern tones: 
"Why , certainly. " 
She was a little woman. Onc e she had 
been handsome, but now her face was 
drawn wit h wor k and care. She' was 
nervous, and was always thinking, wish ­
ing, wantin g for something. She went 
in and got him some cornbread and a 
glass of cool, rich buttermilk, and then 
came out and sat down beside him. She 
began, quite unconsciously, to tell him 
about herself—the things she had done, 
and had not done, and the things she 
had wished. She told him of her husband, and this new farm they were trying to buy. She said it was so hard to 
get niggers to work. She said they ought 
all to be in the chain gang and made to 
work . Eve n then some ran away. Onl y 
yesterday one had escaped. 
A t last she gossiped of her neighbors; 
how good they were and how bad. 
"An d do yo u like them all? " asked the 
stranger. 
She hesitated. 
"Most of them, " she said; and then, 
lookin g up into his face and putting her 
hand in his as though he were her father, 
she said: 
"Ther e are none I hate; no, none at 
all. " 
H e looked away and said dreamily: 
"Yo u love your neighbor as yourself? " 
She hesitated— 
"I try " she began, and then looked 
the way he was looking ; down under the 
hill, where lay a little, half-ruined cabin. 
"The y are niggers," she said briefly. 
H e looked at her. Suddenly a confusion came over her, and she insisted, she 
knew not why— 
"Bu t they are niggers." 
Wit h a sudden impulse she rose, and 
hurriedly lighted the lamp that stood just 
withi n the door and held it above her 
head. She saw his dark face and curly 
hair. She shrieked in angry terror, and 
rushed down the path; and just as she 
rushed down, the black convict came running up wit h hands outstretched. The y 
met in midpath, and before he could stop 
he had run against her, and she fell 
heavily to earth and lay white and still. 
He r husband came rushing up wit h cry 
and oath: 
" I knew it," he said; "it is that runaway nigger." H e held the black man 
struggling to the earth, and raised his 
voice to a yell. Dow n the highway came 
the convict guard with hound and mob 
and gun. The y poured across the fields. 
Th e farmer motioned to them. 
"He-—attacked—my wife, " he gasped. 
Th e mob snarled and worke d silently. 
Righ t to the limb of the red oak they 
hoisted the struggling, writhin g black 
man, whil e others lifted the dazed 
woman. Righ t and left as she tottered to 
the house she searched for the stranger, 1» 
74 THE CRISIS 
wit h a sick yearning, but the stranger 
was gone. An d she told none of her 
guest. 
"No—no—I want nothing, " she in ­
sisted, until they left her, as they thought, 
asleep. Fo r a time she lay still listening 
to the departure of the mob. The n she 
rose. She shuddered as she heard the 
creaking of the limb where the body 
hung. Bu t resolutely she crawled to the 
window and peered out into the moon ­
light; she saw the dead man writhe . H e 
stretched his arms out like a cross, lookin g upward. She gasped and clung to 
the window sill. Behin d the swayin g 
body, and down where the little, halfruined cabin lay, a single flame flashed 
up amid the far-off shout and cry of the 
mob. A fierce jo y sobbed up through 
the terror in her soul and then sank 
abashed as she watched the flame rise. 
Suddenly whirlin g into one great crimson column it shot to the top of the sky 
and threw great arms athwart the 
gloom until above the worl d and behind 
the roped and swayin g form below hung 
quivering and burnin g a great crimso n 
cross. 
She hid her dizzy, achin g head in an 
agony of tears, ana dared not look, for 
she knew. He r dry lips moved : 
"Despised and rejected of men. " 
She knew, and the very horro r of it 
lifted her dull and shrinkin g eyelids. 
There , heaven-tall, earth-wide, hun g the 
stranger on the crimson cross, riven and 
bloodstained wit h thorn-crowne d head 
and pierced hands. She stretched her 
arms and shrieked. 
H e did not hear. H e did not see. His 
calm dark eyes all sorrowful were fastened on the writhing , twistin g body of 
the thief, and a voice came out of the 
winds of the night, saying : 
"This day thou shalt be wit h me in 
Paradise! " 
TH E STOR Y O F A "DESPERADO " 
Newspape r headlines can easily make 
•a thing seem what it is not. This evil 
powe r is almost universally used in the 
America n press against the interests of 
the Negr o race. 
W e all saw a few days ago how one 
Negr o in Northport, Ala. , had killed 
two "deputy sheriffs," and we all, even 
the blackest of us, had our minds filled 
wit h the idea of some Negr o crimina l 
being run down by officers of the law and 
makin g a desperate and murderous resistance. Fo r instance, "Negr o Desperado Kills Tw o Deputy Sheriffs in 
Figh t Nea r Tuscaloosa—Stron g Posse 
Ha s Blac k Surrounded in Swamp and His 
Death Is Momentaril y Expected—Excite ­
ment Is High. " An d the dispatch sent 
from Birmingham read: "Chased by a 
posse, Fran k Harrison , a Negr o murderer, is hidin g in the hills of Tuscaloos a 
County. O n Sunday he killed Deputy 
Sheriff Coope r at Northport, Ala. , and today killed Deputy Sheriff Horto n and a 
Negro . In the fight Deputy Sheriff 
Hamb y and another Negr o were 
wounded. 
"It is feared the Negr o wil l be lynched 
if caught. Dog s are on the murderer's 
trail. " 
Eve n the best of us, those of us wh o 
sympathize with the disadvantage under which the Negr o so often struggles, 
in this particular case shrugged our 
shoulders and said, "Ho w bad of the 
Negro ; how foolish to make such a 
bloodthirsty crimina l mark for himself." 
An d then perhaps we whispered to our 
thoughts: " I should not be surprised if 
the white people, 'the best citizens,' of 
that neighborhood woul d try to lync h 
that Negro. " An d that is the wa y in 
whic h the newspaper has imposed upon 
the thoughts of law-abiding white and 
black people all over this country, in 
this instance, and in a thousand and ten 
thousand other instances; for behold 
here the truth: 
In the first place, and to rob the newspaper headline of its chief sting, neither 
of the men killed were "deputy sheriffs." 
An d yo u who read the first and onl y accounts in the Associated Press read the 
followin g plain statement of the actual 
facts and see what a different impression 
wil l be made on you : 
A white man, of Northport, Ala. , wh o 
had once upon a time been a deputy 
sheriff, went to the home of a Negr o 
named Richardso n to borrow that Ne ­
gro's saddle. Th e Negro , standing in 
his own door, said to the white man, 
wh o was standing outside of the Negro's 
gate: "Mr . Cooper, I woul d be glad to 
lend yo u my saddle to-day, but I'm going to use it myself—I'm goin g to ride 
to church. " 
The n the white man, perhaps crazed 
by liquor or drug but more likel y by the 
hardly less dangerous consciousness of 
his race, replied wit h heat and in the 
presence of the Negro's family : "D— n 
you, nigger! Ever y time I ask yo u for 
a favor, you've got some excuse. Yo u 
blank-blank-blankety-blank, you ! I'l l 
have that saddle or kil l you. " 
Th e Negr o replied: "If I came to you r 
house and spoke that way in the presence of your family, yo u all woul d try to 
mob me." HISTORIC DAYS IN DECEMBER 75 
Whereupo n the white man, apparently 
infuriated by this recital of a very evident truth, entered the Negro's gate and 
made straight for him. Th e Negr o 
stepped back, reached for his Win ­
chester and the white man was slain. 
An d what did the Negr o do then? 
Exactl y what every Negr o in certain 
States of the Unio n woul d have imme ­
diately thought of doing, and what I 
suspect the majority of them woul d 
actually have done; he decided that selfdefense woul d be no plea for him, and 
he immediately became a fugitive from 
justice, or (according to his viewpoint) 
from injustice. 
Why ? 
Well , let us look the truth full i n the 
face once, if it kills, and I half suspect 
that it wil l not kil l us. H e had heard of 
a hundred cases in whic h colored men 
had been murdered by either legal or 
illega l process for a plain homicide in 
self-defense. Nay , more, he had heard a 
thousand times that Negroe s had lost 
their lives or their liberty for acts much 
less grave than the one he committed. 
I am told by those wh o kno w that as 
he fled, the best white people of North -
port did not go in pursuit of him— 
perhaps they thought that the least embarrassing wa y out of the whol e thing 
woul d be to let the Negr o run off if 
he could. O f those wh o pursued him 
(and wit h wha t intention both yo u and 
I, as wel l as he, woul d have been of 
the same opinion) he slew one, wh o 
constitutes "the second "deputy" of the 
newspaper headline. 
Wha t about this second killing ? Well , 
in the eyes of the law 1 suppose it was 
murder, but in the light of that fellow's 
situation, taking absolutely everything 
into consideration just as we all know 
it, and in the more awful light of your 
own instinct of self-preservation, what 
do yo u call it? Wa s there anything in 
the history of the courts of his own 
communit y to give him even the slightest hope of justice? Wa s there anything in the last thirty days through 
whic h he had lived, during whic h time a 
black man was shot or burned EVER Y 
OTHE R DAY—wa s there one thing in 
this terrible history to lead him to fall 
wit h confidence and complacency into 
the hands of a lot of pursuing "citizens, " 
even if they had been the "best?" 
It was another Negr o wh o finally disarmed and delivered this Negr o into the 
hands of officers. An d yet the Negr o 
is accused of hidin g the criminals of his 
race. Th e Negr o is guilty of as little 
concealment of this type of criminals as 
any other people woul d be—if not less 
—i f in their situation. Bu t unless the 
Negr o is made a party to our conventions called laws, he wil l feel more 
and more that he has nothing to do wit h 
them and is not justly bound by them, 
and the number of those wh o wil l be 
willin g to deliver up offenders, especially 
of the color-line type, wil l become 
steadily and proportionately less. 
WM . PICKENS, Talladega College. 
HISTORI C DAY S I N DECEMBE R 
1. Connecticut makes man stealing a 
capital offense, 1642. 
2. Joh n Brow n is executed at Charlestown, Virgini a (now West Virginia), 
18S9. 
4. South Carolin a adopts revised constitution, whose main purpose is to exclude Negroe s from the suffrage, 189S. 
5. Frederic k Douglass' freedom is purchased, 1846. 
6. Columbu s discovers the island of 
Hayti , 1496. 
8. President Lincol n proposes a plan 
of reconstruction in his message to Con ­
gress, 1863. 
10. Nationa l Colore d Labo r Conven ­
tion meets in the Distric t of Columbia , 
1869. 
12. Joseph H . Rainey, of South Caro ­
lina , takes his seat as the first Negr o 
membe r of Congress, 1870. 
14. Proposa l in Congress to revive 
Africa n slave trade, 1856. 
15. Colored . Methodist Episcopa l 
Churc h consisting of what had • been 
the Negr o membership of the Methodist 
Episcopa l Churc h (South) is organized, 
1870. 
17. Joh n G. Whittier, the poet of freedom, born, 1807. 
18. Thaddeus Stevens opens debate in 
Congress on Reconstruction, 1865. 
22. Charles Leno x Remond , Negr o 
anti-slavery worker, dies, 1873. 
23. Jefferson Davis, President of the 
Confederacy, issues proclamation outlawing officers of Negro troops, 1862. 
26. Th e Georgi a Legislatur e passes an 
act offering a reward of $5,000 for the 
arrest and delivery within that State of 
Willia m Lloy d Garrison, 1831. 
27. Hinto n R. Helper, author of "Th e 
Impending Crisis, " born, 1829. 
28. America n Colonizatio n Society 
founded, 1817. 
29. Th e Pennsylvani a Anti-Slaver y 
Society petitions Congress for the abolition of slavery, 1790. 
L . M . HERSHAW. ITH E BURDEN] 
COLORE D ME N LYNCHE D WITH ­
OU T TRIAL . 
1885. 
1886. 
1887. 
1888. 
1889. 
1890. 
1891. 
1892. 
1893. 
1894. 
1895. 
1896. 
1897. 
78 
71 
80 
95 
95 
90 
121 
155 
154 
134 
112 
S O 
122 
1898. 
1899. 
1900. 
1901. 
1902. 
1903. 
1904. 
1905. 
1906. 
1907. 
1908. 
1909. 
1910. 
102 
84 
107 
107 
86 
86 
83 
61 
64 
60 
93 
73 
65 
Tota l 2,458 
<] The followin g incident comes from 
Oklahoma : "O n Tuesday an old colored 
lady was standing on Broadwa y and a 
nicely dressed little white girl attempted 
to cross the street-car track in front of 
a movin g car, not seeing the car, whic h 
meant death. Th e old colored lady 
grabbed the child and held it back, 
thereby saving its life. Th e child looked 
up into her face, saw wh o it was, and 
jerked away, exclaiming, 'Don't put your 
hands on me, yo u old nigger.' 
" A little later a little colored girl was 
crossing the track on Court Street in 
front of a movin g car, not seeing the car, 
and woul d doubtless have been killed , 
but a white gentleman wh o was near 
caught the child and saved her life. Look ­
ing around and seeing wh o it was, she 
cried out, 'Whit e man, don't put your 
hands on me.' " 
q In Denver, Colorado, Dr. W . H . P . 
Westbrook , a colored physician, applied 
for membership in the Chambe r of Com ­
merce. Th e committee on membership, 
after some hesitation, accepted the application. Whe n the matter came before 
the organization the white Southerners 
threatened to withdraw, and Dr. Westbrook withdrew his application. 
•J In a machine shop i n Muskogee , 
Okla. , there was a race riot, precipitated 
by some trouble between a black man 
and a white man. Th e whit e ma n entered the shop by the wron g door and 
a Negr o sent him to the right one (he 
said by the direction of the foreman) ; 
wh o was to blame for the ensuing trouble does not appear, but anywa y a letter 
appeared in a daily paper of that city, 
signed by the white shop committee, and 
we quote a few specimen phrases: 
"I n reference to the race riot at Mid ­
land Valle y shops, I woul d like to in ­
form yo u and the publi c that there are 
no Negr o machinists in the Unite d States 
of Americ a or Canada . W e consider it 
a gross insult to be classed with a Negro ; 
therefore, we want the public to kno w 
that there were no Negr o machinists 
in the union. . . . Th e men in a body 
refused to resume their wor k wit h the 
Negroes as helpers, and therefore they 
were discharged. " 
Th e incident is interesting, in that it 
shows the systematic attempts of a certain type of man to spread falsehoods 
about the Negro . Ther e are, of course, 
Negr o machinists i n the Unite d States, 
but ignorant workingme n in Oklahoma 
must be kept from the knowledge , that 
black men may be mor e easily pushed 
into purely menia l positions. 
f$ In Frankfort, Ky. , an ol d colored 
man, a stranger, was struck by a railway train and severely injured. A n 
ambulance was called but the white hospitals woul d not take him. H e was 
carried to an undertaker's shop, but the 
proprietor had no room and no experience wit h persons wh o were merely 
dying. Afte r several other adventures 
the injured man was carried to the work ­
house, and as it was crowded withi n 
doors, a wago n was wheeled out of a 
shed and he was put in its place. Afte r 
a few hours of the shed the old man 
solved the difficulty by dying . 
NATIVITY 
By Mary White Ovington 
Unt o the pure of heart it matters not 
Thoug h they be born to great estate 
or small. 
Withi n a palace stood Lor d Buddha's cot 
Whil e Jesus suckled in an ox's stall. D u Bois, W . E . B.—"Th e Quest of the 
Silve r Fleece. " McClur g & Co., 
Chicago . 
I n reading Dr. D u Bois' novel yo u realize for the first time the vita l note whic h 
the art of America n fiction has lacked. 
In the absorbing and compellin g hold 
that it takes upon your imagination and 
sympathies, yo u are convinced of what 
America n fiction has gained in this story. 
Behin d every big novel is some great 
force of nature; this struggles through 
the human experience and becomes the 
law by whic h the mora l and ethical fate 
of man work s out the drama of the soul. 
It is subtle and strange and mysterious, 
and levels all mankin d into a fraternity 
of those virtues and vices, those hopes 
and aspirations, those joys and sorrows, 
makin g a commo n brotherhood of all the 
races of men that live the intricate but 
infinite distance between nature and God . 
T o Fran k Morris' commercia l epic of 
wheat and James Lan e Allen's theological epic of hemp Dr. D u Bois now adds 
the spiritual epic of cotton. It becomes 
the wove n texture in the hands of this 
poet, through whic h runs the pattern of 
a great problem, harmonized in its subtler details of human motives. Th e significance of these human figures, in the 
grip of this great force of nature, lies 
deeper than the difference between their 
circumstances of life; it is in that sublime r consciousness of the soul whic h 
finds its law in nature and in God , and 
finds its aspirations and its hopes crushed 
through the interpretation of those laws 
whe n applied by man's unjust and narrow conception of them. Bu t yo u can 
never get away from the fact, prophetic 
as it is, and overwhelmin g in its profound simplicity, that nature renders visible—is a sort of material symbo l of 
God's invisible and impartia l justice; that 
of neither race nor creed do either take 
any recognizance in leading the strugglin g human soul to a realization of the 
light it sees. Blac k folk and white folk 
under the tremendous influence of a force 
deeper than any recognition of dominant 
and inferior races, voyage as it were, in 
the ship of their souls over life's troubled 
waters, in the "Quest of the Silve r 
Fleece. " 
I n writin g the story of Zor a and Ble s 
Alwyn , Dr. D u Bois has created two 
characters, and brought them through the 
ramifications of the Great Problem to a 
final triumph with unerring balance of 
motives, and with all the felicitous, 
poetic, unweaving of purpose. In and 
out like tangled threads run the lives of 
those whom the perplexing conditions of 
the South cannot separate, who share a 
commo n fate in their own individua l experiences. It is an immense background 
that stretches into infinite reaches of soul 
and conscience, across whic h the actions 
of these lives pass. Tragedy, pity, sympathy, the great sullen and inexplicable 
deepness and the vast silence therein that 
smothers reason and makes inarticulate 
the surging inclinations, beat like a great 
rhythm in these men and women as they 
voyage on this quest of the fleece. Th e 
environment of an Alabama county, wit h 
all its picturesque details of swamp, plantatio n and village, in which the sordid 
conditions of an unhappy people and 
their masters blotch the countenance of 
the earth; and later the urban, complexed, intriguing and feverish antagonisms of the nation's capital, furnish the 
scenes in which these two dark children 
of men rise above themselves to manhood and womanhood. Ther e is no more 
subtler portraiture of womanhood than 
that apparition that rose out of the 
swamp, a child of nature and dreams, 
who made her soul an altar of sacrifice 
and a messenger of life. 
He r character is wrought upon the 
anvil of suspicion. It is placed there a 
molten mass of dreams and mysterious 
desires, which the hammers of Southern 
carnality, her lover's desertion and the 
redemptive hopes for her helpless people 
beat mercilessly, but joyously, into the 
final triumphant shape of noble woman ­
hood. She is prima l in her instincts, 
whic h is her truthfulness to nature—to 
type—if you will . But so was Jane Eyre , 
too, and Beck y Sharp; and to make her 
more real, more vitally human, you find 
Dr. D u Bois holding her off, as Thack ­
eray holds Becky, and emphasizing those 
conventional traits—her little falsehoods 
and thefts—so yo u may the more readily 
see the fineness of her character in what 
she overcame and accomplished. But, 
after all, when you have arrived without 
prejudice at the psychology of her untruthfulness and thefts, and drew the 
comparative consequences that followed 
Mar y Taylor's betrayal of her ideals and 
conscience, yo u also arrive at that pro-78 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
found universality of human nature that 
lies at the bottom of all mankind . An d 
it is the poetic vision, the touchstone of 
that eternal rhythm, whic h Dr. D u Bois 
reveals, penetrating and layin g bare the 
likeness in the unlikeness of these two 
peoples wh o are submitting in this remarkabl e story their passions and their 
prejudices, their hatreds and commo n in ­
terests for settlement before the arbitra ­
tion of the great natural tribuna l of 
cotton. 
I wis h to lay stress on this because, for 
the first time, in this novel, the great 
problem has been handled wit h such 
sheer visiona l grasp of life purpose and 
not race purpose. Tak e any one of the 
important characters—Miss Smith, head 
of the Negr o school; Colone l Cresswell, 
Harr y Cresswell, his son, the aristocratic 
planters; Mar y Taylo r and Joh n Taylor, 
her brother and manipulator of the cotton corner; Senator Smith , Maxwell , Mrs. 
Vanderpool, Ble s Alwy n and Carri e 
Wynn , the colored Washingto n school 
teacher—and yo u wil l discover that, 
howeve r it may seem to be the tremendous racial stake that draws their 
lives into sharp and agonizin g conflict 
and contrast, it is really the deeper, 
more passionate battle of individua l life. 
Th e incidents and actions through whic h 
these characters progress to the climax 
of their strivings—the cotton-growers' 
problems of labor and prices, the market manipulations of Norther n capitalists, 
the politica l machinery of a presidential 
campaign, the machinery of the colored 
school system at Washington , and the 
growin g complexity of social life amon g 
the colored people—however diversified, 
howeve r contrasting in revealing traits 
and temperaments, it is the arriva l 
at some final distinction i n all these 
figures of a deeply human sense 
of man's existence. If yo u carry 
away from a nove l this impression 
of human nature, of a fine distinction of 
character breaking through this human 
nature, yo u are richer by a revelation of 
life that has been the artist's sole purpose 
in weavin g his imagination around those 
unseen realities that beat from that eternal rhythm of existence, and whic h 
counts not for a day, but for all times. 
Somethin g more important than immigration supplies the meltin g pot of the 
future American ; it is vision, that boils 
truth into some visibl e and pulsing 
shape; and it is this spiritua l element 
whic h wil l add completeness to that figure now simmerin g in the development 
of the America n nation. Th e great and 
conflicting forces of these two peoples 
in the South does not become a text i n 
Dr. D u Bois' novel, for justice, equality, 
charity, nor mutua l co-operation; it is 
the vision of truth glowingl y presented 
in all its evading and changing aspects 
whic h alone, makin g art, and especially 
the illusion of fictional art, reveals how 
inevitable these things must be, if humanity woul d not destroy wha t is most 
precious and vita l i n its progress. Be ­
cause something so large, so elemental, 
so sweeping i n its poetic conviction , underlies the disengaging visio n of a great 
human oneness, "Th e Quest of the Silve r 
Fleece " stands above all other novels 
that shape this theme. 
WILLIA M STANLE Y BRAITHWAITE. 
Bom. 2220 Cen. 6322 
Van Noy Printing Co. 
100 Line n Finis h Card s by Mall , 50c. 
COMMERCIA L PRINTIN G 
SOCIET Y PRINTIN G 
BOO K AN D JO B PRINTIN G 
2315 MARKE T ST . ST . LOUIS , MO . 
JOINING TH E NAVY ; OR, 
ABROA D WIT H UNCL E SAM 
B y JOH N H . PAYNTER , A.M . 
' First Race Contribution to Navy 
Literature 
Ordered b y the Government for Librarie s of 
Wa r Vessels 
"It is a perfect pictur e of life on board 
ship when I first went to sea. Th e story is 
told so simply and in such good style, and 
holds its interest so, that I read it through 
at one sitting."—Richardso n Clover , Rear 
Admiral , U . S. N. , Retired. 
Cloth Bound . 300 Pages. Full y Illustrated. 
SECON D EDITIO N 
Sent Postage Pai d on Receipt of One Dolla r 
Address care of 
SUDWARTH PRINTING CO. 
WASHINGTON , D . C. 
Xmas Pictures Free 
Send us 15 cents to pay postage and packing. We will 
enclose our unique selling plan, whereby you may make 
money selling beautiful pictures of Negro subjects, suitable for interior decoration. Pictures 16x20. "Jesus 
Died for Both." "Clinging to the Cross." "Beacon 
Light" "Booker T. Washington." "Protecting Angel.'' 
"Heavenward." "Onward." "Jack Johnson." "The 
Colored Troop Charging up San Juan Hill. " "Moses." 
"The Little Shepherd." Price, postpaid, 25 cents. 
15 Beautiful Art Postcards, 10 Cents 
Christmas, New Year's and other holiday cards. 
AGENTS WANTE D 
Our agents are coining money on these pictures and 
postcards. One agent made $15 in one day. 
JACOB GRIFFITH 
252 WES T 53 d STREE T NE W YOR K 
Mention THE CRISI S THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 79 
If you are honest, ambitious and determined to succeed in business—a business absolutely your own—we 
can help you. We will teach you by mail the secrets of 
Real Estate, Brokerage and Insurance business, list properties and propositions with and for you to handle so1 
you can make money from the very start. 
We Teach Yon All the Secrets 
of Real Estate, Brokerage 
and Insurance Business 
W e Instruc t You I n 
Salesmanship, 
Advertising. 
Office System. 
Real Estate Titles. 
ConveyancingHow to List Properties. 
How to Judge Values. 
How to Option Properties. 
How to Find Prospective Customers. 
How to Close Deals. 
How to Secure Loans. 
How to Get Insurance Business. 
How to Organize and Finance Corporations. In fact, 
all the essential secrets known to and practiced by the 
successful broker and promoter. 
We also give you a thorough Commercial Law Course. 
enabling you to meet for yourself and overcome difficulties 
that may arise. In short. we start you on the road to success. 
Success and Independence 
Mr. Gates says: "I started into this business without 
capital and have built up one of the most successful 
agencies in Vermont." Mr. Dunbar of Kansas says: "I 
have cleared up for myself during the year (his first 
year) over $9,000." Mr. Reynaud of Texas says: "I have 
done remarkably well for a beginner, having made over 
$6,500 in commissions since I started, nine months ago." 
Our 64-page book, sent free, tells you how to 
start—a postal card will bring it—write today. 
INTERNATIONA L REALT Y CORP. , 
719 Manhatta n Bldg , Chicago , Ill. 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.0( ) 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C . R . Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
REA D TH E CLASSIFIE D 
ADVERTISEMENT S O N 
PAGE S 8 2 AN D 83 . 
A limited numbe r of 
free beds maintained 
for the worthy poor. 
Othe r ward patients 
maintained at $7.00 
per week. 
Privat e rooms can 
be secured from 
$12.00 to $30.00 pe r 
week. 
The training school 
for nurses maintains 
a two years' course. 
A high school certificate, or an education sufficient to 
be considered an 
equivalent, necessary 
for admission. 
Fiv e thousand 
lars endows a 
bed. 
dolfree 
Andrew F. Stevens, 
President. 
Nathan F. Mossell. M.D. 
Medical Director and 
Superintendent. 
Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital and Training School, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mention The Crisis. 80 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Religious Training 
School and Chautauqua 
extends a cordial greeting to the ministers of all denominations 
to be the guests of the School for one week, beginning July 
6, 1912, for the purpose of discussing the following and 
kindred questions: 
What is the moral condition of the people in your community? 
Is crime on the increase? If not, what was the cause of its 
reduction ? 
What is the sanitary condition? What effort, if any, has 
been made to improve the sanitary condition? 
Is the death rate increasing? 
To what extent do you co-operate with the Civic Improvement 
Leagues? 
Has settlement work been conducted to any extent in your 
community, and with what results? 
What has been the effect of Temperance Organizations, and 
have you co-operated with them? 
To what extent has the work of the Y . M . C . A . and 
Y . W. C. A . been effective in your community? Do 
you approve them? 
What is the general fitness of the city and country school 
teacher? 
What has been the attitude of the day-school teacher toward 
the Church and Sunday School? 
What is the real religious condition of your people? Revivals, 
how conducted? 
All ministers who intend attending this Conference should 
make it known at an early date, addressing the President, so 
that reservation can be made for them. 
The Summer School and Chautauqua of the National 
Religious Training School will open July 3, 1912, and 
continue for six weeks. The most complete and most up-todate Summer School for the Colored Race in the United 
States. For particulars and terms address 
President JAME S E. SHEPAR D 
DURHAM , N. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS 
O. Augustus Wright 
Attorney-in-Fact 
P. O. Box 121 Bedford City, Va. 
Practices before the Department of the 
Interior, and the several bureaus thereof 
at Washington , D . C. Prosecutes 
claims for pension, increase of pension and bounty land. 
Searches made of U . S. Patent Office 
records; assignments of patents prepared and filed. Trademarks and copyrights procured. 
Correspondence solicited. 
Approved : Bureau of Pensions, J. P. 
9-26-11. 
ADVERTISER 81 
Beautiful Art Exhibit 
Durin g the holidays Miss Cor a Va n Schoick 
will have a sale and exhibit of unusual interest 
at the 
CLIO SCHOOL 
487 SIXT H AVENU E 
Bet. 29th and 30th Sts. New York City 
Ther e will be for sale hand-painted china and 
pillow tops; handmad e opera bags, pin-cushions 
and novelties. 
The exhibit will be brimful of Christmas-gift 
suggestions, as you will find original hand creations that appeal to milady's every mood and 
fancy. 
Telephone 3253 Harle m CARPE T CLEANIN G 
CLEANER S AN D RENOVATER S FO R PARTICULA R PEOPL E 
NE W YOR K CAREFU L CLEANIN G BUREA U 
12 WES T 135TH STREE T 
W e make a specialty of cleaning and renovating carpets, rugs, portieres and upholstered 
furniture , we also vacuum clean in the home. We are not the largest carpet cleaner in the 
world, but absolutely the most careful in every detail. 
SHAMPOOIN G CARPET S AN D RUG S OUR SPECIALT Y 
ESTABLISHE D 1887 'Phone 4715 Mad . Sq. 
L . A . d e TOSCAN O CO . 
OLDES T COLORE D REGALI A ESTABLISHMEN T I N TH E CIT Y 
Knights of Pythias 
Knights Templars 
And Patriarchs 
Equipments 
BADGE S 
JEWEL S 
REGALI A 
Paraphernalia 
and Supplies 
for All Societies 
Estimates Given 
Mme. B. E . de Toscano, Manager 
146 WES T 31st STREE T Bet. Sixth and Seventh Avenue . NE W YOR K CIT Y 
LEGA L DIRECTORY 
J . DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
5 Beekman Street (Temple Court) 
New Yor k City 
Tel . 6222 Cortlandt Cable Address, Judowet 
FREDERIC K L . McGHE E 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
Unio n Block, Fourth and Cedar Streets 
St. Paul, Minn . 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
Real Estate and Probate Matters a Specialty 
ROBER T B. BARCU S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
Office: Room 502, Eberly Block Columbus, O. 
B. S. SMIT H 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LAW . 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 82 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
CLASSIFIED ADVERTISING 
Through our Classified Advertising Service you have the opportunity 
to tell your little wants to 40,000 SELEC T readers. 
I| If you want HELP , you can find, among TH E CRISIS readers, 
graduates of Industrial Schools and thousands of young people who are 
trained for efficient, dependable service. 
C, If you want a POSITION , TH E CRISIS can help you find highclass places for teachers, managers, clerks, stenographers, hotel men, etc, etc. 
•I Yo u will find our readers very responsive to this department for 
Business Opportunities, Investments, Correspondence Schools, Agents 
Wanted, etc. 
Advertisers may have replies sent in care of TH E CRISIS and forwarded. 
C | Classified advertising rates made known on application. 
REA L ESTAT E 
Valuable Texas Lands 
For Sale 
Larg e tracts of farm, land in the best localities of the State for sale at very flattering 
prices. Small tracts for good lands suitable for 
farming, truck, fruits and any domestic product. 
We have for sale a numbe r of large farms already in cultivation, good houses and barns, 
wells, and nice pasture lands, which can be 
obtained at reasonable rates. City property a 
specialty. Business lots i n the best part of 
the city, improved and unimproved. Larg e lots 
suitable for factory property with switch 
facilities. 
No investment can be more valuable than an 
investment in Texas real estate. Land s are becoming so valuable that they are doubling 
themselves in value i n less than a year's time. 
Fo r any investment in Texas property, write 
T. B . Madiso n Rea l Estat e Company, 2415 El m 
Street, Dallas, Texas. 
To Colored People 
F
O R SALE—W e have houses from $1,000 to 
$30,000. Ou r city is the capital of Ohi o 
and a great manufacturing center—plenty of 
work, a good place to locate for business. Ca n 
sell you a house for $50, $100 to $500 down, 
balance like rent. Fo r investment and speculating houses or business places, $1,000 to 
$5,000 down, balance on long time payment. 
Far m land prices from $1,000 to $10,000 up. 
An y of these are i n good locations. Writ e for 
further information. 
THI S I S A COLORE D ENTERPRISE . 
EDWARD A. SHANKLIN 
Real Estate 
1218 1/2 Mt. Vernon Ave. Columbus, Ohio 
Mention 
Come to Oklahoma 
TAFT , OKLAHOMA , is the fastest-growing colored town in the United 
States. Already a flourishing, prosperous community with bank, industrial college and State school for colored race, 
cotton gin, brick yard, churches, numerous stores and other enterprises, all controlled by thriving colored citizens. 
Surrounded by the most fertile fanning 
land in Oklahoma. Directly in the path 
of the fortune-making oil developments 
in Oklahoma. Splendid openings for 
home seekers, business men, mechanics 
and others. Invest pour money in Taft 
now. It will make you handsome 
returns. 
Beautifully located lots, $25 to $30 
each. Five dollars cash, small monthly 
payments without interest or taxes. 
Perfect titles positively guaranteed. 
Write to-day for handsome illustrated 
map, booklet and lithograph. 
REEVES REALTY CO. 
Flynn-Ame s Bldg-, Muskogee . Okla . 
THE CRISIS, THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 83 
REA L ESTATE 
A n investment in New Yor k Cit y and its 
suburban Real Estat e offers the surest road to 
success And wealth. Lots, farm lands and houses 
for sale. Out-of-town correspondence invited. 
S. AUGUSTU S DUNCA N 
REA L ESTAT E AN D INSURANC E BROKE R 
2229 Fift h Avenue New Yor k 
160 ACRES OF LAND FREE 
Under the U. S. Homestead Act, 160 acres of laud 
may be acquired free of charge, except small fee for 
filing application and recording patent, by any person 
of age, married or single (If married, the head of the 
family is entitled). who is not the owner of any 
land. Land located In 21 States. Some very rich 
and productive. Choice of location. Send $1.00 for 
a copy of the Free Homestead Act. Address 
0. A. WRIGHT, Box 121, Bedford City, Virginia 
MUSIC 
HELE N ELIS E SMIT H 
CONCER T PIANIS T 
Post-Graduate of the Institute of Musica l 
Pupi l of Sigismund Stojowski 
Teache r of Piano, Theory, Ear-training , etc. 
22 4 EAS T 86T H STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Ar t 
MISS EDIT H W . McKENN Y 
Concert Pianist 
310 W. 119th Street Now Yor k City 
Piano lessons given privately or in classes 
at reasonable rates. 
Musi c furnished for privat e parties. 
SCHOOLS 
YOUN G MAN , HAV E YO U A TRADE 7 
B y our method we teach the Barbe r Trade in 
six weeks. 
We give you a complete set of tools and 
secure you a position in a shop. Call or write 
for particulars. 
NE W YOR K BARBE R SCHOO L 
Costello & Wis e 
Cor . Bower y and Rivington St. NE W YOR K 
FURRIER 
Seventeen Years' Experienc e 
WOR K TURNE D OU T PROMPTL Y 
MRS . G. B. NEEDLE S 
Lat e with Broadwa y houses 
PRACTICA L FURRIE R 
Al l kinds of furs remodelled, repaired and relined. Whit e furs cleaned, equal to new. Coats 
guaranteed to fit. Price s reasonable. 
24 WES T 136T H STREE T NE W YOR K 
CRISIS AGEN T 
TH E CRISIS 
CHARLE S D. LEVY , Agent 
4218 Clara Street New Orleans, La . 
HELP WANTE D 
LOCA L REPRESENTATIVE S for TH E CRISI S 
wanted in each locality. 
Some agents sell over 800 copies monthly. 
Writ e for particulars. 
Address: 
FRAN K M . TURNE R 
CIRCULATIO N MANAGE R 
Suite 811 
20 Vesey Street, New Yor k 
RELIABL E HEL P at all times for the most 
discriminating employers. 
Out-of-town correspondence invited. 
References thoroughly investigated 
Address: 
MIS S I. L . MOORMA N 
463 Leno x Avenue New Yor k 
Are you in need of 
Is your friend in need of Help or position? 
If so, 'phone, call or write the 
MIDDLESE X EMPLOYMEN T AGENC Y 
2229 Fift h Ave., near 136th St. 
OHAS . A . KNOWLES , Mgr . 
References Carefully Investigated 
'Phone 6870 Harle m 
STUDEN T NURSE S WANTE D 
A limited number of vacancies for pupil nurses 
at the Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital, 
Lombar d and 16th Streets, Philadelphia, Pa . 
Requirements for Admission 
HIGH-SCHOO L CERTIFICAT E or an education sufficient to be considered an equivalent. 
Course—2 years, 3 months. 
Applicants for admission will address 
MIS S E . M . BROWNE , Supt. of Nurses 
TYPEWRITERS 
Remingtons, Densmores, Jewetts, $11.50 each; Franklins. 
Postals, Hammonds, $9 each. 
Bargain s in Underwoods. 
Smiths and all others. All 
guaranteed. Supplies. 
Standar d Typewrite r 
Exchang e 
23B Park Row, New York 
JEWELR Y 
$1.00 A BEAUTIFU L 
Gold-Filled Ring 
Suitable as a present or Christmas gift. 
Writ e for particulars. 
DODSO N COMPAN Y 
Importing Jewelers 
127 W . VIN E ST. , KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
A RAC E ENTERPRIS E 
Manufacturing Badges, Banners and 
Supplies for all Fraterna l and Churc h 
Societies. Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L . Jones, Pres. 
N. E . Cor. 8th and Plum Streets 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
Mention TH B CRISIS . 84 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
WHER E T O STO P 
f$ Our readers are urged to use these hotels and stopping places. 
They are modern in every sense, and the traveling public is assured 
comfort and efficient service. 
•I For detailed information concerning resorts and hotels write 
The Travel Editor of The Crisis, 20 Vesey St., New York 
NEW YORK CITY 
Marshall's Hotel 127-129 West 33d Street 
NE W YOR K CITY 
COMFORT— Large , airy rooms, offering genuine home comforts plus the 
conveniences and privileges of a modern hotel. 
SERVICE— I n the hotel and dinin g room the "Marshall " service is an exceptional feature, whic h assures comfort and pleasure for our patrons. 
Restaurant open all night. Cuisine to satisfy the most discriminating 
VOCA L AN D INSTRUMENTA L MUSI C EVER Y EVENIN G 
Breakfast, 7:30 to 12:30, 30c. Luncheon , 12:30 to 3, 30c. Dinner, 6 to 8, 35c. 
Special Course Dinne r Ever y Sunday and Holidays, 50c. 
Telephones 4693 - 4694 Columbus J- L . MARSHALL , Proprietor 
'Phone Chelsea 2957 
TH E TE N EYC K HOUS E 
232 WES T 20T H STREE T 
Between 7th and 8th Avenue s NE W YOR K 
Neatly Furnished Rooms for Permanent 
or Transient Guests by Da y or Week 
MBS . THOMA S L . TE N EYCK , Proprietress 
' ' A quiet place for quiet people to dine'' 
"TH E BRADFORD " 
73 WES T 134T H STREE T 
Between Fift h and Leno x Avenue s NE W YOR E 
Oysters, Chops, Steaks, Rarebits, Salads, Club 
Sandwiches, Etc . Regular Dinner , 25c , from 
2 p. m. to 9 p. m. Meals Served at Al l Hours. 
Privat e Dinin g Room. Furnishe d Rooms T o 
Let. Permanent or Transient. 
JOH N E . BRADFORD , Proprieto r 
HARLE M PRIVAT E HOUS E 
Furnishe d rooms to let for gentlemen only. 
Ho t and cold water in every room. 
MRS . BERRY L . HICKS , Proprietress 
258 WES T 133D STREE T NE W YOR K 
Fou r doors from Eight h Avenue 
'Phone 2877 Lenox 
WHIT E ROS E WORKIN G GIRLS ' 
HOM E 
217 East 86th Street 
Bet. Second and Thir d Avenue s 
Pleasant temporary lodgings for working girls, 
with privileges, at reasonable rates. Th e Hom e 
solicits orders for working dresses, aprons, etc. 
Address: 
MBS . FRANCE S B . KEYSER , Supt. 
Mention TH E CRISIS , 
TH E SOUTHER N RESTAURAN T 
2229 Fifth Avenue 
Bet. 135th and 136th Sts. 
Sea l Hom e Cooking ; Meals Served at Al l Hours. 
REASONABL E RATE S EXCELLEN T SERVIC E 
Home-made Rolls Served Ho t 
NORTH CAROLINA 
SANDERS ' HOTE L 
301 S. Caldwell Street, Charlotte, N . C . 
Ideal location for transient and permanent 
boarders. Al l modern conveniences and comforts 
of home life. 
J. T. SANDER S 
Proprieto r 
'Phone 681 Ho t and Gold Baths 
WARRE N HOTE L 
MIS S BETTI E DUNCAN , Proprietress 
First-class accommodations. Meals at all hours. 
RATE S REASONABL E 
COB . RAMSE Y AN D PROCTO R STREET 8 
Thre e Blocks from Unio n Station 
DURHAM , N . C . 
IS YOU R HOTEL LISTED HERE? 
I F NOT , WRIT E US . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 85 
8. A . KELSEY , Pre». DR . WM . J . CARTER , Chiropodist MM E A . C. KELSEY , Gen' l Instr. 
The Kelsey School of Beauty Cultur e and Hair Dressin g 
328 Lenox Avenue, New York City. Branch: 75 W . 135th Street 
Persona l instruction given in the Ar t of Manicuring , Shampooing, Hair Dressing, 
Beauty Culture , Chiropody , and the manufacturing of Huma n Hair Goods. Send 
for booklet-directory of the recently graduated students. Courses from $10 to $65. 
KELL Y MILLER' S WORK S 
COMPREHENSIVE , CANDID , STATESMANLIKE . 
RACE ADJUSTMENT 
Large , octavo, 300 pages, best book, cloth, gilt edge, gold top. Pric e $2.00. 
"Prof. Mille r shows himself a master of an incisive style and a keen logician. " 
—Clevelan d Plai n Dealer. 
"Admirabl e for calmness and temper, thoroughness and skill."—New Yor k 
Evenin g Post. 
"Controversial, brilliantly so."—New Yor k Sun. 
PAMPHLET S 
Roosevelt and the Negro 10c 
Appea l to Reason 10c 
Fort y Year s of Negro Education 10c 
Th e Ultimat e Race Problem 10c 
Th e Politica l Capacity of the Negro 10c 
The Talented Tenth 10c 
Brie f for the Highe r Education of the Negro 10c 
Primar y Needs of the Negro Race 10c 
Social Equalit y 6c 
Agents wanted. Appl y to author, Howar d University , Washington , D . C. 
Do You Want to Make Money? 
CANVASSERS TO SELL SPHINX HANSOPE 
Used in garage, machine shop, factory and home. Twenty-five boxes 
for $1.25; you sell for $2.50. Whitens the skin, softens the hands, prevents 
chapping, heals cracks and sores. The first aid in burns. Strictly antiseptic, 
SPHINX LABOR-SAVING SOAP CO., Inc. 
11 7 Wes t Street , Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Mention THE CRISIS . 
HOO T SUPREM E 
OFFICER S O F TH E 
Home Nest Tree 
110 1/2 West Colfax Ave . 
South Bend, Ind. 
Hoo Hoo t Ho o Ho o ! Hoo Hoo ! 
SOMETHIN G NE W 
The Afro-American 
Order of Owls 
With a Graduated Scale of Endowment 
WANTED—Organizers in every city in the United 
States. For particulars write G. W. Bland, H. S- P., 
110 1/2 Colfax Avenue, South Bend, Indiana. 86 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
HAL F A MA N 
The Status of the Negro in New York 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a Foreword by Dr. Franz Boas, of Columbia University 
Miss Ovington's description of the statu a 
of the Negro in New Yor k City is based on 
a most painstaking inquiry into his social 
and economic conditions, and brings out in 
the most forceful way the difficulties under 
which the race is laboring, even in the large 
cosmopolitan population of New York . It 
is a refutation of the claims that the Negro 
has equal opportunity with the whites, and 
that his failure to advance more rapidly 
than he has, is due to innate inability.— 
From Dr. Boas' "Foreword." 
12mo, cloth. Price $1.00 net. By mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
The above book may be purchased through any bookseller or will be mailed by 
TH E CRISIS on receipt of the price and postage. 
"M y father has always lived in the 
South," a young colored man once said to 
me, "and has attained success there; but 
when I ceased to be a boy he advised me 
to live in the North,, where my manhood 
would be respected. H e himself cannot 
continually endure his position of inferiority, and in the summer he comes North to 
be a man. No, " correcting himself, "to 
be HAL F A MAN . A Negro is wholly a 
man only in Europe."—From the Author's 
"Introduction." 
TH E DIFFERENC E 
Between "GOO D ENOUGH " and the "BEST " is the 
difference between ordinary print-shop work and ours. 
Our facilities and long years of experience give 
our work that INDIVIDUALIT Y which you appreciate in 
your printed things. 
W e refer you to Mr . Conde Nast of Vogue and 
Dr. W . E . B. D u Bois of TH E CRISIS . 
By the way, we print TH E CRISIS . D O you like 
it? If so, let us make an estimate on your work. 
ROBER T N . WOO D
 20 2
 East 99th St., New York Phone Lenox 6
Mention THE Crisis. TH E NATIONAL ASSOCIATION for the 
ADVANCEMEN T of COLORED PEOPLE 
(Incorporated May 25, 1911) 
OBJECT. — Th e National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People 
is an organization composed of men and 
women of all races and classes who believe that the present widespread increase 
of prejudice against colored races and 
particularly the denial of rights and 
opportunities to ten million Americans of 
Negro descent is not only unjust and a 
menace to our free institutions, but also 
is a direct hindrance to Worl d Peace 
and the realization of Human Brotherhood. 
METHODS.—Th e encouragement of 
education and efforts for social uplift; the 
dissemination of literature; the holding of 
mass meetings; the maintenance of a lecture bureau ; the encouragement of vigilance committees ; the investigation of complaints ; the maintenance of a Bureau of 
Information; the publication of TH E 
CRISIS; the collection of facts and publication of the truth. 
ORGANIZATION.—Al l interested 
persons are urged to join our organization 
—associate membership costs $ 1, and 
contributing and sustaining members pay 
from $2 to $25 a year. 
FUNDS.—W e need $10,000 a year 
for running expenses of this work and particularly urge the necessity of gifts to help 
on our objects. 
OFFICERS.—Th e officers of the 
organization are: 
National President — Mr. Moorfield 
Storey, Boston, Mass. 
Chairman of the Executive Committee— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard, New 
York. 
Treasurer—Mr. Walter E . Sachs, New 
York. 
Director of Publicity and Research—Dr. 
W . Ε. B . D u Bois, New York. 
Secretary—Miss Mary W . Ovington, 
New York. 
COMMITTEE.—Ou r work is carried on under the auspices of the following General Committee, in addition to the 
officers named: 
Miss Gertrude Barnum, New York, 
Miss Frances Blascoer, New York. 
*Rev. W. H. Brooks, New York. 
Prof. John Dewey, New York. 
•Dr. John Lovejoy Elliott. New York 
•Mrs. Thos. Ewing, Jr., New York. 
•Rev. John Haynes Holmes, New York. 
Mr. Hamilton Holt, New York;. 
Miss Maud R. Ingersoll, New York. 
•Mrs. Florence Kelley, New York. 
•Mr . Paul Kennaday, New York. 
•Mrs. F. It. Keyser, New York. 
Dr. Chas. Lenz, New York. 
Mr. Jacob W. Mack, New York 
•Mrs. M. D. Maclean, New York. 
•Mr . John E. Milholland. New York. 
Rev. Horace G. Miller, New York. 
Mrs. Max Morgenthau. Jr., New York. 
Mr. James F. Morton, Jr., New York. 
Mr. Henry Moskowitz, New York. 
Miss Leonora O'Reilly, New York. 
•Rev. A. Clayton Powell, New York. 
•Mr . Charles Edward Russell, New York. 
Mr. Jacob H. Schiff, New York. 
Prof. E. R. A. Seligman, New York. 
•Dr. Joseph Silverman, New York. 
Mrs. Anna. Garlin Spencer, New York. 
•Prof. J. E. Spingarn, New York. 
Mrs. Henry Villard. New York. 
•Miss Lillian D. Wald, New York. 
•Mr . Wm. English Walling, New York. 
'Bishop Alexander Walters, New York. 
Dr. Stephen S. Wise. New York. 
Miss M. R. Lyons. Brooklyn, Ν. Y. 
•Dr. Ο. M. Waller. Brooklyn. Ν. Y. 
Mr. D. Macon Webster, Brooklyn, Ν. Y. 
Mr. Geo. E. Wibecan, Jr., Brooklyn, Ν. Y. 
Mrs. W. H. Talbert, Buffalo, Ν. Y. 
Hon. Thos. M. Osborne. Auburn, Ν. Y. 
•Mr . W. L. Bulkley, Ridgefleld Park, N. J. 
Mr. George W. Crawford. New Haven. Conn. 
Miss Maria Baldwin. Boston, Mass. 
Mr. Francis J. Garrison. Boston, Mass. 
Mr. Archibald H. Grimke, Boston, Mass. 
Miss Adelene Moffat, Boston. Mass. 
•Mr . Albert E. Pillsbury, Boston, Mass. 
Mr. Wm. Munroe Trotter, Boston, Mass. 
Dr. Horace Bumstead. Brookline. Mass. 
Miss Elizabeth C. Carter, New Bedford, Mass. 
Rev. Harvey Johnston, Baltimore, Md. 
Rev. Garnett R. Walter, Baltimore, Md. 
Prest. Chas. T. Thwlng, Cleveland, O. 
Mr. Chas. W. Chesnutt, Cleveland, O. 
Hon. Harry C. Smith. Cleveland, O. 
Prest. H . C. King, Oherlin, O. 
Prest. W. S. Scarborough, Wilberforce, O. 
•Miss Jane Addams, Chicago, Ill. 
•Mrs. Ida B. Wells Barnett. Chicago, Ill. 
•Dr. C. E. Bentley. Chicago. Ill. 
Miss Sophronisba Breckenridge, Chicago, Ill. 
Mr. Clarence Darrow. Chicago, Ill. 
Mr. Julius Rosenwald, Chicago. Ill. 
Mrs. Celia Parker Woolley, Chicago, Ill. 
Mr. F. L. McGhee. St. Paul. Minn. 
Miss Frances Bartholomew. Philadelphia, Pa. 
•Dr. N. F. Mossell. Philadelphia, Pa. 
•Dr. Wm. A. Sinclair, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Miss Susan Wharton. Philadelphia. Pa. 
Mr. R. R. Wright, Jr., Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mr. W. Justin Carter, Harrisburg, Pa. 
Rev. Harvey Johnson, D. D., Baltimore, Md. 
Hon. Wm. S. Bennet, Washington. D. C. 
Mrs. Carrie W. Clifford. Washington, D. C. 
Mr. L. M. Hershaw, Washington, D. C. 
Prof. Kelly Miller, Washington, D. C. 
Prof. L. B. Moore, Washington, D. C. 
Justice W. P. Stafford, Washington, D. C. 
•Mrs. Mary Church Terrell, Washington, D. C. 
*Rev. J. Milton Waldron. Washington, D. C, 
Prest. John Hope. Atlanta, Ga. 
Mr. Leslie P. Hill, Manassas, Va. 
Mr. William Pickens, Talladega, Ala. 
•Executive Committee. 
OFFICES : 
Suite 311, 20 Vesey Street, New York. A ONE-DOLLA R 
Christma s Gif t of Qualit y 
This petticoat is made of a fine HYDEGRAD E 
fabric, deep plaiting, two insertions of black and white. 
Made in black, Copenhagen, navy, green, brown, gray 
and champagne. Al l sizes. 
Wha t is a more fitting gift for mother, wife, 
sister or sweetheart than several of these handsome silklike petticoats? An d they'd never guess the price—just 
One Dollar each. Packed in special Christmas box and 
expressed to you prepaid. Send your order to-day. 
Delivery will be made promptly when requested. 
HOM E GARMEN T CO. 
Box 2106, General P. O. Ne w Yor k Cit y 
THIN K OF IT ! 
This Beautiful 
PETTICOAT 
AID A OVERTO N WALKE R says: " I cheerfully recommend 
VELV A 
to the discriminating woman who appreciates a 
velvety complexion." 
Velva is a medicated cream, delightfully 
perfumed. Unequaled for the complexion. 
Heals rashes, blackheads and pimples. A 
new and very scientific production. 
TRIA L SIZE BOX, MAILED POSTPAID. 15c 
Alexander Specialty Co. 
150 Nassau Street Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Headquarters for toilet preparations. Write 
for free price list of talcum, face, tooth and 
foot powders, perfumes, toilet soaps, massage 
creams, etc. 
AIDA OVERTO N WALKE R 
One of the greatest dancers on the American stage 