TH E CRISIS 
Vol. 6—No. 1 MAY , 1913 Whole No. 31 
ON E DOLLA R A YEA R TE N CENT S A COP Y 
John Henry Adams Safely 
Secured First Mortgages 
AN D 
First mortgage Bonds 
Capital Demands Higher Wages 
Capital that used to work for 3% to 4l/2% is now demanding higher wages to meet 
the increased cost of living. We offer capital employment at 5%% to 6 % secured 
by first mortgage on newly improved Chicago income Real Estate, in the form of 
bonds, in amounts of $100, $300 and $500 and individual mortgages in amounts from 
$1,000 to $25,000, in periods from one to six years. Al l titles guaranteed by Chicago 
Titl e and Trust Company, Capital and Surplus over Six Millio n Dollars. 
H.DAVID MURRAY AND CO. 
MORTGAG E BROKERS 
LOAN S 
REA L ESTAT E 
INSURANC E 
BAN K FLOO R S E CO R STAT E a. 3IS T ST S 
CHICAG O 
SCHOOL OF BEAUTY CULTURE AND HAIR DRESSING 
Manicuring , Shampooing, Hai r Dressing , Marce l Wav ­
ing, Facia l and Bod y Massage , Hai r Making , Chiropody , 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimite d practic e i n parlo r 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summe r Course, $7.50 up. Send for 
booklet. Mme . A . Carte r Kelsey , Gen'l Intr.; Dr . Samue l 
A . Kelsey , Chiropodist, President and Gen' l Manager . 
KELSEY' S 
Telephone, Morningside 8162 
143 West 131st St. 
NE W YOR K 
TH E NEGR O A T WOR K 
I N NE W YOR K CIT Y 
GEORG E EDMUN D HAYNES , Ph. D. 
Professor of Social Science, Fis k Universit y 
A study of the manner and causes of the migratio n of Negroe s to the cities 
Nort h and South, wit h special materia l about occupations, efficiency and wages 
and a detailed study of business enterprises of Negroe s in Ne w York . Studies 
in History , Economic s and Publi c Law , edited by the Facult y of Politica l Science, 
Columbia University. Longmans, Green and Co., New York , agents.. Cloth , $1.75; 
paper, $1.25. Contains a mass of well-arragned material - The Survey. 
"Affords us an exhaustive and interesting account of the manne r i n whic h colore d 
citizens earn their living in New York."—The Crisis. . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D 
PEOPLE . A T 26 VESE Y STREET . NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducted by W . E . Burghardt Du Bois 
Contents for May, 1913 
COVE R PICTURE . Drawn by John Henry Adams. 
ARTICLES 
Page 
HAGA R AN D ISHMAEL . By Charlotte Teller Hirsch 30 
A MINIMU M PROGRA M O F NEGR O ADVANCEMENT . 
By William English Walling 31 
TH E MA N WH O WON . A Story. (Concluded.) 
By Harry H . Pace. Illustrated by Lorenzo W. Harris 33 
UP ! SIN G TH E SONG . A Poem. By James D. Corrothers 39 
DEPARTMENTS 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 7 
ME N O F TH E MONT H 17 
OPINIO N 20 
EDITORIA L 26 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPL E 37 
TH E BURDE N 40 
TE N CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Whe n a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your 
subscription is desired. Th e date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the 
wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
I n ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 4 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
State summer school for colored 
teachers. Fourteent h annual 
session begins June 23,1913, and 
continues five weeks. Board, 
lodging and fees for the session, 
$14.00. Limited accommodations. 
Den d $1.00 in advance and reserve room. Fo r catalo g o r 
furtker information address : 
STATE SUMME R SCHOO L 
Agricultura l and 
Mechanical College 
GREENSBORO , N . C . 
"I n the Hear t of^the Health y Hills " 
The Agricultura l and 
Mechanical Colleg e 
NORMAL , ALABAM A 
Make s a special effort to meet the needs of 
young people who must work out their own salvation. It gives breadwinner s a chance to go to 
school and so puts a first-class Englis h education and 
a trade within the reach of every young person of 
push and purpose. 
Board, lodging and washing cost $9 per month. 
A n entrance fee of $10 covers medicine, hospital 
care and doctor's bill for the year. 
School opens the first Monda y in October and 
closes the last Thursda y in May . 
WALTE R S. BUCHANAN , President 
Send your boy South—the land of Opportunity. 
The Prairi e Vie w State Norma l and Industria l 
College of Texas. E . L . Blackshear , Principal . W . 
C . Rollins, Treasurer . Largest State institution for 
colored youth in the Unite d States. Excellent 
literary, scientific and industrial advantages. Ex ­
penses low—idea l climate—new buildings. 
Fo r particular s address: 
H . J . MASON , Secretary 
Prairi e Vie w Walle r County, Texas 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
A n Episcopa l boarding and day school 
for girls, under the direction of the Sisters 
of St. Mary . Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
611 N. 43d St. W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
Fisk University 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 H . H . Wright, Dean 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro 
history. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standards of independent manhood 
and womanhood. 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
Th e courses of study include Hig h School, Nor ­
mal School and College, with manua l training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth , Smit h 
and Wellesley. Forty-two years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r furthe r information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, Hig h School, Gramma r School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expense s very reasonable. 
Opportunit y for Self-help. 
Fall Term Begins September, 1913. 
Fo r information address 
President R. W . McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological seminaries. 
A n Academy , with manual training, giving a 
preparation for life or for college. 
The positive mora l and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of class 
work, its fine new buildings and well-equipped 
laboratories and librar y prepar e a faithful student 
for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY , President 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 5 
Short Talk s on 
Advertising and 
Ou r Advertisers 
"I had never thought of advertising for 
colored business until I saw TH E CRISIS, " 
said a well-known advertiser the other day. 
The neatly printed pages and clean advertising had commanded his attention from 
the time he received the first copy we sent 
him, so he said. 
Another man (an advertising agent) 
said: "Among the great mass of sample 
copies of the various publications which 
come to this office TH E CRISI S is among the 
very few I take home to read." 
Another man said: " I congratulate you 
all on the stand you take for reliable 
advertising." 
The question whether or not it pays 
TH E CRISI S to reject all but dependable 
advertising is being constantly answered in 
the affirmative. 
Two advertisers, who had never used any 
Negro periodicals, were induced to try 
TH E CRISI S and it paid them. Since then 
they have used other colored papers. 
Which proves that our decided stand is 
giving us prestige among reliable advertisers and at the same time enabling us to 
make it possible for other journals to 
secure some business which heretofore they 
have not had. 
Then there's another side—the reader. 
In a letter to one of our advertisers a 
lady said: "Of course I knew that 
was all right when I saw it advertised in 
TH E CRISIS. " 
If you have an article to market or a 
service to sell, make TH E CRISI S columns 
your market place. We guarantee to put 
your proposition into the hands of 25.000 
people, and if it is well told they will pass 
it along throughout the zone of our 
influence, which embraces, perhaps, 100,000 
people. 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY , 
Advertising Manager. 
$
5 
Brings Oliver 
Typewriter 
Send $5 for The Oliver Typewriter—the 
machine will come a-flying. The newest 
Model—N'o. 5—the regular $100 machine— 
with no extra charge for Printype. 
For the price of a good fountain pen you 
secure the World's Greatest Typewriter. You 
can pay the balance at the rate of 17 cents a 
day. 
This irresistible "$5 offer" is sweeping everything before it. The era of universal typewriting is coming. The triumph of the typewriter over primitive pen-and-ink has been 
brought about by the same machine that 
introduced visible writing. 
The 
OLIVER 
Typewriter 
The Standard Visible Writer 
This is the typewriter whose high efficiency haa 
made it the choice of the greatest firms and corporations. It is the simplest of all standard typewriters, yet the swiftest and by far the most 
versatile. Th e moving parts work freely in a solid 
metal framework, making the machine so strong 
that the hardest usage has no effect upon it. 
No Extra Charge for 
"Printype" 
Most people prefer to have the machine equipped 
to write in Printype. This beautiful type is obtainable only on Th e Olive r Typewriter. 
It is the greatest style improvement ever evolved 
for typewriters—the most easily read type in existence—the type which conforms to that in universal 
use on the world's printing presses! 
Win Success with the Oliver! 
Th e Olive r Typewrite r aids success-seekers in a 
multitude of ways. Th e real-life stories of achievement that center around it would fill volumes. 
N o matter what your work may be—in office, 
store, shop or home—The Olive r Typewrite r will 
prove itself a great convenience and an actual 
money-maker. 
It stands for order and system and success. It is 
the visible evidence of the progressiveness of its 
owner. Young people with brains, ambition and 
Olive r Typewriters are succeeding everywhere. Can 
you afford to let $5 stand between you and success? 
Sen d lo r Specia l Circula r an d Ar t Catalog 
Ful l details regarding the 
Olive r Easy-Purchase-Plan, 
beautiful catalog and a 
specimen letter written in 
Printype will be sent you 
on request. 
Le t this $5 offer awaken 
you to your need of Th e 
Olive r Typewrite r and the 
ease with which you may 
own it. 
Remember—$5 only and on 
comes The Oliver Typewriter I Sales Department 
(206) 
The Oliver Typewriter Company 
310 Broadwa y NE W YORK , N. Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 6 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
When Buying Hair Goods 
ask your dealer for Green's Creole hair. It 
not only keeps the crimp, but is the best on 
the market. If your dealer cannot furnish 
you with our goods, send your order direct 
to us and we will be pleased to fill it. 
Switches, puffs, pompadours, transformations 
and anything pertaining to hair goods. 
18-inch 1-stem Switches $ .50 
18-inch 3-stem Switches 75 
3/4-ounce 3-stem Switches 1.00 
22-inch Switches 1.50 
24-inch Switches 2.00 
26-inch Switches 2.50 
28-inch Switches 3.00 
These prices not including gray hair. 
Our workmanship is the best, and we feel 
sure that after using our grade of goods, we 
will have you as our regular customer. 
Send in your samples. Perfect match., 
guaranteed. If not satisfactory we will 
refund your money. 
GREEN'S HAIR GOODS CO. 
Room 58 
6 West Randolph Street Chicago, 111. 
FREE! FREE! FREE! 
Absolutely Free of Cost 
Fo r thirty davs the Carnegi e College wil l mai l to any reader 
of TH E CRISIS , absolutely free of cost, a list of "50O 
questions" on any of the following branches: 
1. Agriculture 6. Civi l Government 
2. U. S. History 7. Domestic Science 
3. Theory and Practice 8. American Literature 
4. Physiology 9. English Literature 
5. Letter Writing 10. English Grammar 
CIVI L SERVIC E MANUA L FRE E 
These "questions" wil l -ive you a good idea of our methods 
of teaching by mail . W e will send to you one list of 
"questions" FREE . Writ e for it to-day. 
W e also sell all makes of typewriters at only S3 per month . 
Writ e for prices an d terms. 
What Wil l You Do in Vacation? Why Not Study at Home? 
We Wil l Instruct You by Mail . 
FRE E TUITIO N SCHOLARSHIP S 
FIL E YOU R APPLICATIO N NOW . Commencin g Apri l 1 we 
will grant to the first 1,000 students makin g application "Fre e 
Tuitio n Scholarships " i n the following courses taught by mail : 
Norma l Penmanshi p Bookkeeping 
Hi*.;h Schoo l Typewriting Agricultur e 
Professiona l Shorthan d Civi l Servic e 
Poultr y Domesti c Science Drawin g 
Engineerin g La w Rea l Estat e 
Al l applications for "Fre e Tuition " must be filed by Jun e 1 
Th e tuition is absolutely FREE . Th e Matriculatio n Fe e is ?5. 
SUBSCRIB E FOR NE W EDUCATION— A 60 -PAG E 
EDUCATIONA L PAPE R 
Tria l subscription for six months only 25 cents. TJS E 
COUPO N BELOW . Mar k it an d send it to the College at 
once. 
Carnegi e College, Office No . 44. Rogers, Ohio . 
Sirs: 
Enclosed find 25 cents in stamps for six months' subscription 
to New Education . Mai l to me FRE E O F COS T the "500 
questions" on the branc h marke d with an X above, your 60-
page Bulletin , prices an d terms on typewriters, an d your "Fre e 
Tuitio n Scholarship " for my consideration. 
I a m markin g with an X i n the advertisement above the 
course that ma y interest me. 
NAM E 
ADDRES S 
OF INTEREST TO 
VOCAL STUDENTS 
Tone Placing and 
Voice Development 
Practica l method of singing for 
daily practice , based upon artisti c 
principles, together with a carefully prepared numbe r of exercises. 
Fro m "Musica l Courier, " N . Y. : 
A ver y practica l little book is 
•"Ton e Placin g and Voic e Development, " b y PedTO T . Tinsley . It 
contains some very excellent material and vocal 
exercises, and should be in the hands of all vocal 
students. 
WORD S O F APPRECIATIO N 
I offer you the heartiest possible endorsement 
of your work, which I believe to be the most complete course of the kin d that has ever come 
unde r m y notice.—Glen n Dillar d Gunn , Chicago 
"Tribune. " 
Fro m "Musi c News, " Chicago, 111.: Accordingl y 
his "Practica l Metho d of Singing " is a most concise and practica l little manual, containing man y 
valuable vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be 
helpful to all ambitious vocal students. 
CANNO T FAI L O F GOO D RESULT S 
Th e work is especially commendable because it 
k
 treats in a cl&ar and systematic manne r all the vital 
points so essential to the student, makin g it easy 
for him to advance to the highest point of 
.development.—Geo. I. Holt, De s Moines, Iowa. 
PRIC E $1.00 
Address the publisher : 
PEDRO T. TINSLEY 
6448 Drexel Avenue CHICAGO, ILL. 
This Handsome Suit 
FREE to Our Agents 
Write to-day. Be the one i n you r town 
to get this astounding tailorin g offer. A n 
offer to give you the swellest suit you 
ever saw FREE ! Bu t yo u must hurry. 
W e want a representative In your town 
right away. We wil l start you in a big 
money-making business of your own— 
FREE ! Plent y of mone y an d plenty of 
nifty clothes—for YOU—i f you writ e A T 
ONCE ! N o mone y no r experienc e 
necessary. 
We Pay All Express Charges 
Yes. we pa y everything. Yo u take no 
risk. Just take orders for our fine clothes— 
made of the most beautiful fabric s an d 
i n the latest, classiest styles. Kee p your 
present position an d mak e 
$50.00 to $100.00 A WEE K 
on the side, or go int o the business 
right an d make $3,000 to §5,00 0 a 
year. PARAGO N clothe s sell lllse wild ­
fire. Agents swamped wit h orders on 
. , . NE W plan . Nothin g like it anywhere . 
Write to-day for our swell sample s an d complet e outfit for 
going right out to take orders. Ge t our WONDERFU L NE W 
OFFE R right now. W E PA Y AL L CHARGES . Send a postcar d NOW—whil e tins great offer is stil l open. Don' t delay— 
WRIT E TO-DAY . 
PARAGO N TAILORIN G GO . 
Dept. 551 Chicago, 111. 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements Jul y and August. 
Bo x 26, Wilberforc e Universit y 
Wilberforce , O. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S 
Vol. 6—No. 1 MAY . 1913 Whole No. 31 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 
EDUCATION. 
THE Unite d States Census fo r 1910 reports that 55 pe r cent, of the Negro 
children and 35 per cent, of the whites 
between the ages of 6 and 20 years 
were not enrolled i n school. I n Louisian a 75 
per cent, of the Negr o children of school 
age are without instruction and i n nine 
Southern States more than half the colored 
children do not go to school. Fo r those 
enrolled the school period is very short, and 
the Southwestern Christian Recorder estimates that "there are more than 2,000,000 
publi c citizens of this country who have not 
attended school six months. " 
This condition is due to the fact that the 
appropriatio n for colored schools i n the 
South is so small as compared wit h that for 
whites. I n Centra l Alabama , wit h a school 
population equally divided between the 
races, Mrs. Wooley , of the Douglass Center 
i n Chicago, finds that the whites have school 
propert y valued at $6,149,413 as compared 
wit h $533,033 fo r Negroes. 
"I n the case of Kowalig a community school, 
fo r instance," says Mrs. Wooley , "the Negro 
children practically woul d get no schooling 
at all i f it were not that Willia m Benson has 
built u p a school with funds sent from New 
York , Philadelphi a and Boston. The appropriatio n by the county is $60 a year. " 
<I Willia m J . Brya n and Mrs. Brya n have 
given $500 to the William s Industria l 
College, at Littl e Rock , Ark . 
*I The Japanese of Seattle, Wash. , have given 
a scholarship at Tuskegee Institute. 
^ The principa l buildin g at Claflin Uni ­
versity, Orangeburg, S. C , has been destroyed 
by fire. 
1$ Charles Francis Adams, of Massachusetts, 
has offered to colored students, "juniors and 
seniors i n attendance at some America n 
college," a priz e of $50 for the best essay 
on "The Effect of Emancipatio n Upo n the 
Physica l Condition of the Afro-American. " 
Those intending to compete for the priz e 
should send their names to Professor Kell y 
Miller, Howar d University, Washington , 
D . C. ' 
<I Congress has appropriated $300,000 for 
India n schools, but some anxiety is felt i n 
Washingto n about the delay i n the appropria ­
tion fo r Howar d University. 
1 Dr . Wallac e Buttrick , secretary of the 
General Educatio n Board , has been conferrin g wit h Governor Goldsborough i n regard 
to aid from the fund for Negro agricultura l 
schools i n Maryland . 
*J Miss Elle n McKendry , of Houghton, 
Mass., has bequeathed $2,500 to Tuskegee 
Institute. 
<I I n an address on race culture before the 
Arundel l Club , of Baltimore , Md. , Mrs. 
Ann a Beecher Scoville, a granddaughter of 
Henr y War d Beecher, complained of the 
tardiness of the trustees of the Joh n Hopkin s 
Estate in carryin g out the provisions of the 
wil l of the philanthropist wit h regard to 
asylums for colored children. 
*I A correspondent of the Baltimor e News 
points out that "the colored citizens of 
Baltimor e have improved 100 per cent, since 8 TH E CRISIS 
the establishment of the loca l colored high 
school. This includes a decrease i n criminals, 
i n increase i n property holders and perhaps, 
above all, an increase along mora l and 
religious lines. " 
SOCIAL UPLIFT. 
AT last the emancipation proclamation 
commission of Pennsylvani a has given 
the publi c an authentic report of its work. 
O f the $20,000 appropriate d by the State 
about $6,000 has been spent i n salaries, $600 
for rent, and something over $2,000 fo r 
general expenses, leaving over $10,000 on 
hand. The pla n outlined fo r the exhibit 
contemplates a main buildin g about 84x150 
feet, wit h dinin g room and auditorium, an 
agricultura l buildin g and a concert and lecture hall. The exhibit wil l be i n three parts 
—industrial, educational and religious. The 
industria l exhibit wil l include farm products, 
manufacturing, domestic art, the business 
and professions. Unde r education wil l come 
photographs, singing and an educational 
congress. Unde r religion wil l come photographs and other exhibits. There wil l also 
be an art exhibit, a collection of 6,000 
volumes of Negro authors and a pageant. 
Several prizes are being offered, and the 
commission recommends an additional appropriatio n of $50,000 by the legislature. 
*I The Negro Organization Society, of 
Virginia co-operated with the State health 
department for a cleaning-up day among the 
Negroes on Apri l 14. The health department has issued a "Health - Handboo k fo r 
Colored People. " The board of aldermen of 
Richmon d has instructed the local health 
department to make an investigation of the 
housing and sanitary conditions i n the 
Ghetto and to make a report recommending 
legislation lookin g toward the betterment of 
sewerage, water, street and other conditions. 
The city engineer of Richmon d has been in ­
structed to prepare maps and estimates for 
a proposed par k fo r Negroes. 
•I The location of the colored branch librar y 
i n Ne w Orleans is still i n doubt, as some white 
people have protested against the site first 
chosen, although it is i n a largely colored 
neighborhood. 
*J There is a movement on foot to establish 
a State orphanage for Negroes i n Texas. 
1 The Sojourne r Trut h Industria l Home 
for Youn g Wome n is now nearing completion 
in Lo s Angeles, Cal . 
«J The Climbers, a colored women teachers' 
club i n Birmingham, Ala. , has given a bazaar 
-to help remove the $3,000 mortgage on the 
Home fo r Age d and Destitute Negroes i n 
that city. 
qi n Kansa s Cit y $139,963 of a required 
$225,000 has been raised fo r a Helpin g Han d 
Institute, Negr o Y . M . C. A . an d Street 
Boys' Home . 
<I George B . Yandes, a whit e man, has 
bequeathed $5,000 to the Negr o Y . M . C . A . 
of Indianapolis. 
9 A t the sprin g dua l meet held at Ocean City , 
N . J. , between Ocean Cit y Hig h School and 
Southern Manual , of Philadelphia , Rolan d 
N . Else y won fo r the latter sixteen points, 
that being the highest number of points wo n 
by any contestant. H e was awarded first 
priz e fo r the 220 and 75-yard dashes and the 
mil e relay, where he was placed last. Else y 
is a colored youth and trainers speak highl y 
of him. 
*I Congress has appointed a commission o f 
three—General J. Warren Keifer, of 
Springfield, O., chairman; General Nelson A. 
Mile s an d an admira l of the navy—an d ap ­
propriated $300,000 to assist i n the celebration of the battle of Lak e Erie . Ohio an d 
other States and civic bodies have swelled 
the total to about $1,500,000. There wil l 
be man y events i n man y places, but the 
celebration wil l culminate at or nea r 
Sandusky, September 10, the anniversary o f 
the battle. Negr o sailors took a prominent 
part i n the battle. 
9 Al l the mail carriers of Helena , Ark. , are 
colored. Recently twenty-two men took the 
examination fo r civil service and the two 
colored candidates were the only ones that 
passed. 
*8 The Crisis was mistaken i n stating that 
the acting governor of Jamaic a is colored. 
The Hon . Phili p Cor k is a white man. ' 
1 A colored physicia n of Talladega , Ala. , 
diagnosed a disease whic h broke out there to 
be smallpox. The white physicians of both 
city and State declared it was not smallpox. 
Eventuall y it was proven that the colored 
physician was right. 
9 A bil l to create a Negro regiment i n the 
Nationa l Guar d has been passed by the 
Pennsylvani a legislature. 
*I The colored women and societies o f 
Indianapolis have played their part i n ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 9 
relieving the distress i n the wake of the storm 
and flood i n that city. 
A t Lawrence , Kan. , the seat of the State 
University , the Rev. J . M . Brown , the colored 
pastor of St. Luke's A . M . E . Church, was 
toastmaster at a farewell banquet i n honor 
o f the Rev . J . N . Brush , the minister of the 
white Presbyterian church. 
^ Miss S. B . Breckinridge , of Chicago, says 
i n the Survey: 
"Th e segregated black district is almost 
invariabl y the region i n which vice is tolerated by the police. Tha t is, the segregation 
of the Negro quarter is only a segregation 
from respectable white people. The disreputable white element is forced upon him. 
"I n no part of Chicago was there found a 
whole neighborhood so conspicuously dilapidated as the black belt on the south side. 
*I The Arkansa s legislature has made it a 
misdemeanor to accept a tip and subjects the 
employer who permits the employee to receive 
a gratuity to a fine. This act is aimed at 
Negro waiters. 
<J Fift y per cent, of the 10,000 Negroes i n 
Meridian , Miss., are said to own their own 
homes. 
1$ In Uniontown , Ala. , wit h a total popula ­
tion of 2,000, it is reported that Negroes 
control about half of the business enterprises. 
They have $70,000 on deposit i n the local 
banks. Eldridg e Brothers, a grocery firm, do 
an annual business of $40,000 a year. 
A t Pin e Bluff, Ark. , an insurance company wit h a capita l stock of $250,000 has 
been organized. A t the initia l meeting of the 
society $5,200 i n cash and securities was 
pai d up. 
ON X O F MB . DUPEE' S MIL K WAGONS . 
No t only does the Negro suffer from this 
extreme dilapidation, but he pays a heavy 
cost i n the form of high rent. I n crowded 
emigrant neighborhoods i n different parts of 
the city the medium rental for the prevailin g 
four-room apartment was between $8 and 
$8.50; i n South Chicago, near the steel mills, 
it was between $9 and $9.50, and in the 
Jewis h quarter between $10 and $10.50 was 
charged. Bu t i n the great black belt of the 
south side the sum exacted was between $12 
and $12.50," 
<I Si x years ago Oscar Dupre , a colored 
man wit h a famil y of six children livin g i n 
New Orleans, could scarcely make a livin g 
doing odd jobs. H e decided to try dairy 
farming . H e rented a plantation i n Jefferson Paris h on the outskirts of the city and 
bought a few cows on time. To-day he owns 
98 milch cows, 6 fine horses and mules, 4 
mil k wagons, a feed wagon, carriage and a 
buggy. H e sells between 125 and 140 gallons of mil k a day, at 30 cents a gallon, 
supplyin g the wealthiest families and 10 TH E CRISIS 
physicians, who want specially good milk . 
H e spends $650 a month for feed alone, 
employs nine persons and has refused $8,000 
fo r his plant. 
«J A t Austin , Tex., the Rev. L . L . Campbell 
and Dr . W . H . Crawfor d have organized the 
Texas Colonization and Development 
Company. They have purchased 10,000 acres of 
land i n Housto n County and are selling lots 
of ten, twenty, fifty and one hundred acres 
to Negroes only. 
I A t a recent conference i n Washington , 
D . C., the Nationa l Benefit Association reported receipts amounting to $146,709 and 
disbursements of $121,654 during 1912. The 
resources of the association amount to 
$133,155. 
*I A recent investigation discloses the fact 
that 86.59 per cent, of the colored workers 
i n Philadelphia , i n industries employin g 
at least 100 colored persons receive an 
average annual wage of less than $400 a 
year, while the highest-paid group receive 
less than $800. The average annual income 
necessary to support a famil y of five i n 
Philadelphi a is estimated at $750. 
*I Colored waitresses have been dismissed 
from the service of the Oriental Tea 
Company in Boston. 
<I Mr . Richar d E . Westbrooks, president of 
the Men's Civi c Clu b of Chicago, has appealed to the vice-investigating commissioners not to overlook the condition of the 
colored women. H e .calls attention to the 
"low economic condition of the colored 
women and the small wages which they receive i n domestic service and the small business firms." I n addition to this, "thousands 
of them are excluded from earning an honest livin g i n many of the great industries 
of the State on account of race and color. 
I f the low wage is a menace to the white 
women i n the industries, the lack of an opportunity to earn any wage at all is a still 
greater menace to general moral conditions 
i n Illinois. The mora l condition of the white 
women of Illinois is inseparable from the 
mora l condition of the colored women, and 
the morals of the white women are not safe 
so long as conditions exist which prey upon 
the morals of the colored women. An y attempt to solve the one without the other is 
little more than scratching the social evil 
upo n the surface." 
«I Mr . Thomas Walsh , superintendent of the 
New Yor k Society fo r the Preventio n of 
Cruelt y to Children , declares: "It is futil e to 
take the case of a youn g colored girl to 
the children's court at this time, owin g to a 
lack of provision for delinquent colored girls 
i n any existing institution. " Women's clubs 
i n New Yor k Cit y are raisin g funds fo r the 
establishment of a home fo r delinquent 
colored girls. . . 
ECONOMICS. 
A COTTO N factory i n Savannah, Ga. , 
finds Negro women such reliable an d 
satisfactory operators that the proprieto r 
intends to double the present number of 200 
employees. 
fl The Afro-American Stock Trading 
Company has been organized at Louisville, Ky. 
The company starts wit h a grocery, but 
intends later to open a department store. 
J. W . Buchana n is president of the 
corporation. 
^ Negro farmers have organized a corn club 
at Spartansburg, S. C. The purpose o f the 
club is to stimulate intensive cultivation by 
offering prizes to the highest produce r o f 
corn and cotton. 
1 The Mechanica l Investment Company , a 
Negro bank, has been organized at Savannah, 
Ga . 
<J I n Wak e County , N . C , Negroes pa y taxes 
on property valued at $1,330,705 and i n 
Halifa x County on $1,225,576. I n each of 
fifty-one counties the value of Negr o prop ­
erty is more than $250,000. 
Negr o farmers of Fairhope , Ala. , have 
formed a co-operative packin g association. 
The Unite d Brothers of Friendshi p of 
Texas report total receipts of $42,735 durin g the last three months. They own prop ­
erty worth $200,000 i n two cities, which 
brings i n a revenue of $800 a month.. 
Sunset Lodge of Colored Masons, i n E l 
Paso, Tex., has just completed its threestory brick temple costing $11,000. 
POLITICS. 
MR. WILLIA M H . LEWI S has resigned 
the office of Assistant AttorneyGeneral of the United States, and on recommendation of Attorney-Genera l McReynolds, 
President Wilso n has abolished the office 
which Mr . Lewis held—that o f handlin g 
Indian claims, as the wor k is said to have 
been completed. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 11 
Vardaman is on the warpath in 
Washington. He told newspaper men that he was 
goin g to have the Fifteent h Amendment repealed and, generally, "to carr y the wa r into 
Africa. " H e is only waitin g til l Congress 
disposes of the tariff to fire the first shot. 
B y a vote of seventy to forty-six the lower 
house of South Carolina has petitioned 
Congress to repeal the Fifteenth Amendment. 
The petition alleges that i n exchange for the 
franchise the Negr o has given the white 
people of this country only "anxiety, strife, 
bloodshed and the hookworm. " 
•j The Washingto n Post is authority for the 
statement: "Non e of the Federa l offices i n 
the South, positions which the Republica n 
Presidents have been wont to confer upon 
Negroes, wil l be turned over to them so long 
as the present administration remains i n 
office." 
<J The colored voters of St. Louis have supported H. W. Kiel for mayor on the 
Republican ticket. Some of the white labor 
unions have opposed Kie l because he gave 
employment to Negroes i n a buildin g contract. To m Hale , formerl y business agent 
o f Unio n No . 1, and a Socialist, declares that 
he will "throw his vote away on the 
Democratic candidate rather than vote for a man 
who woul d not consent to employ white 
labor exclusively. " 
9 The resignation of Mr . Fred . Moore , 
Unite d States Ministe r to Liberia , has been 
asked and accepted. Moor e served an uneventful term of twenty-nine days. 
MEETINGS . 
MEMORIA L meetings have been held i n 
honor of Davi d Livingstone and 
Harrie t Tubman . Speakin g at the Charles 
Street A . M . E . Churc h i n Boston, Mr . Fran k 
B . Sanborn, the biographer of Joh n Brown , 
said : 
"Th e question of races, of race seclusion 
and race fusion, of superior and inferio r is 
one which many half-enlightened people are 
eager to discuss, but one which puzzles the 
student of the history of man. * * * 
The America n has been so essentially modified by fusion that ideal purit y of stock here 
is nowhere to be found. 
"Th e heroine whose memory we assemble 
to recall was nearer the mixed type of a 
great and widely extended race—the West 
Africa n Negro—tha n most of us could say 
of ourselves. She illustrated by her 
character what I expect wil l be the future 
type of that race, when preserved from 
slavery and degeneracy by a higher civiliza ­
tion than has as yet taken the native 
African. " 
<I Negroes of New Orleans have organized 
an association to conduct a State fair i n 
honor of the semi-centenary of the emancipation. The association's headquarters are i n 
the Y . M . C. A . building, 2220 Dryades 
Street. Rev. W . Scott Chin n is the president of the organization. 
*I The semi-annual executive meeting of the 
Afro-America n Press Association was held 
recently i n Philadelphia , Pa . The report of 
chairman N . B . Dodson showed a membership of 300, representing 250 periodicals 
controlled by NegToes. The annual general 
assembly of the association takes place i n 
Philadelphi a next August. 
^ Farmers' conventions, conferences of 
business leagues and teachers' conventions 
have been held i n Alabama , Texas, Tennessee 
and elsewhere i n the South. 
*I Mrs. Mar y Churc h Terrell recently addressed the students of Wellesley College on 
the subject of opportunities, or rather the 
lack of opportunities, for colored girls. Miss 
Mar y Eliz a Clark , president of the Christian 
Association of Wellesley, writes as follows 
of this occasion: 
" I do not know when a speaker has aroused 
so much interest and changed so many ideas 
i n so short a time. I want yo u to feel that 
you r visit here was distinctly worth while, 
and that Wellesley people of broadest minds 
and widest sympathies feel a distinct debt of 
gratitude to yo u for the strong presentation 
of you r subject." 
<I At a meeting of the Society for Cooperation of Charities at Albany, N. Y., the Rev. 
A . B . Morton , pastor of the A . M . E . Church, 
said that of the 2,000 Negroes i n that city, 
only 200 or 300 attend church, and that there 
are colonies of neglected people livin g i n 
such mora l and physica l degradation as the 
city would not tolerate i f the conditions were 
known . 
"The mai n point to be considered," said 
Mr . Morton , "is that the youn g people of 
our race have so few places where they can 
enjoy the healthy, simple pleasures. Mrs. 
Halicous, of the Eli m House , is workin g 
faithfull y i n the interests of the girls, but 
teachers are needed, and frequently it is 12 TH E CRISIS 
difficult to make ends meet wit h the small 
sums of money donated." 
SI A t a meeting of the Adelphi c Literar y 
Society of Augustana College, near 
Davenport, la., the program was devoted to 
"The America n Negro of To-day. " Orations 
on the Negr o songs and musical selections 
by the white and colored students occupied 
the evening. 
SI Dr . W . E . B . D u Bois has been lecturing 
on the history of the Negro race at Howar d 
Universit y and i n Virginia . H e is making, 
this month, a lecture tour in Indiana, 
Missouri, California, Oregon, Washington, 
Oklahoma, Texas, Louisiana and Georgia. 
PERSONAL. 
"UNCLE" DANIE L SUGG , 82 years 
old, attends school regularly i n the 
town of Hookerton, N . C. H e owns a farm of 
180 acres. Whe n he was youn g he could not 
go to school, but now, having the means, he 
is determined to make use of the opportunity. 
His neighbors are makin g no effort to deny 
him the privilege, fo r "he is a fine specimen 
of the old-lime darky and is very much liked 
by all the white people." 
SI Willia m Cain , said to be the. last survivin g 
member of the origina l Joh n Brow n raiders, 
died recently i n Winona , Minn . 
SI Mr . T. G. Nutte r has been appointed a 
clerk in the land department of the office of 
the auditor-general of West Virginia . 
SI Miss Sophi a B . Boaz , a graduate of the 
Kansas City High School and of risk 
University (1911), has been appointed a probation officer of Cook County, 111. 
SI Samuel Be n Elehanan, an Abyssinia n 
Jew, was found stranded i n Cincinnati the 
other day. Dr . Boris D . Borger, of the 
Unite d Jewish Charities, secured him 
employment. 
SI Mr . Jerome B . Peterson has been appointed deputy collector of internal revenue 
at San Juan , Port o Rico . 
SI The Hon . Charles A . Cottrill, collector of 
internal revenue at Hawaii , recently delivered 
an address on "Armstron g and Hampton " 
on the occasion of the unveiling of a tablet 
to General Armstrong at Oahu College. 
Commenting on the address, the Commercial 
Advertiser says: 
"It was fortunate that there should be at 
this particula r time i n Hawai i so worthy 
a representative of the race that Armstron g 
fought to free. 
"Lookin g back to those few weeks between 
the time of the announcement of the Cottril l 
appointment to the position of collector of 
interna l revenue fo r this territory and 
remembering the opposition there was locally 
to his appointment because he is of Negr o 
blood and contrasting the sentiments then 
expressed with the applause he received from 
the leading white and Hawaiia n residents of 
Honulul u and the friendliness towar d him 
evinced on every hand, it is plai n that Mr . 
Cottril l has not only been an efficient official, 
but has shown himself to be a man able to 
gai n a high place fo r himself i n publi c 
esteem." 
SI Isaac D . Martin , of Pratt City , Ala. , is 
the first Negro to receive a priz e i n the 
corn-club contest i n Alabama . Fo r produc ­
in g 200 bushels on one acre he was awarded 
second priz e of $150. There were more than 
10,000 competitors, chiefly white farmers. 
SI Mrs. James Russell, a colored woma n of 
Columbus, O., has patented a portable 
newsstand. 
^ Mr . Sterlin g Leeo, a colored man of Lo s 
Angeles, Cal. , has patented a device fo r preventing wear and tear of railroa d tracks. 
The invention has received the favorable 
consideration of several street-railway 
companies. 
SI Sam. Thomas, a colored wagon driver, 
rescued Mrs. Mar y Keating , a white woman, 
from attempted suicide by drownin g at 
Norfolk , Va . 
^ Thomas Galloway , of Ware , Ala. , owns 
upwar d of 800 acres of lan d and is pro ­
prietor of three turpentine farms. H e asserts 
that most of his success has come withi n the 
past five years. 
SI Mr . Willia m Pickens has been elected 
president of the Alabama State Teachers' 
Association. 
SI The Rev. Wilbu r O. Rogers, priest-incharge of St, Philip's Episcopa l Missio n i n 
Syracuse, N . Y. , has accepted a position as 
teacher i n the St. Matthia s Industria l Train ­
in g School, Atlanta , Ga . 
SI The Rev. G. A . McGuire , M . D. , forme r 
rector of St. Bartholomew's, Cambridge , 
Mass., has accepted a livin g in the diocese of 
Antigua , B . W . I. 
SI Bisho p Moses B . Salter, of the A . M . E . 
Church , died recently at Charleston, S. C. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 13 
*J Joseph D . Brya n has invented an improved 
scrubbin g brush which is now being manufactured and marketed at Milwaukee . 
SI "The Arabic Bible—a Plea for 
Transliteration" is the title of a posthumous work 
of Dr . S. W . Blyde n now appearing from 
the press of C. M . Philips, of London . 
SI Mar y Washington , the colored nurse and 
attendant of Mrs. Robert E . Lee, who is herself at present a patient i n the hospital of 
the Universit y of Virginia , at Charlottesville, 
has a Bibl e inscribed as follows: 
"Mar y Logan , from her friend, Mar y 
Curtis Lee, Alexandria , 24th May , 1873." 
SI Jackson, a colored boy, won the 440-yard 
dash i n the Occidental Universit y Southern 
Californi a meet. 
SI The Smart Set Athleti c Clu b of Brooklyn , 
conducted "one of the most successful meets 
held i n the various armories this winter. " 
Ted Meredith, of the University of 
Pennsylvania, won the J. B. Taylor memorial quartermile race. Howar d Drew and other colored 
athletes scored i n several events. 
SI Troo p G , 10th U . S. Cavalry , Burlington , 
Vt , attended the Britis h Columbia , Ottawa 
and Montrea l horse show at Montreal. 
SI A t a basketball meet in Manhattan Casino, 
New York , Howar d Universit y defeated the 
Monticello A . C. of Pittsburgh. 
SI The Hon . Henr y T. Eubanks, a colored 
man who was three times elected to the 
Ohio legislature, is dead. 
SI Miss E . F . Wilson , of Washington, D . C , 
has been made assistant director of domestic 
science in the colored schools. 
SI Miss Mario n Green, who is now attending 
Hillsdal e College, Hillsdale , Mich. , is a 
graduate of Storer College, Harper's Ferry . 
She is doing excellent work and is abreast 
with the best minds of the college. Out of 
more than 500 students, only four received 
the mark of A , she being one of the four. 
Miss Green is workin g her way through 
college by cooking for some of the private 
families. 
MUSIC AN D ART. 
AT the "recital of songs by America n 
composers," which was given Marc h 6 
at the MacDowel l Clu b i n New Yor k City , 
"Sinc e Yo u Wen t Away, " a song by the 
colored composer, J . Rosamond Johnson, was 
sung by Charlotte Lind , soprano. 
SI On Februar y 22, at the Howar d Theatre, 
Washington, D . C , the Howar d Universit y 
Dramati c Clu b presented Bulwer-Lytton's 
"Lad y of Lyons. " Miss Osceola McCarthy , 
i n the role of Pauline , exhibited talent of a 
very high order. 
SI A t the recent civic-welfare exhibit at the 
Newport, R. I., high school, many of the 
designs and plans were constructed by 
Wellingto n Willard , a student i n the high 
school. I n the president's report special 
mention was made of Mr . Willard's work i n 
water colors. 
SI Wil l Cook's characteristic Negro songs have 
become popula r with America n singers i n 
the South. "Exhortation " was lately sung by 
Fran k Agar, of Texas Christian University , PAULINE , I N "LAD Y OF LYONS. " 14 TH E CRISIS 
who was the honor guest of the Harmon y 
Clu b of Polytechni c College of Fort Worth , 
Tex. 
*J A Lenten musicale was given fo r charity at 
the home of Mrs. Albert S. Reed, Ne w Yor k 
City , on Marc h 22. The program was presented under the direction of Mr . U . G. 
Chalmers. 
<J The music department of Sam. Housto n 
College, of Austi n Tex., one of the progressive freedmen's schools of the South, of 
which R. S. Lovinggoo d is president, has 
been reorganized this year under the efficient 
directorship of W . E . Lew, of Boston, Mass. 
The course embraces instruction i n piano, 
voice, public-school music and choral work. 
A concert of much interest was given by the 
department on Marc h 11, for which 
Professor Lew deserves considerable praise. 
<5 Mr . James A . Mundy , composer of 
"Ethiopia,' ' directed an emancipation chorus 
at the semi-centennial celebration i n Chicago. 
*J Concerts and entertainments to help i n the 
purchase of the home of the late ColeridgeTaylo r are to be held i n Boston, Washington , 
D . C , and Washington , Pa . 
<J G. Ricord i and Compan y have published two 
songs by J . Rosamond Johnson, wit h words 
by James W . Johnson : "Sinc e Yo u Wen t 
Away " and "The Awakening. " 
A t Moun t Vernon , N . Y. , a concert i n 
behalf of St. Clement's Chape l was given 
by a number of white artists. 
^ Clarence Withington , 13 years of age, 
of Brooklyn , N . Y. , was awarded a prize 
for his water-color work at the Brookly n 
Hobb y Show. There were 2,000 exhibitors 
and fifty-eight prizes were awarded. 
*I Madame Azali a Hackley , soprano, assisted 
by Kempne r Harreld , violinist and director 
of the musical department of the Atlant a 
Baptist College, appeared at the Auditorium 
Armor y at Atlanta , Ga. , as conductor of the 
students' musical festival. Compositions by 
colored composers were given by a male 
chorus of 250 voices and the Atlant a Baptist 
orchestra. Commenting on this festival, the 
Atlant a Journal says: 
"The musical festival and voice demonstration by Madame Hackle y and students at 
Atlant a Baptist College drew an audience of 
4,000 white and colored people to the 
auditorium. I n addition to the large local 
MELNOTTE , I N "LAD Y OF LYONS. " 
representation present, forme r students and 
alumn i of the college were there from various 
other towns and cities i n Georgi a an d 
Alabama . 
"A n interesting and varied program was 
rendered, consisting of exercises i n voice 
culture, orchestral selections, old-time Negro 
melodies, instrumenta l solos and melodies by 
Negro composers, and renditions of 
Kipling's 'Rolling Down to Rio' and Gounod's 
'Gallia, ' by a male chorus of 250 voices. 
"A s a whole, the entertainment was very 
creditable. Man y numbers elicited vigorous 
and enthusiastic applause from the audience." 
<J "Creol e Candjo " is the title of a song, i n 
the Frenc h patois of. Louisiana , included i n 
the repertoire of Madame Marcell a Sembrich 
at a farewell recital i n Carnegie Hal l i n 
Ne w York . ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 15 
TH E GHETTO. 
THE fate of the new Northern "Jim 
Crow" legislation is so fax as follows: 
In Michigan the marriage bill was not 
reported from the committee. 
*I In Delaware the separate-car law may 
pass the house, but will not pass the senate. 
In California the separate-school law was 
killed in committee. 
<J In Colorado the separate-school law was 
voted down. 
<J The anti-marriage bill in Kansas passed 
the house but was killed in the senate 
committee. 
-marriage bill in Iowa was 
indefinitely postponed by a vote of 27 to 16. 
This was the last of three bills introduced 
in that State. 
<I In the State of Washington the marriage 
bill was killed in the judiciary committee of 
the senate. 
*J In Missouri the separate-car law was killed 
in committee and the segregation bill was 
voted down. 
9 In Ohio the anti-marriage bill has been 
killed after a severe fight. 
9 In St. Louis, Mo., a colored woman who 
gained a position of stenographer by civilservice examination was rejected by Denis 
A . Ryan, the Irish assistant custodian of the 
custom house. 
fl In Chicago, 111., 1,000 white women refused to dine at the Hotel L a Salle because 
the management would not seat the Negro 
delegates. 
<I The Levy bill, providing against discrimination on account of race or color, has 
passed the New York assembly and now 
goes to the senate. 
*I At the Progressive party conference at 
Baltimore colored delegates were not allowed 
to use the elevator's in the hotel. 
TH E COURTS. 
THE Massachusetts Supreme Court has 
held that a slave marriage must be regarded as a lawful marriage. The decision 
was won by Mr . Clement G. Morgan in a 
case which had been decided against him in 
the lower courts. 
^ The Supreme Court of Florida has recently had before it the case where in eight 
years the sheriff had drawn no colored man 
on the jury. The court declared: 
"We have held in effect that our statutes 
on the subject of the selection of jurors do 
not discriminate, and do not authorize discrimination against any person for jury 
service because of race or color. But that if 
the executive officers charged with the duty of 
executing such statutory provisions deliberately, in the execution thereof, discriminated 
against Negroes because of their color or race, 
it would be not only a violation of our 
statutes, but would violate the provision of 
the Fourteenth Amendment to the Federal 
Constitution, and would render their actions 
null and void in any case in which such 
discrimination occurred." (Montgomery vs. 
State, 55 Fla. 97, 45 South Rep. 879.) 
Mr . I. S. Purcell was the attorney who won 
this case. 
^ In Georgia a colored man was accused of 
assault on two white women of notorious 
reputation. The evidence was flimsy and 
the jury found the defendant guilty of 
criminal assault, but recommended that he 
be punished as for a misdemeanor. The 
court allowed the white audience to vote on 
the subject. They were divided in sentiment, 
but the judge gave the colored man a severe 
sentence. The governor pardoned the 
colored man. 
CRIME. 
LYNCHING S have occurred as follows: 
At Mondak, Mont., a Negro, for shooting the sheriff and his deputy. 
At Union City, Tenn., one colored man, for 
the murder of an aged white man. 
At Issaquena, Miss., a colored man, for 
the murder of a white man. 
At Albany, Ga., a colored man, for no 
apparent reason. 
In the county jail at West Point, Miss., a 
colored man, for an assault upon the sheriff. 
At Kosciusko, Miss., and at Marshall, Tex., 
colored men, for alleged assaults on white 
women. 
At Springfield, Miss., Hickory, Miss., and 
Pensacola, Fla., colored men, for murderous 
assaults on white men. 
*J The Pennsylvania legislature is considering a bill to abolish lynching by subjecting 
the sheriff to forfeiture of office and the 
payment of a fine to the relatives of the 
lynched man. HARRIE T TUBMAN—181 3 (?)-1913. MEN OF THE M0NTH 
GORDO N DAVI D HOUSTON . 
A TEACHE R OF ENGLISH. 
GORDO N DAVI D HOUSTO N was born 
i n Cambridge , Mass., Ma y 6, 1880. 
H e was graduated wit h honors from the 
Cambridge Englis h Hig h School i n 1898 and 
from the Lati n school i n 1900. I n 1904 he 
received his bachelor's degree, cum laude, 
from Harvar d College. 
Mr . Housto n has taught at Tuskegee and 
i n the colored hig h schools of Baltimor e and 
Washington . Latel y he was placed at the 
head of the departments of Englis h i n 
Howar d University . H e is a teacher of 
sympath y and breadth and has always taken 
active interest i n the social and athletic 
activities of the schools where he has taught. 
A WIFE AN D MOTHER . 
AROLIN E V . ROBINSON , the 
daughter of George M . and Caroline 
Kelly , of Baltimore , died recently at her 
home i n Lexington , Ky . Mrs. Robinson 
married Dr. Perr y D . Robinson i n 1891, and 
was the mother of three children. She was 
a beautiful woman, and yet, as the teachers 
of the Chandler A . M . A . School write : 
"So little consideration did she give to 
merely external charms that those who loved 
her best lost sight of these i n their contemplation of her graces of min d and heart." 
The head of the Lexingto n colored orphanage says i n a letter to the local paper: 
"A s promoter of the Colored Orpha n LI ­
TH E LAT E MRS. CAROLIN E V . ROBINSON. 18 TH E CRISIS 
dustria l Home , of which, from the beginning', 
Mrs. Robinso n had been the honored secretary, the write r had seen much of her both i n 
her business and domestic relations; and 
after eighteen years of such observation his 
unreserved testimony is that as a sensitive, 
honorable and circumspect official and a 
wise and judicious mother, but few, i f any, 
could have excelled her." 
DR. SOLOMO N C. FULLER . 
A PATHOLOGIST. 
SOLOMO N C. FULLE R was born i n 
Monrovia , Liberia , August 11, 1872. 
H e came to the Unite d States i n 1889, to 
study at Livingstone College, Salisbury, 
N . C , which he entered i n the fal l of that 
year, graduating with the class of 1893. H e 
studied medicine at Lon g Island College 
Hospital, Brooklyn , N . Y. , and at Boston 
University, graduating from the latter i n 
1897. Immediately upon finishing the 
medical school he was appointed an interne 
at Westborough State Hospita l (Mass.), and 
two years later was promoted to be pathologist. Subsequently, he studied at the 
Carnegie Laboratory, New York , under Prof. 
Edwar d K . Dunham, and at the Psychiatri c 
Clini c of the Universit y of Munich , Bavaria , 
with Professors E . Kraepeli n and A . 
Alzheimer, also at the Pathologica l Institut e 
o f the Universit y of Munich , wit h Professors 
Bollinge r and Schmaus. 
He is a member of the New England 
Society of Psychiatry, the Association of 
Neuropathologists, an associate of the 
America n Medico-Psychologica l Association , 
the Bosto n Medica l Library , etc. Fo r the 
past four years Dr . Fulle r has been a n in ­
structor i n norma l and pathologica l anatomy 
of the nervous system, department of neurology, Boston University . H e is the i editor 
of Westborough. State Hospital Papers (a 
publication i n which appears the scientific 
work of the members of the hospita l staff), 
and the author of several contributions to 
the pathological anatomy of the brai n in 
persons dyin g of mental diseases. 
m 
DAVID LIVINGSTON E AN D 
HARRIET TUBMAN . 
IN March , 1813, Davi d Living-stone was 
born i n Scotland, an d at nearly the 
same time (the exact date is unknown ) 
Harrie t Tubma n was born on the eastern 
shore of Maryland . Livingston e died in 
Afric a forty years ago this month, whil e 
Harrie t Tubma n died but yesterday, havin g 
lived a century. 
Bot h these sincere souls gave their lives 
for black men. One explored Africa , but 
di d not stop wit h lake and mountain, but 
saw and knew the human hearts that beat 
i n those dark bodies and tried to make a 
deaf worl d realize that they were fellow men. 
The other, Harrie t Tubman , fought 
America n slavery single handed and was a 
pioneer i n that organized effort known as the 
Undergroun d Railroad . She was born a 
slave, nearly beaten to death by her master 
and ra n away. Then she returned and 
helped others to escape. Reward s amountin g to $40,000 were offered fo r her dead 
or alive, but she flitted lik e a shadow south 
and nort h and north an d south, until she 
had led thousands into freedom and was 
known all over the nation as "Moses. " 
Wendel l Phillip s and other noted abolitionists knew her. Joh n Brow n sought her 
aid and counsel. Whe n the Negr o soldiers 
marched south she went as nurse and spy 
wit h the famous 51st Massachusetts Infantry , 
under Colone l Shaw. Photograp h by Underwood and Underwood . 
DAVI D LIVINGSTONE—1813-1873. OPINION 
LIE S
 I f men wanted proo f of the utterly 
indefensible logic of racia l hatred it 
could be found i n the necessity of such 
prejudice to bolster its case by deliberate 
lying , deception and subterfuge. A prominent official of Australia , for instance, says 
blandly i n an interview: 
"W e find our educational test capable of 
ingenious application i n such a way as to 
shut out any undesirables who are not 
covered by any other detail of the law, and 
it is used, occasionally, for that especial 
purpose. Ou r law provides that those applyin g for entrance must be able to read and 
write some given language and knowledge of 
any language may be required upon occasion 
—the language is not specified. This, it 
wil l be readily understood, gives us a bar 
which we may raise to shut out any individua l 
whom it would not conserve our interests to 
admit into the country. The device is not 
used against white persons unless there is 
the gravest doubt of their desirability; but 
it may sometimes have been used against 
others." 
A simila r ease is i n the Unite d States civil 
service. Joh n T. Paynter, writin g i n the 
Washingto n Post, says: 
"The adverse conditions and obstacles 
which confront the ambitious Negro i n his 
efforts to scale the heights of governmental 
preferment are forcibly illustrated i n the 
case of A . 
"H e entered the service as an unclassified 
laborer, possessed of a common school education, which, combined wit h fine native 
ability and refined gentility, made him popu ­
la r with all classes of employees. 
"Throug h an executive order of Januar y 
12, 1905, he became eligible for and passed 
the clerk-promotion examination. H e applied for a clerkship at $900 i n a particula r 
office, and i n lieu of one at $000 was offered 
one at $660, which was his salary as an 
unclassified laborer. H e was told that he 
could not possibly be appointed in that 
office at $900, as that woul d place him over 
men already in the office, neither of whom 
had taken the examination for promotion . 
"Th e youn g man, after man y appeals to 
those who control appointments, took his 
case to the secretary in person, who called 
for a list of vacancies. The list, furnished in 
response to this demand, showed a numbe r 
of vacancies of the $900 grade. 
"I n this case the secretary, to his credit, 
without the slightest hesitation, ordered the 
applicant assigned at $900 i n the division 
which he had sought." 
Anothe r case is that of Joh n P . Ford , a 
colored clerk i n the India n Bureau . The 
white man whom he excelled i n the civilservice examinations was appointed before 
For d and rapidl y promoted to a $2,000 position. For d is getting $1,000. 
Bu t perhaps the most astounding and barefaced lyin g has been done by certain 
Southern papers concerning the late suffrage 
parade i n Washington . The Richmon d 
Times-Despatch is angr y when the Wash ­
ington chief of police said : "Tha t he feared 
the parade because the riffraff of the South 
would be here (in Washington ) to attend the 
inauguration of a Democrati c President. " 
The Times-Despatch then proceeds to declare i n its news columns that "Th e jeers 
and commonplace humor came mostly from 
youths, Negroes and men under liquor. " 
This is in flat contradiction to all the testimony, but the Ne w Orleans Times-Democrat 
ignores the testimony and on its editorial 
page perpetrates this flat falsehood: 
"Th e Washingto n police force and the 
Negro hoodlums that infest the nationa l 
capital wil l apparentl y divide between them 
most of the responsibility and" discredit for 
the outrageous treatment accorded women 
marchers i n the suffrage pageant of last OPINIO N 21 
Monday . The Washingto n Negroes' part i n 
the disgraceful affair fo r some reason has 
been 'playe d down' i n the telegraphic accounts of the parade and of the Senatorial 
investigation that followed it. " 
Thereupon the pape r proceeds: 
"Tha t city is cursed wit h the presence i n 
great numbers of blacks whose offensive 
conduct woul d not be tolerated anywhere 
else. No t a few, we dare say, are crimina l 
refugees who find asylum i n the national 
capita l and are encouraged there by a curious 
tolerance traceable to politica l sources to 
follow their evil bents shameless and unafraid. Repeatedly durin g the past few 
years the white residents of Washingto n have 
been roused, by epidemics of Negro crime, 
to vigorous protest." 
Ho w can one expect the ignorant white 
masses of the South to know the truth when 
information is thus deliberately poisoned at 
the sources? 
Wh y does the South so fear and shun the 
truth and how lon g wil l the nation coddle it 
i n this fear ? The Washingto n Times says: 
"Southern senators are hostile to Dr. 
Charles P. Neill's reappointment as 
Commissioner of Labor, because he made a report 
on conditions i n the Southern cotton mills 
that offended some Southern sensibilities. 
"Ar e Southern cotton mills so sacred, i n 
the view of Southern senators, that it is 
crimina l to tell the truth about them because 
they are Southern? The Neil l report on conditions at Lawrence , Mass., was vastly more 
harsh i n its criticisms and extreme i n recommendations than was the report on Southern 
mil l conditions; but we hear no Southern 
senator assailing Neil l for that piece of 
work. 
"I f the gentlemen from the South insist 
on a Department of Labo r that wil l spray 
attar of roses on the industria l stench places 
of the South, then i n fairness they should 
prescribe eau de cologne for Pittsburgh, 
violet water for Lawrenc e and Fal l River, 
and breath of lilacs fo r sweatshops 
everywhere. 
"I f the new Department of Labo r is to be 
a job for whitewashers, let's be honest about 
it and engage the most expert we can of 
them. " 
The real cause of Southern fear is thus 
summed up by St. Luke's Herald, a colored 
pape r of Virginia : 
"Yes, we want suffrage for Southern white 
women ; but i f Southern Negro women must 
be included, then we prefer to do without 
suffrage. 
"W e are hungry i n the South, but i f the 
bringin g of bread to us means that the 
Negro must share even i n scraps and crumbs, 
then we wil l go on starving. 
"W e want education, want it badly ; but 
i f the givin g of education to us means that 
the Negro wil l learn to read and write, then 
we wil l go on i n ignorance. 
"W e want capital, manufactures and mercantile enterprises i n the South ; but i f yo u 
are going to allow the Negro men and women 
to labor therein, so that they can have a little 
money, we would rather do without much, 
to keep them from having little. 
"The South is still under the blight and 
everlasting curse of slavery. The South is 
still gathering the vengeance of a just God. 
The South is still the land of bondage. There 
is no freedom i n the South fo r either white 
or black. Race hate rules and predominates. 
There is no law for the Negro, but injustice 
and oppression — civilly , politically and 
educationally. 
"Bu t can these wrongs go on forever? 
"No . Go d is just and right. The day must 
win!" ' 
THE MAN
 Mr ' Booke r T. Washingto n 
FARTHEST DOWN.
 has a report in the 
Independent on Mr . Wat t 
Terry, a remarkable young Negro capitalist 
of Brockton , Mass. Terr y has a gross 
monthly income of over $6,000 from 
$400,000 worth of real estate. H e began 
business twelve years ago. The article 
rightl y emphasizes the fact that grit, honesty 
and ability will tell even for black 
Americans. It is proper that such cases shou
be spoken of and given their full value. 
A t the same time one reads with interest 
the statement of an Austria n observer, 
Robert Braun , i n the Public, commenting on 
a review of Mr . Washington's last book by 
J . H . Dillard : 
"Booke r T. Washingto n surely deserves 
the praise of Professor Dillard , and even 
more than that. I have always considered 
him as the best representative of America n 
character. I know of no other man who has 
made such a wonderful progress out of the 
deepest ignorance and poverty. H e is the 
most energetic and most optimistic man I 
ever met. Bu t with all my admiration fo r 22 TH E CRISI S 
him, i f I were a Negr o I woul d not follow 
him. I believe, i n his great optimism, he 
has not the right conception of the situation 
of his race. An d I believe man y American s 
share what I regard as his mistaken 
optimism. 
"First of all, there is hardl y anywhere i n 
Europ e a race question i n the America n 
sense. Wit h us it is mostly a question of 
languages, where the ultimate aim is to 
assimilate the other 'race.' There is, of 
course, oppression, and force is used against 
people speaking another language, i n 
Hungar y and i n other Europea n countries; 
but the aim is not to exclude them, but just 
the opposite—to assimilate them. They are 
not excluded from the schools and churches 
of the rulin g 'race'; on the contrary, they 
are forced to joi n them. N o liberal-thinkin g man can justif y such measures, but they 
are certainly a milde r form of oppression 
than those usual i n America , on both sides 
of the Maso n and Dixo n line. I woul d be 
even so tactless (you do not want to be 
always tactful) as to say that I know of no 
country i n the worl d where 'the man farthest 
down' would be more hopelessly down than is 
the Negro i n America . There is no doubt 
i n my min d that the Negro farme r lives 
more comfortably, that he is more intelligent 
and more virtuous than the majority of 
peasants i n Southeastern Europe . Bu t the 
feeling of human happiness is based largely 
upo n comparison wit h the condition of our 
neighbors, and upo n hopefulness. Wher e 
legal and social equality is racial, oppression 
is more keenly resented than i n countries 
where oppression is common. An d what hope 
can a Negro i n Americ a have where the most 
prominent Negro, Booke r T. Washington , 
boasts i n the most childish wa y of having 
once had tea i n a dinin g car without being 
turned out? Ho w many Negroes enjoy the 
same privilege i n the South, after so man y 
years under that Constitutiona l amendment 
which is directed against discrimination 'on 
account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude?' Is there any people or 
nation i n Europ e i n the same hopeless 
inequality? An d who woul d not, ceteris 
paribus, prefer to be a Jew i n Russi a than 
to be a Negro in America ? 
"M y investigations i n the South led me 
to the conclusion that the race question has 
not yet reached its climax i n America . Most 
Negroes acquiesce i n their present condition. 
Their inevitable progress i n education wil l 
change all that; it wil l make them dissatisfied. 
The Southern white man wil l make no concession to a Negr o just because he has become 
more cultivated, because he uses more soap 
and better English . O n the contrary, the 
more he wil l then insist upo n drawin g the 
color line. " 
Two classes o f American s seem 
POLITICS 
worrie d over President Wilso n 
and Negro appointments to office: the 
colored Democrats and the white Southern 
politicians. One attempt to draw the 
President out resulted in a letter saying: 
" I have made it a n absolute rul e not to 
indicate what I am goin g to do about 
appointments because I am not now makin g 
promises of any kind , but I am sure yo u wil l 
not yourself feel uneasy after the general 
assurance I have taken pleasure i n givin g 
yo u from time to time. " 
This causes some hilarit y among colored 
editors. The Richmon d Planet says: 
"Vision s of that magnificent banquet to 
their 'new-found' leader float before us and 
now we are about to witness the blasting of 
all of their hopes. W e woul d remin d our 
friends that it is a poor pla n to go huntin g 
wit h a band of music or wit h a flare of 
trumpets. 
"Whe n white men cannot get office, what 
wil l make them angrie r than to see colored 
men get office? The notice of intentions 
given out, followed by this open applicatio n 
for patronage, .to our minds emphasizes the 
fact that our colored politica l friends are 
passing from one big blunde r to another." 
The New Yor k Evening Post adds: 
"The rai d o f colored Democrats upo n the 
Whit e Hous e last week, wit h the demand 
that every Negr o Republica n be turned out 
and the offices be given to them and their 
friends, shows that these members of the 
emancipated race have patterned after the 
practica l politicians among the whites. 
Twent y years ago such a demand woul d have 
seemed reasonable, i f not proper; to-day we 
are decades away from this bruta l spoilsman's attitude. Tha t the Wilso n administra ­
tion wil l be i n the least degree influenced by 
such a demand we have not the slightest 
belief. I n the whole matter of officeholding 
by Negroes Mr . Wilso n has yet to define his 
attitude, but he has already made it clear 
that he is not goin g to tur n over the offices 
to the spoilsmen. " OPINIO N 23 
The August a Chronicle is calm and 
judicial : 
"It appears that a number of Negroes 
have made request on the administration for 
a reasonable allotment of the Federa l patronage to men and women of their race, because 
they are Democrats, and because they represent their race i n politics. So fa r as known, 
the administration, through President Wilso n 
or any one else, has made no statement of 
polic y i n repl y to this request, and it is 
taken that there wil l be no statement, as 
there is no necessity therefor. 
"Th e Negroes makin g the request fell into 
error. Tha t there wil l be Negr o Democrats 
appointed to office there is no doubt. Bu t 
they wil l not be appointed because they are 
Negroes. Rather, because they are 
Democrats, are efficient and are suitable for the 
places to which they aspire. They must rely 
o n their individua l qualifications, not on the 
fact of their race." 
The Maco n Telegraph is implacable : 
"Afte r havin g been pai d fo r their votes 
so lon g by a commercial G . 0 . P. , these 
Norther n 'Afro-Americans' seem to have developed extremely exaggerated notions as to 
the magnitude of the reward due them fo r 
their politica l support. " 
The Roanoke (Va.) News suggests a way 
out i n the appointment of a large number 
o f Negr o janitors and menials and quotes 
a loca l Negr o politicia n as demanding "more 
jobs fo r little men" : 
"This is mighty sensible, straightforward 
talk and, coming from a member of the Negro 
race, should carr y weight and conviction. I f 
this pla n were followed it woul d go a long 
wa y toward satisfying the Negro vote and 
removin g the objectionable feature of placin g Negroes i n command and direction of 
white men and women. " 
TH E WORLD 
PROBLE M OF 
TH E FUTURE . 
No w and then an America n 
wakes u p and realizes that 
the problem of the color line 
is destined to loom large i n 
the future and that the attitude of this 
country wil l need some careful attention. 
"Observer, " writin g i n the Chicago Tribune, 
says that the opening of the Panama Cana l 
brings us face to face wit h the race problems of the West Indies and Centra l 
America : 
"Th e uppe r class being white, the lower 
being Negro, Indian, or a mixture of both, 
and there always being a number of mixed 
bloods, the race question cannot be ignored. 
"The bitter antagonism and prejudice prevalent i n this country do not exist. There 
is, however, a feeling varyin g in different 
countries. The mixed bloods always envy 
the pure white, and do not feel themselves 
quite their equals. 
"The pure whites boast of their blood! 
"Th e pure-blood native and Negro makin g 
up the mass of the victims of an unjust 
system and seeing the white and near white 
i n the majority of cases reaping the benefit 
cannot help but feel that race has something 
to do wit h it. " 
H e concludes that: 
"T o help, we have got to find satisfactory 
means 
"1 . To brin g about just economic conditions for the mass of the people without 
unjust discrimination against any class. 
"2. To endeavor to do away wit h what 
little race prejudice exists without injecting 
into it any of our own violence or hatred. 
"3 . To brin g about the development of 
the country while preventing its exploitation. 
"4. To educate and develop the people so 
that they may gradually take charge of their 
own affairs. 
"5. To brin g about prope r sanitary conditions while educating the people as to their 
necessity. 
"6. I f accomplishing these ends necessitates remaining until the people recognize 
themselves as belonging to the Unite d States, 
to face squarely the question as to -whether or 
not the Constitution follows the flag. I f it 
does, to appl y it. I f it does not, to say so and 
provide fo r a prope r government. 
"I n other words, we wil l only find repeated 
the problems which we already face i n Port o 
Ric o and the Philippines. " 
Herbert Quick, in the Gran d Rapid s 
(Mich.) Press, sees the real way out: 
"A s i f to give us another chance for redemption, there is being revealed to the white 
race—and to it almost exclusively—the vision 
of democracy. This vision comes to an 
intellect i n which honesty and candor have 
been defined through the redemptive grace 
of modern science. So the crisis of the white 
peril is on, i n the question as to whether the 24 TH E CRISI S 
white race wil l be true to Christianit y as 
revealed i n democracy or wil l be false to it 
as it was to the first revelation. 
"It is not too late fo r the white peril to 
be turned into the hope of the world . It 
may be. W e have lost the confidence of the 
other passengers on the good ship Earth , and 
we can wi n it again only by bringin g our 
government u p to our highest ideals and liv ­
in g down our past. Not until we have so 
lived our Christianit y and our democracy 
that our purposes shall be known to be pure, 
and not until we have extirpated our un ­
christian poverty and oppression can we 
expect our brother races to believe i n us as 
true soldiers of the common good." 
Eve n the white South, i n the vision of 
broad men like S. C. Mitchell, president of 
the Universit y of South Carolina , sees the 
light. H e says, i n "The Phases of Progress 
Towar d Peace," published by the Marylan d 
Peace Society: 
"The South is coming to embrace the 
view that the Africa n is not the Achille s 
heel of America n destiny, and that his 
presence here is not an accident, but an 
integral part of the purpose of Go d i n bring ­
in g that race to share i n the common in ­
heritances of mankind. I f so, the South today i n its heroic struggle is tugging at a 
task of world significance. This view strings 
wit h energy the arm of every man who is 
strivin g for a nobler social order here, 
founded upon justice and the spirit of 
mutua l helpfulness." 
The Federation of Religious Liberals at 
their last meeting passed this resolution: 
"W e plead for all the possible wise ways 
and means for allayin g race prejudice by 
removing its causes, and to this end we urge 
the broader education of both races—the 
final result to be a larger measure of political, 
social and economic justice to govern the 
treatment of the weaker races by the 
stronger. Large r patience i n dealing wit h 
the problem and more sympathy i n dealing 
with the people of color may well go hand 
i n hand wit h the impartia l application of 
all of the constitutional and legal safeguards 
for the protection of the Negro i n his necessarily slow development." 
The Christian Recorder, the 
EDUCATION. oldes t colore d paper, calls at _ 
tention to the wretched condition of the 
Negr o common school. The census figures 
are : 
Tota l No . No . No . not 
State 6 to 20 vs. enrolled enrolled 
Unite d States. .3,422,157 1,619,699 1,802,458 
Virginia ' 242,413 114,346 128,067 
Nort h Carolina . 264,025 143,039 120,986 
South Carolina . 331,429 151,726 179.703 
Georgia 439.485 185,191 254.295 
Florid a 101,285 44,634 56,651 
Kentuck y 81.976 44.064 37,912 
Tennessee 163,397 77,lo3 86,244 
Alabama 327,176 133,191 193.9S5 
Mississippi ... . 372,331 192,826 179,505 
Arkansa s 159,431 ' 77,467 81,964 
Louisiana 254,580 73,478 1S1,102 
The editor comments as follows: 
" A study of the statistics shows that 645 
out of every 1,000 white children, between 
6 and 20 years of age, were i n school; only 
455 out of every 1,000 Negroes o f the same 
ages were enrolled. 
"Between the ages of 6 an d 20 years, the 
legal school age i n man y States, there were 
3,422,157 Negroes. O f these 1,619,699 were 
i n school, and 1.802,45S Negr o children of 
this age were not i n school. 
"O f the tender age between 6 and 10 years, 
when every norma l child ought to be i n 
school, there were 990,8.50 Negr o children ; 
of these .4SS.954 were i n school and 501.S9C. 
or more than half, were out of school. 
"Between 10 and 15 years of age there 
were 1,155.266 Negr o children. O f these 
791,995 were i n school and 363,271 were out 
of school. Between 6 and 15 years of age 
there were 865,167 Negr o children who were 
not even enrolled durin g the whole of the 
year 1909-1910." 
The Survey says of the black 
TH E NEGR O builders of the Panama Canal : 
WORKER . TH E POLICE FORC E CONSIST S 
largely of Jamaicans and other West 
India n Negroes who have previously served 
as soldiers i n the Britis h army. A s teamsters 
they have shown extraordinary capacity' fo r 
improvement and are now generally as 
trustworthy as any who could be found to 
manage the army mules. A s pitmen around 
the feet of the almost huma n steam shovels 
they may aspire to count their wages proudl y 
i n gold, and even i n the strong rooms of the 
treasurer and disbursing officer they are 
employed i n places requirin g intelligence and 
character. 
"Best of all, they do not furnish a marked 
disproportio n of criminals. Muc h of 
the crime wit h whic h the local courts deal OPINIO N 25 
does appea r among them fo r the same 
reason that it appears among the immigrants 
i n our cities, because they are relatively 'the 
poor,' the part of the population which is 
pai d least, has least at stake i n the community, has least of opportunity and of 
outlook. " 
The great difficulty with the Negro worke r 
is the determination to keep him poor and 
make him a menial. Mar y W . Ovington 
says i n the New Review: 
"Th e share tenants whom I saw i n the 
Southern black-belt counties of Alabama 
were nine-tenths of them Negroes, but their 
economic status was the same as that of the 
Northern white tenants. They sowed their 
cotton and corn and their landlords reaped 
the profits. Their legal status was worse than 
that of the whites, fo r justice, when it concerned them i n their relations wit h white men, 
di d not exist. Kindliness was sometimes 
present, but when this was lackin g i n the 
white employin g class brutality might and 
di d ru n riot. 'I' d rather have Niggers than 
whites wor k for me,' one of the sensual, cruel 
employers said, 'for ye r can do anything yer 
want wit h a Nigger.' An d so this employer 
did ; for he ordered his overseer to drive his 
men to wor k at the point of a pistol, and to 
beat the mother who took her child out of 
the cotton field and sent him to school. 
" I used to think, as I traveled over 
the rough, dreary roads, and saw the 
impoverished workers, that nowhere could 
one better realize the folly of allowin g a 
few individuals to gain economic control • i n a country. Everythin g that 
nature gave was being exhausted—the 
soil, the noble suppl y of timber, the 
hearts of the men and women and little 
children. One never came upon a pleasant 
village street wit h freshly painted houses 
and trim lawns, one rarely saw a schoolhouse. Onl y a tired land and a tired, ignorant people, performin g a degrading work. 
Ca n the Socialist party arouse these workers 
to rebel against their condition? " 
Ad d to the above a letter i n the Baltimor e 
Sun: 
"I n 1849 my grandfather gave Betsy 
Kendrick , a youn g colored woman, 24 years 
of age, to my father for a cook. She was 
given a comfortable home in the yar d and 
treated as a member of the family . Bu t 
that eventful day, when Sherman made his 
march to the sea, Betsy was carried off by 
one of her admirers. A t the end of three 
months she was back, to the great jo y of all. 
Thoroughly penitent, she exclaimed: 'Please 
forgive me, missis, I never would have gone, 
but I was so harassed.' 
"Thoug h my father and mother have passed 
away, Betsy has never left us, but still lives 
in her same house and cooks with an assistant, 
but gives you to understand she is 'head.' 
"She has never demanded any wages, but 
the bargain is one quart of whiskey every 
Saturday. 
"Ma y Go d spare her to us for a few more 
years, and when she dies a monument wil l 
be erected to Betsy Kendrick : 
" 'Wel l done, thou good and faithful 
servant.' MES . C. L . HOPKINS , 
"Lincolnton , N . C. " 
W e trust Betsy wil l thoroughly enjoy that 
monument! 
Anothe r characteristic Southernism is the 
editorial comment of the Birmingham AgeHerald on a meeting of Negroes which the 
governor and a colored educator addressed: 
"There were more than 100 white people 
present, nearly one-fourth of whom were 
women, whose maids and cooks and butlers 
were in the audience. Ye t there was the same 
respect shown the white people on the part 
of the Negroes that was accorded them i n their 
homes. Seats were vacated to give room for 
the mistress and their white employers, the 
Negroes surging backward toward the rear 
of the church. 
"Governor O'Nea l occupied a seat on the 
platform, as di d two members of the Supreme 
Court and other State officials. Followin g the 
address of the Negro educator, Governor 
O'Nea l made a timely speech, bringin g applause from the crowded house, and voicing 
the sentiment of all the white people present. 
H e declared that the Negro's ignorance, his 
poverty and his degradation would have 
sufficient weight to drag the white people 
down i f the Negro's condition were not improved, stating that it was the duty of the 
white people to help the black race i n order 
to improve the economic and industria l conditions of the State. 
"The occasion was probably unlike any 
other that was ever witnessed i n the State. 
The majority of the white people present 
shook hands with the speaker when the meetin g adjourned, after which they left the 
church, the Negroes standing aside to allow 
the white people to pass." EDITORIAL 
PEACE . 
AT the coming meeting of 
the peace societies at St. 
Louis the question of 
peace between civilized 
and backward peoples 
wil l not probably be considered. The secretary of the New Yor k 
Peace Society writes us that "Ou r 
peace congresses have not dealt i n the 
past wit h the relations of civilized and 
non-civilized people ;' ' and he thinks that 
largely on this account "ou r America n 
congresses have been more dignified and 
more influential than those held abroad.' ' 
W e are not sure about that word 
"influential, " but there is no doubt 
about the dignity of the America n peace 
movement. It has been so dignified and 
aristocratic that it has been often most 
difficult for the humbler sort of folk to 
recognize it as the opponent of organized 
murder. 
A t a recent meeting of the New Yor k 
Peace Society the war i n the Balkans 
was eulogized and applauded, and the 
president stated that ' ' when we advocate 
peace " it is for nations ' ' worthy of it! " 
Such a peace movement belies its name. 
Peace to-day, if it means anything, 
means the stopping of the slaughter of 
the weaker by the stronger i n the name 
of Christianity and culture. The modern 
lust for land and slaves i n Africa , Asi a 
and the South Seas is the greatest and 
almost the only cause of war between the 
so-called civilized peoples. Fo r such 
"colonial " aggression and "imperial " 
expansion England , France , Germany, 
Russia and Austri a are straining every 
nerve to arm themselves; against such 
policies Japa n and Chin a are armin g 
desperately. An d yet the America n 
peace movement thinks it bad polic y to 
take up this problem of machine guns, 
natives and rubber, and wants "con ­
structive " work i n "arbitratio n treaties 
and internationa l law. " Fo r our part 
we think that a little less dignit y and 
dollars and a little more humanit y woul d 
make the peace movement i n Americ a a 
great democratic philantrop y instead 
of an aristocratic refuge. 
TH E VIGILANC E COMMITTEE : A CAL L 
T O ARMS . 
THER E is scarcely a communit y i n the Unite d 
States where a group of 
colored people live that 
has not its vigilanc e 
committee. Sometimes 
this committee is organized and has a 
name indicating its function. Sometimes 
it is organized for other purposes and 
becomes a vigilance committee on 
occasion. I n other cases the committee 
has no regular organization or membership ; it springs into being on occasion, 
but consists of approximately the same 
group of persons from year to j^ear. 
The work of these vigilance committees is to protect the colored people 
i n their several communities from 
aggression. 
The aggression takes the form of 
hostile laws and ordinances, curtailment 
of civi l rights, new racia l discriminations, 
overtax or oversevere enforcement of 
the law, curtailment, of opportunities, EDITORIA L 27 
etc. Sometimes this aggression is but the 
careless act of thoughtless folk and needs 
but a wor d i n season to correct it. Mor e 
often it is a part of that persistent 
underground campaign centering largely 
among white Americans of Southern 
birt h which is determined so to intrench 
color caste i n the Unite d States as to 
make it impossible for any person of 
Negro blood to be more than a menial. 
Against both sorts of racia l aggression organized effort is necessary. Man y 
thoughtful colored people have sought 
to avoid this; to act independently and 
to refuse to meet organization by organization. This i n most cases has been found 
impossible. The blows of racial and color 
prejudice fal l on all alike, rich and poor, 
educated and ignorant, and all must 
stand together and fight. 
The methods of these vigilance committees are various. The simplest action 
is the appointment of a committee of one 
or more to call on some official or person of influence; from this, action extends to letters and the press, pamphlets, legislative hearings, mass meetings, 
petitions, etc. I n a few cases threats 
and violence have been attempted, but 
these are at present exceptional. 
Fro m this procedure on the. part of 
tens of thousands of largely isolated 
groups much actual good has been done 
and much experience accumulated. 
The time is now evidently at hand to 
fund and pool this nation-wide experience, and to systematize this scattered 
local effort into steady, persistent and 
unwavering pressure. A s it is, unorganized local effort loses much time 
and energy i n reorganizing for every 
new object; organized local efforts lack 
experience and knowledge of similar 
action elsewhere. Henceforth we must 
act together and we must fight 
continuously. 
The object of the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People 
is to federate local vigilance committees 
among colored people in every community in the United States; to coordinate their activities, to exchange 
experiences and to concentrate the 
application of funds where the need is 
greatest. 
Hitherto we have spoken almost exclusively of the central office of the association i n New Yor k and its work. The 
central office is now permanently established, wit h executive officers and an 
organ of publicity read by at least 
150,000 of the most intelligent colored 
people i n the land. 
W e are now turnin g our attention to 
the branches i n order, on the one hand, 
to buil d a sure foundation and support 
for the national body and, on the other 
hand, chiefly to federate and organize 
the local battle against race prejudice. 
Wha t then is a local branch of the 
National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People? 
It is an organization of men and 
women, white and colored, workin g i n 
a given locality for the overthrow of 
race prejudice and color caste. It should 
have, among other things, twelve principa l functions: 
1. Legislation. It should watch hostile and discriminating legislation, hostile and discriminating administration 
of the law and injustice i n the courts. 
2. Discrimination. It should note the 
barometer of racial discrimination and 
see that it does not fall a single degree 
i n the matters of civi l rights, i n parks, 
museums, theatres and places of public 
accommodation and amusement. It 
should note new efforts at discrimination, 
have them systematically and promptly 
reported. It should note old habits of 
discrimination and have them wisely but 
persistently opposed. It should note 
the action of the police and discrimination i n charitable and settlement work. 
3. Legal Redress. It should see that 
good test cases of the rights of Negro 
citizens are brought before the courts 
and strong decisions obtained. 
4. Laws. It should seek to secure 
new laws and ordinances to protect the 
lives and property of citizens and to 28 TH E CRISI S 
prevent race discrimination. I n cases 
where race discrimination is too strongly 
intrenched to be attacked at present it 
should secure at least equal rights and 
accommodations for colored citizens. 
5. Education. It should see that every 
colored chil d between the ages of 5 and 
14 years is i n school; that the largest 
possible number of colored children finish 
the high school; that every colored boy 
and girl who shows good ability goes to 
a good college; that careful technical 
training i n some branch of modern in ­
dustry is furnished all colored children. 
It should see that libraries, museums, 
etc., are open to colored folk and that 
they use them. 
6. Health. It should conserve the 
health and healthful habits of the 
colored people, particularly i n the matters of fresh air, sensible clothing, good 
food and healthy amusement. 
7. Occupations. It should see that 
the colored youth have a larger opportunit y for employment at better wages 
than now; that they have a chance of 
promotion according to merit; that they 
are urged into new and higher avenues 
of endeavor, especially i n lines of literature, pictoria l art, music, business, executive work and skilled labor of the higher 
sorts and scientific farming. 
It should see that co-operative effort to 
furnish capital is encouraged and wise 
investments extended and guarded, and 
capital put at the disposal of the honest 
and efficient. 
8. Co-operation. It should endeavor 
to co-operate and advise with all general 
philanthropic effort and have the colored 
people represented on boards of control. 
9. Publicity and Information. It 
should stop the conscious and unconscious enmity of the daily and weekly 
press and seek to abate scurrilous headlines and contemptuous and belittling 
reports; it should send letters to newspapers, answer attacks, visit the editors; 
furnish the papers wit h news of events; 
give facilities to reporters to see the best 
an d follow them up ; it should see that the 
cause of the Negro is represented on al l 
publi c occasions; it should send lecturers and lantern slides to clubs an d 
meetings, etc. 
It should publish pamphlets an d distribute them an d use every opportunity 
to make the Negro church a vehicle of 
upliftin g information to Negroes. 
10. Racial Contact. It should use 
every opportunity to brin g the best representatives of both races into helpful 
and enlightening contact; it should brin g 
white lecturers on all subjects to colored 
audiences and colored lecturers to white 
audiences; it should arrange conferences. 
11. Political Action. It should see 
that colored people qualify as voters according to law and vote intelligently at 
every election. It should keep the records 
of legislators and Congressmen on racia l 
discrimination and publish the record 
before each election wit h such promises 
for the future as can be obtained. It 
should discourage an d expose bribery, 
and support only the best qualified candidates, black and white. ' 
12. Meetings. The branch should 
have an executive committee, whic h 
should meet regularly at least once a 
month for reports and pla n of campaign. 
It should have a secretary 'with an office 
open each day. It should arrange at 
least four times a year large meetings of 
members and friends for lectures, reports and protests. 
I n fine, the local branch should try, i n 
each community, Nort h and South, East 
and West, to solve the Negro problem 
i n that community by makin g the in ­
justice of discrimination clear to all, and 
the need of equal opportunity plai n to 
the most prejudiced. 
Finally , let the locals support the 
National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People We have 1,500 
members. W e want 10,000 members who 
wil l contribute at least a dollar apiece 
to the nationa l body i n order to effect 
the second an d final emancipation of the 
Negro i n America ; i n order that the 
national body may become a great clear-EDITORIA L 29 
in g house for information and experience, and be able to concentrate money 
an d help on particula r plague spots of 
prejudice. 
W e have ten branches which are 
beginning work as outlined above. Wh o 
wil l be the next ? 
B 
WOMAN' S SUFFRAGE . 
THER E seems to be no 
doubt but that the attempt to draw the color 
line i n the woman's 
suffrage movement has 
received a severe and, let 
us hope, final setback. Both at 
Washington and St. Louis the right of the 
black woman to vote and strive for a 
vote was openly recognized. There was, 
to be sure, a struggle i n both cases and 
the forces of caste are not demoralized; 
they are, however, beaten at present, and 
a great and good cause can go forward 
wit h unbedraggled skirts. Le t every 
black man and woman fight for the new 
democracy which knows no race or sex. 
PERSONA L JOURNALISM . 
One of the besetting sins of 
colored journals is the 
exploitation of personal 
animosit y in their 
editorial columns. 
Indeed, many of these 
papers never rise above insipidity until 
they take occasion to abuse somebody. 
Then they flash and scintillate; the 
strength and vigor of their Englis h 
know no bounds, even of grammar, much 
less of good manners. 
W e have recently seen three of the 
leading colored weeklies i n the United 
States throwing mu d at each other wit h 
an energy and vindictiveness which 
woul d be laughable if it were not so 
tragic and ominous. 
Does such journalism pay? W e doubt 
it seriously. Of course, there is always 
a deep human interest i n a fight. Bu t 
have we not enough to fight about without fighting each other? An d may we 
not remember that civilization is slowly 
but surely changing the character of all 
fighting, especially of newspaper rows? 
Differences of opinion are not only in ­
evitable, but necessary. Strong beliefs 
engender strong disagreements. Out of 
the clash of opinion and desires arises i n 
true democracy the slow triump h of 
Trut h and Right. Bu t this does not in ­
volve personal abuse of editor by-editor 
or pitiable innuendo. The editor who 
disagrees wit h you may be neither fool 
nor rascal, but simply mistaken; or— 
mirabile dictu ! you may be mistaken. 
I n any case, forget the personalities 
and argue to the principle . A wretched 
newspaper row may attract attention, 
but i n the end it wil l brin g contempt on 
the editors and disbelief i n their work. 
This does not mean for a moment any 
lukewarm or apologetic attitude toward 
honest belief. TH E CRISIS believes i n 
strong defense and vigorous, uncompromising championship. There is no 
man so important and no cause so 
triumphant that TH E CRISIS wil l not 
attack them i n the defense of right; but 
the attack wil l be on principl e and not 
on personalities. 
It is conceivable that now and then 
impostors should be exposed and liars 
called by their right names, but the 
necessity for this does not often arise and 
the doing of it does not call for a column 
of abuse. Le t the colored editors resolve 
to lift their differences to the high plane 
of principl e and let lis fight, not each 
other, but the common foe. 
"Let us have no more dominant races. 
We don't want them. They only turn 
men into insolent brutes."—Edward 
Jones. 
m 
"Education is a very good thing. It 
makes fools out of some people, but there 
are more fools who haven't any." 
—Harrie t Tubman. HAGA R AN D ISHMAEL 
By CHARLOTT E TELLE R HIRSCH 
AND Sara h saw the son of 
Hagar, the Egyptian , which 
she had borne unto 
Abraham, mocking. Wherefore 
she said unto Abraham, 
Cast out this bondwoman 
and her son : for the son of 
this bondwoman shall not be here wit h my 
son, even wit h Isaac. An d the thin g was 
very grievous i n Abraham's sight because 
of his son. 
were a bow-shot: fo r she said, Le t me not 
see the death of the child . An d she sat over 
against him, and lifte d u p her voice and 
wept."—Genesis 21. 
(Not far from the tents of Abraham. 
Hagar stands alone, looking out across the 
desert. In the shade of low and twisted 
shrubs lies Ishmael, motionless. There is a 
barren rock into whose shadow the woman 
comes slowly, her head averted so that she 
may not see her son.) 
"ISHMAEL"—AFTE R BECQUE T I N TH E LUXEMBOUR G MUSEUM . 
"An d Go d said unto Abraham, Le t it not 
be grievous i n thy sight because of the lad, 
and because of thy bondwoman; i n all that 
Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto 
her voice ; fo r i n Isaac shall thy seed be 
called. An d also of the son of the bondwoman wil l I make a nation, because he is 
thy seed. An d Abraham rose u p early i n 
the morning, an d took bread, and a bottle of 
water, and gave it unto Hagar, puttin g it 
on her shoulder, and the child, and sent her 
away : and she departed and wandered i n 
the wilderness of Beersheba. 
"An d the water was spent i n the bottle, 
and she cast the child under one of the 
shrubs. An d she went, and sat her down 
over against him a good way off, as it 
HAGAR : 
Ho w Egypt's Go d has burned this desert 
dry ! An d i n the flames of Hi s great wrat h 
my Ishmael dies, because i n Abram's tent I 
yielded me. Hi s cries grow faint, whil e I 
afraid to look into his eyes, wait here, apart. 
(Listens a moment then calls.) Oh , Ishmael! 
(There comes a moan for answer and she 
flings herself down upon the sand and reaches 
up her arms in prayer.) 
Great Go d of Egypt , let Th y Nil e flow 
here that he ma y drin k an d live , fo r am I 
not a child of Egyp t still ? 
See how m y bosom to the burnin g sands I 
bend. Dra w from it b y Th y powe r that 
which his new-born lip s once drew. O r let 
my blood slake his youth's thirst fo r life.. A MINIMU M PROGRA M O F NEGR O ADVANCEMEN T 31 
See, now my brow upo n the sands, for 
that I know an d understand. Bu t need my 
son pa y fo r the lif e I led i n Abram's tent? 
(Listens and calls.) Oh , Ishmael! 
(This time there is no sound. She rises in 
terror, her eyes closed, her head lifted in 
anguish. As she moves toward the bushes 
her hand touches the rock and she gives a 
cry, opens her eyes and bends over the 
crevice, follows it with her gaze and discovers the pool at the base of the rock.) 
M y cry to Egypt's Go d has rent these 
rocks! 
(She rushes^ to Ishmael and drags him 
back to the pool where she gives him to drink 
from her own hand. Then she lets him slip 
from her clasp and stoops to drink.) 
M y tears! I know the taste of them! An d 
they have saved his life . 
ISHMAEL (weakly) : 
Jehovah lets me live. 
HAGAE (in horror) : 
Jehovah, Go d of Abraham? No ! No ! H e 
has made mock o f us! Di d H e not promise 
yo u should be the father of a race and then 
let Abra m cast yo u forth wit h me? (Stoops.) 
Yo u li e so prone upo n the sand, child of the 
desert, flower of my swift advent to the 
heart of man. 
ISHMAEL (lifting his head) : 
The father of a race. H e promised that? 
HAGAE : 
The lie of Go d and Ma n against a woman 
slave. ISHMAEL : 
I f we could make it true ! (Lifts himself 
upon his elbow.) 
HAGAR : 
I f we' could breed a race to take great 
vengeance upon Isaac's seed, his son, who 
shall have wealth and comfort i n his flocks! 
I f we could find upon this fearful plai n some 
child of lust to mother such a rice ! (Rises.) 
A s yo u have tasted tears from my own 
breast and live, you shall eat fruit of evil 
and grow strong! Yo u shall breed men to 
mock his Go d of Greed. You r seed against 
youn g Isaac's from this day ! H e has thrust 
Haga r forth. Bu t she shall enter i n and 
lure his sons and work destruction i n the 
midst of them! 
ISHMAEL (rising slowly to his feet) : 
You r tears were bitter, but I live from 
them. You r curse upon his tented happiness 
I hear. 
Ye t I feel joy ! You r tears, his blood are 
mingled i n me now ; your hate, his strength. 
New power, I know ! 
Ho w great this wilderness i n which we 
are! Ho w small those tents that we have left 
behind! No t i f I could woul d I go back 
to tend those flocks that I might have their 
fleece. Before me lies the way of exiles'. 
See! 
M y sons, all those who are cast out by 
men. They shall not march i n numbers; but, 
alone, each one shall wander on to his own 
truth across the desert's stretch. 
Ye t every one of them shall find this pool 
of tears—the exile's bitter drink, by which 
he lives—Son of a Slave, but Fathe r to the 
Free . 
A Minimum Program of Negro Advancement 
By WILLIAM ENGLISH WALLIN G 
IT is believed by those who 
support this program that 
all organizations and in ­
dividuals inspire d by a 
genuine interest i n the 
advancement of colore d 
people, no matter how conservative or how radica l they may be, no 
matter wha t their ultimate views on the 
race question, may co-operate i n the followin g program: 
Withou t reference to color, class or the 
geographica l section, all the humanitarian 
and enlightened elements of every community 
i n the Unite d States can agree on this program. Afte r these measures are enacted, 
a further basis of agreement may be found, 
or more fundamental questions may come 
into view upon which differences of opinion 
wil l prove to be insuperable. Bu t i n the 
meantime the advance not only of the 
colored people, but of whole sections of the 
country, and indeed, of the Unite d States 
generally, depends i n a large degree upon 
the carryin g out of the followin g measures: 
1. Lynching must be stopped. I n the 
communities where lynchin g has become 
customary, law and order may always be 
said to have been partl y overthrown, and 
often legal government practically has dis-32 TH E CRISIS 
appeared as fa r as the colored people are 
concerned, and a litera l reign of terror prevails i n its stead. There are no defenders 
of the lynchin g custom among the leading 
citizens of any section nor among any class 
of enlightened people. 
2. Lynchin g i n the courtroom, such as 
we see when trials are reduced to a few 
minutes, is a doubtful improvement over 
lynchin g outside of the courts—for the 
methods are nearly as lawless and the courts 
are degraded as well as the people. 
3. The rights of employers and employees must be held inviolate without regard 
to color. It is only the most ignorant and 
backward element of the population i n any 
section that refuses to allow colored workin g 
people to enter into employments fo r which 
they can prove their fitness to the satisfaction 
of employers. The tendency to forbid Negroes 
to work as railwa y firemen, chauffeurs and 
i n many other occupations where there is an 
undoubted demand for their labor must be 
checked. It is generally conceded that the 
chief reason of the inferiority of slave labor 
was its lack of opportunity, and fo r this 
reason industria l and agricultura l education 
for Negroes is now everywhere approved. 
They mean nothing i f all employments except 
those that were formerly reserved to slaves 
are forbidden to the colored people. 
4. A11 forms of peonage and criminal 
penalties for the violation of contracts by 
labor must be ended. The danger of these 
methods is not only that they make criminals, 
but that they are almost inevitably extended 
to the lower level of white workers also. 
The recent actions of several Southern 
'governors show that the related danger of 
me labor-contract system for prisoners is 
Widely recognized, and neither the people 
of the Unite d States nor of any State i n the 
Unio n are ready to stand fo r the restoration 
or slavery under peonage or any other name, 
whether it is a law that makes the breaking 
of a labor contract a crime or any other 
simila r device. 
5. A full common-school education must 
be guaranteed to every child. This is necessary as a basis fo r industria l and agricultura l trainin g and is absolutely indispensable 
i n many modern employments. Publi c 
morality, publi c health and publi c order are 
menaced by illiteracy—whic h costs much 
more both to the government and to the 
business community than the most complete 
and efficient public-school system. 
6. Industrial and agricultural training 
must be secured for the whole population. 
The experiments at Tuskegee and Hampto n 
have proved their success an d accomplished 
their purpose. Privat e endowments, however, 
cannot cover one-hundredth part of the need. 
Man y of the States where the largest number of colored people live are altogether too 
poor to do what needs to be done, an d 
besides slavery was a nationa l evil and the 
expense of doing away wit h its after effects 
should be met by the whole nation. 
Moreover, the largest number of illiterate whites 
exist i n the same sections and these are 
equally out of the reach of sufficient privat e 
or State aid. W e must have Federa l aid fo r 
industria l and agricultura l education. An d 
the money so given by the nationa l government must be expended equally upo n the 
colored and the whites. 
7. The teachers fo r these schools must be 
provided chiefly from the colored population , 
so also preachers, an d a part of all the 
other professions. I n so fa r as the actual 
need exists, all wil l agree efficient higher 
schools must be provided—or both the colored 
people and the whole populatio n wil l feel the 
evil results. 
8. The same protection must be given to 
colored as to white property owners. W e 
were able to live fo r nearly fifty years after 
the end of slavery before the Ghetto system 
was widely introduced. It is a return to 
the methods of present-day Russi a or o f 
the Middl e Age s i n other Europea n countries. 
An d it is opposed to the interests of the 
whole community except those individuals 
wit h whom the Negroes are i n immediate 
commercial competition. So costly is it i n 
Russi a that appeals from the non-Jewish 
community fo r the abolition of Jewis h disabilities are frequent, and the first Dum a 
voted unanimously for the end of the Ghetto 
regime and of other disabilities, wit h only 
five members darin g even to abstain from 
the vote. A s Russi a begins to go forwar d 
the Unite d States wil l certainly not move 
centuries back. 
9. Equal service for equal pay. Al l the 
better elements i n those communities where 
racia l segregation at present unfortunately 
prevails wil l at least assent to this proposition : Tha t these communities wil l consent to 
the propositio n that there should be equal 
service for equal pay, and there is no tendency on the part of well-to-do whites to use 
segregation for the purposes of exploitin g TH E MA N WH O WO N 33 
their unfortunate colored neighbors. There 
is, therefore, every hope that this abuse may 
be remedied. 
10. Just administration of suffrage laws. 
Politica l disabilities, primaril y intended to 
disfranchise Negroes, are also, for the present, 
part of the publi c policy of many communities, but all the fair minded "and fa r 
sighted among the whites wil l assent to the 
proposition that whatever the law is it 
should be equally administered. Indeed, an 
unequal administration, the former method 
of disfranchisement, was seen to be costly 
and inadvisable by practically everybody, 
and this is the reason wh y new disqualifications have been enacted i n statute form. 
Eve n to accomplish their purpose, then, the 
laws must be equally administered, and all 
colored people who have fulfilled the requirements must be allowed to vote, both i n elections and i n primaries. 
11. The statutory disfranchisement— 
where it is insisted upon—cannot be along 
lines of color or race. Propert y and 
educational qualifications, which are not 
applied to poor and ignorant whites, can 
mean only that a premium for advancement 
—the vote—is offered to Negroes and that no 
such premium is offered to the whiles, who 
are allowed to vote without it. The statutory device used for this purpose, namely, 
the "grandfather clause," means, moreover, 
the reintroduction of the hereditary principl e 
into America n law. Several communities 
which have this clause are almost equally 
divided upon the question of its advisability, and there ought to be little disagreement among educated and enlightened people 
that a permanent return to the principl e 
against which the whole America n Revolu ­
tion of 1776 was directed would mean a 
reaction of the most dangerous possible 
character. 
TH E MA N WH O WON-( A Story) 
By HARR Y H. PACE 
(Concluded from the April CRISIS) 
II. 
The fifteenth congressional district of 
South Carolin a i n which Golden was located 
was nominall y Democratic, arid for several 
years it had sent a Democratic Congressman 
to Washington . Fo r the last two terms it 
had been represented by Col . James Edge ­
field, whose tirades against the Negro race 
had won the ear, i f not the applause, of the 
America n public . His well-known doctrine 
of race hatred and oppression had been 
openly flaunted i n the face of the Nationa l 
Congress wit h all but applause. "W e keep 
the Niggers away from the polls wit h shotguns, " he said ; "we don't pass laws against 
their voting. " 
H e knew, as di d everybody else who took 
the pains to investigate, that out of the six 
thousand qualified voters i n the fifteenth 
district full y two-thirds were Negroes who 
had conscientiously voted a Republica n ticket 
ever since Lincoln's proclamation. That 
didn't matter. Edgefield obtained and kept 
his seat. 
The Republica n nationa l committee had 
never cared about the Southern districts; they 
expected the Democrats to wi n and made no 
efforts against them. Bu t this year was 
exceptional i n many ways. Important 
measures were to come up i n the House, and 
to obtain a majority it was necessary for the 
Republicans to obtain every possible seat. 
The committee's agents came South. "Yo u 
must nominate a good man and make them 
count yo u fair, " they said to the people i n 
the fifteenth. 
The nominees were Russell Stanley, 
Republican; Col. James Edgefield, Democrat. Never 
was a South Carolin a campaign so hot. 
Adde d to And y Wyatt's influence upon all 
sorts of small farmers, tenants and croppers was the personal influence and devotion which the young man had excited. 
Ever y Negro i n the district made himself a 
committee of one to work for the ticket and 
there seemed no chance on earth to lose. 
Stanley addressed mass meetings, spoke at 
picnics and barbecues until he had aroused 
an enthusiasm that would have made his 
followers face any danger for his sake. They 
did not know the powerful motives behind 
the eloquent and burnin g words of Stanley, 
nor the deep appeal i n the slow, measured 
speech and earnest words of Wyatt . These •STANLE Y ADDRESSED MASS MEETINGS.' TH E MA N WH O WO N 35 
two an d Clara , the wife , knew that i n compassing the defeat of their powerful white 
neighbor there was hidden the revenge for a 
sister's wron g and the revenge of an outcast 
son. 
Meanwhil e Edgefield was i n despair. The 
situation was worse than bad. Reports from 
all over the district were the same: the 
Negroes were going to defeat him. An d defeat meant not only politica l extinction to 
his bright career, but utter and absolute 
financial ruin , and the blasting of his 
daughter's hopes. H e could not endure it. 
H e sent for Harris, his politica l manager. 
"Harris, can't yo u buy those Niggers ? Give 
them as much as $5 apiece fo r their votes 
and all the liquo r they can drink. " 
Harris laughed. "That' d be throwin ' good 
money and bad liquor away. Them darkies 
would take you r money and vote fo r their 
man. " I n a moment he continued more 
seriously: "It's like this: the thin g is as bad 
as can be. The Niggers ain't getting scared 
at you r shotgun threats no more. They've 
got Winchesters themselves. That Nigge r 
Wyat t has supplied the whole district and 
there's going to be something terrible happen 
at the polls. " 
Tha t night Edgefield called Elsi e to him 
an d told her the whole story as Harris had 
told him. Whe n he saw how well she stood 
it he ventured further. H e had always been 
confidential wit h his motherless daughter 
except on this one subject. To-night he threw 
away every restraint. 
"Yo u are almost a woman now, " he said, 
"an d yo u must share my burdens wit h me. 
I have explained the situation to you, but I 
have not explained the cause of it. " Her e 
the colonel lowered his voice to almost a 
whisper. "This is no ordinar y contest. It 
isn't even politics, child, it is revenge; revenge long cherished, lon g planned and now 
about to be fulfilled. Fo r my sake I do not 
care, I could suffer that, and let my conscience rest, but fo r your sake it must not 
be. Yo u do not know, could not know, that 
the Negr o who opposes me is my son, the son 
of my shameful youth, despised and neglected, and to him my rui n is sweet. Bu t 
yo u understand these things; yo u are a 
woman of the South. Yo u must save us. 
Go , do what you can ; he is you r brother." 
III. 
A s the campaign progressed and the certainty of victor y became more sure, Russell's 
spirits rose. H e was already tasting the 
sweets of revenge. And y seemed no less 
jubilant than he and gave every aid to the 
cause, sparin g neither time nor money. It 
was not until the last few weeks before the 
long expected day that his spirits drooped 
and shadows of another thought came flickerin g into his mind. 
The alarm had sounded one night calling 
all hands to a fire at the south end of a tenacre field to the home of one of Andy's 
tenants, whose famil y barely escaped with 
their lives. The origin of the fire was unknown and the spectators looked on suspiciously. A s they were returning i n the 
dim gray light before dawn they saw a 
tongue of flame leap up i n the north, climb 
rapidl y upwar d and burst into a seething 
mass that lighted the whole sky. Befor e they 
could reach it the ginhouse, with all of its 
precious burden of machinery and cotton, 
representing a year's hard labor, was crumbling into ashes. The sight struck terror to 
every heart. They felt powerless before a 
monster so swift and so destructive. And y 
gritted his teeth, and swore double revenge, 
determining more than ever that Russell must 
win . Bu t the sight had an opposite effect 
upon Stanley. It made him begin to think 
i n a way he had not done hitherto. This kin d 
of election was new to him. H e had heard 
vaguely of the terrorism and the red-shirt 
methods of some Southern States. H e was 
now face to face with them i n a way of which 
he had never dreamed. The contest was not 
to be a battle of ballots and convictions 
honestly expressed and counted. It was turnin g now into a struggle of arson, corruption 
and crime. 
Ridin g home through the dusk next day, 
he was turnin g all these things over i n his 
mind. H e had begun to ask himself seriously 
i f the game were worth the cost. H e did 
not want the honor; i n fact, that had played 
such a little part i n his program he had 
never thought of how he should feel as 
Congressman Stanley. His whole thought, 
his whole end and ambition, had been only to 
humble the prou d Edgefield. I n laboring for 
his revenge he had lost sight of the possible 
effect of its accomplishment upon others, 
upon these people here—Andy, his wif e and 
the little Ruby—th e tenants; i n fact, the 
whole district that a year ago he had found i n 
such peace and plenty and happiness. Fo r 
years they had been cheated, he knew, and he 
tried to persuade himself that he was an in -36 TH E CRISIS 
strument of Providence to set things i n order 
again. Bu t the vague terror he had seen that 
mornin g depicted i n those black faces as 
they gazed into the ruined house and the 
burnin g cotton found an echo i n his own 
heart. Wa s this to be his revenge? Wha t i f 
he di d succeed and yet leave behind him a 
chain of disaster—Are, loss, maybe murde r 
and death! H e shuddered at the thought and 
almost wished he had never come South. 
Then he began to wonder i f he ought not go 
away before it was too late and save the 
bloodshed that he knew was coming. H e 
wondered what And y woul d say and what 
the men woul d think ; i f it woul d be cowardly 
to run . Surely there must be some other 
way. So busy was he wit h his musing he 
di d not see the little white figure that 
glided out of the trees on the roadside and 
stopped his horse. 
" I want to talk wit h you, " she said 
quickly, "i f yo u wil l dismount. " 
He r appearance disconcerted him ; quickl y 
he put aside his musings, and the old feeling 
of hate returned. H e felt his mastery of the 
situation, and his first impulse was to drive 
on and leave her. 
"I' m a Nigger, " he finally said, sarcastically. "Wh y do yo u come to talk wit h me? 
Yo u know both yo u and you r father hate 
Niggers. " 
She bit her lip s and flushed. Then she 
said quickly : "There's no need mincin g 
words. I know your story, know everything 
back to the day yo u were born. I know the 
bitterness of it, too, for I have placed myself 
i n you r position and I know what it would 
mean to me. I am sorry fo r you, but that 
does no good. I am you r sister, but the gulf 
between us is fixed. Yo u cannot pass it. I n 
theory there is no communication across it, 
and there should not be, but I come to you 
and reach out my hand across it wit h the 
appea l of blood to blood and beg you to stop. 
I know what this victory means to you ; it 
isn't office, nor honor; you don't want them. 
Yo u want revenge, and you've taken this 
method to get it, to humble me and my father, 
to rui n us, and to make us a. laughing stock 
before the world . I do not dispute the justice 
of you r ease. I couldn't expect you, as the 
son of my father, to do otherwise. Ye t I 
come to yo u wit h no just basis for my plea 
and beg yo u for forgiveness. Yo u saved my 
lif e and I am grateful, but I was ungracious; 
I let an unreasoning prejudice carry me 
away. Believe me, I repent. Yo u do not 
know, cannot know, what this humiliatio n 
would mean to me, but yo u do know what it 
has meant to you. " 
H e sat uneasily on his horse, and she stood 
i n the roadwa y lookin g u p at him, her face 
expressing more than di d her words the in ­
tense emotion under whic h she labored. He r 
words had gone deeply into his mind . Ye t 
he dared not show her how muc h he felt. A t 
last, summin g u p all his control, he said : 
"Wh y do you come? Wh y could not he 
who has never spoken to me come to 
me ? I bear you no great il l will ; there is 
no delight i n seeing yo u suffer. Bu t it were 
wort h the victor y to have hi m at my feet, 
begging and pleading, coward that he is. 
Yes, I'm your brother, now that yo u need me. 
Afte r that I' m one of those yo u hate." 
H e reined i n his horse an d was about to 
move on when she caught his bridle . 
"Wait, " she said, her voice tense i n its 
emotion; "yo u cannot go yet. Yo u must 
promise me that yo u wil l leave here, go away, 
back where yo u came from. " 
H e opened his lip s to speak and gathered 
up his horse's reins as i f to move. A sudden passion swept over her. She had won, 
but she di d not know it ; she thought she 
had failed. She caught his bridl e menacingl y and hissed at him : 
"Don' t yo u dare refuse me ! Nigger—I 
need only scream, here, now, and you r lif e 
wouldn't be wort h that! " and she snapped 
her fingers i n his face. 
The blood flamed i n his brain, and his 
anger burst all bounds. Wit h his flat hand 
he struck her ful l across the face! 
"Scream! " he cried. "Scream, sister, scream 
with all your might! " 
The suddenness and the surpris e of the 
blow more than the pai n made her cr y out 
wit h a shriek heard fa r away on that lonely 
road. A minute later the sharp crack of a 
rifle broke the spell of his words. She saw 
the shadow of his dead body as it lurched 
and fell, and the echoing hoofs of a riderless 
horse smote on her horror-stricken ears. 
* * * 
A t the Shoreham, i n Washington , Colone l 
Edgefield is still the center of the Southern 
group, admired and envied and seemingly 
happy. Sometimes when he is alone wit h 
Elsi e they think of the old home. "Ah, " she 
sighs, "i f only he had really been one of us." 
TH E END. " NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT 
. OF COLORED PEOPLE 
FIFT H ANNUA L CONFERENCE. 
THE sessions of the fifth annual conference, 
announced in the last number 
of TH E CRISI S fo r the 23d, 24th and 25th of 
April , were held i n Philadelphi a as follows: 
First session, Keneseth Israe l Temple ; 
second session, Centra l Congregational 
Church ; third , fourth and fifth sessions, 
Friends' Meetin g House ; sixth session, 
Witherspoo n Hall . 
The first session, wit h Hon . Moorfield 
Storey, the nationa l president of the 
Nationa l Association fo r the Advancement 
o f Colore d People, presiding, was an in ­
troductory session. The speakers were 
Hon . Rudolp h Blankenburg , mayor of 
Philadelphia ; Rabb i Joseph Krauskopf, of 
Keneseth Israel Temple; Mr. Oswald 
Garrison Villard, chairman of the board of 
directors, Nationa l Associatio n for the 
Advancement o f Colored People, and Dr . 
W. E . B . D u Bois, director of publicit y and 
reaseareh. National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People. 
The second and thir d sessions were 
devoted to a consideration of the economic 
condition of the Negro, which were discussed under the heads of "Th e Struggle for 
Lan d and Property " and "The Problem of 
Wor k and Wages. " Rev. Sidney Herbert 
Cox , of the Centra l Congregational Church , 
presided at the afternoon session. The 
speakers were President Joh n Hope , 
Atlant a Baptist College ; W . Ashbi e Hawkins, 
Baltimore ; Mr . Joh n Mitchell, Jr. , editor of 
the Richmon d Planet and president of the 
Mechanics' Ban k of Richmond , and Dr. N . F . 
Mossell, superintendent Frederic k Douglass 
Memoria l Hospital , Philadelphia . 
A t the evening session Bisho p James 
W . Caldwell, o f Philadelphia , presided 
and the followin g made addresses: Prof. 
Kell y Miller, Howar d University ; Dr . 
D u Bois; Mr . Henr y Wilbur, secretary of 
the Friends' Association. 
The fourth session was an executive 
session fo r members only and was devoted 
to reports of branches and delegates. Mr . 
Storey presided. 
The fifth session, "Th e New Southern 
Attitude, " gave ah opportunity to the 
men of good wil l i n the South to speak 
out on the new Southern attitude toward 
the race question. 
The last session of the conference discussed "The New Abolitio n Movement. " The 
speakers were Unite d States Senator Moses 
E . Clapp , of Minnesota, and Justice Wendell 
Phillip s Stafford, of the Supreme Court, 
Distric t of Columbia . Mr . Joh n E . 
Milholland , vice-president of the Nationa l 
Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People, presided. Some of the most representative citizens of Philadelphi a were 
included i n the honorary committee. 
RURA L INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS. 
A CONFERENC E of representatives of 
rura l industria l schools for colored 
people i n the South was held at 26 Vesey 
Street, New York , Apri l 17 and 18. The 
meeting was opened by Mr . Leslie Pinckne y 
Hill , principa l of the Manassas Industria l 
School. The program was devoted to the 
consideration of the general problem of the 
rura l industria l schools and such specific subjects as a standard course of study, a 
standard system of accounting, the joint 
purchasing of stock supplies, the raisin g of 
funds, and the relation of the rura l school 
to the community i n which it is placed. 
Amon g the speakers were Mr . Oswald 38 TH E CRISIS 
Garriso n Villard ; Dr . James H . Dillard , of 
the Jeanes and Slater Funds; Dr . D u Bois; 
Mr. W. T. B. Williams, of Hampton 
Institute; Mr. Clarence H. Kelsey, president of 
the Titl e Guarantee and Trust Compan y and 
trustee of Yale College; Mr. W. D. 
Holtzclaw, principal Utica Normal and Industrial 
Institute, and Miss Emm a Wilson , principa l 
Mayesvill e Institute. 
To quote from a director of one of the 
industria l schools represented: "Nearl y two 
hundred secondary schools for colored 
people, located all over the South, have i n 
common a number of embarrassing problems. The increasingly urgent demands 
which these schools are makin g upo n the 
publi c clearly indicate that the time is rip e 
not only fo r a publi c consideration of their 
aims, methods and merits, but also for more 
effective co-operation and organization among 
themselves. There is no problem before the 
present generation of Negroes i n the Unite d 
States more momentous." 
BRANCHES . 
THI S month we welcome into membership 
two new branches—the branch of the 
Oranges and the Norther n Californi a branch. 
BALTIMORE. 
THE Baltimor e branch held its annua l 
meeting i n the Bethel A . M . E . Church . 
There was a large and appreciative audience. 
Mr . W . Justi n Carte r presided. The chief 
speaker was Professor Spingarn , of New 
York , whose address on "Th e Ne w 
Abolitionism" aroused great enthusiasm. 
Eight y new members were secured. 
The branch reports the followin g ease of 
legal redress: Mr . Thomas W . Turner, 
formerly a teacher in the colored high school 
of Baltimor e and now professor i n Howar d 
University, accompanied by his wife, made 
a tri p to Salisbury, Md. , on the Baltimore , 
Chesapeake and Atlanti c Railway . Mr . 
Turne r complained of the inferio r and degraded accommodations to which the colored 
people were subjected, and was finally persuaded by the members of the local branch 
to file a forma l complaint to the publi c 
service commission. The commission held 
a hearing i n Mr . Turner's case, which lack 
of space prevents our givin g i n full , requirin g that the railroa d shall make no difference 
or discrimination i n quality or convenience of 
accommodation i n ears or compartments set 
aside fo r white and colored passengers. Mr . 
Turne r was represented i n the case by W . 
Ashbi e Hawkins, Esq. , the attorney fo r 
the branch. 
CHICAGO. 
A MEMBERSHI P committee, consisting 
of Mr . S. Lain g Williams, Mr . George 
R. Arthur, Miss Garnett a E . Tibb s and Mr . 
Thomas W . Allinson , has undertaken a 
vigorous campaign fo r new members. 
A committee on grievances, consisting of 
Dr . Bentley, Dr . Hall , Miss Breckenridg e 
and Mr . Packard , has been formed to take 
appropriat e action i n such ' cases as that of 
the L a Salle Hotel , whic h recently turned 
away a thousand clubwomen rather than 
serve the colored guests included i n their 
number. 
A committee on legislation, composed of 
Messrs. Hallinan , McMurd y an d Packard , 
reports through the chairman as follows: 
Race prejudice has been runnin g lik e a 
prairi e fire over Illinois this year. It was 
kindled by the "Jack " Johnson ease, fanned 
by the newspapers and blown into a small 
gale by the Bourbo n publi c sentiment i n the 
southern half of the State. 
Fiv e bills were introduced i n the general 
assembly aimin g at intermarriage . O f these 
bills one hailed from the extreme southern 
part of the State, but fou r of them were 
from the middle tier of counties whic h has 
hitherto seemed fairl y neutra l ground. Non e 
of the bills came from Chicago, though 
Chicago legislators had been quoted freely i n 
favor of such legislation. Fou r of the bills 
were fathered b y Democrats and one by a 
Republican . 
Muc h water has gone unde r the bridge 
since these bills were introduced and the 
general assembly seems to be i n no hurr y to 
follow these proposals through. Governo r 
Dunn e is strongly opposed to them, as are 
the speakers of both houses. It is not believed that they can possibly pass i n the face 
of the vigorous and intelligent resistance 
which the colored people have shown and 
the strength of the other forces i n the 
State which are being brought to bear on 
the legislature. The mai n thin g is to keep 
the question fro m comin g to a sensational 
and ill-tempered ventilation i n either house. 
Anothe r bill , introduced by a senator from 
"Egypt. " provides fo r the introduction of TH E N. A. A. C. P. 
39 
separate cars fo r the colored people on 
trains i n Illinois. This was quietly chloroformed i n the senate committee on judiciary . 
It wil l never be heard from. 
Stil l another bill , innocent i n appearance, 
but serious i n its effects, bobbed up. This 
was a "full-crew" bill introduced by the 
Progressives i n the house and senate and 
drafted originall y by the Brotherhood of 
Railroa d Trainmen . This bill attempts to 
prescribe by law the number of men who 
shall constitute a "ful l crew" for freight and 
passenger trains of a given number of cars. 
The "joker " i n the Illinois bil l is too big 
to be missed, though it slippe d by i n other 
States. This "joker " is the provision that 
the road, i n makin g up its crew, cannot 
utilize the "baggagemaster, express messenger or porter. " This means that the train 
porters and the chair-car porters, who under 
the existing conditions sometimes serve 
(without additiona l pay) as flagmen, wil l 
have to yield their places to white flagmen, 
who wil l be pai d the regular white man's 
wages and who wil l joi n the Brotherhood of 
Railroa d Trainmen. A simila r law, when 
enforced i n Ohio, resulted i n the discharge 
o f about twenty colored porters, whose 
places (as flagmen) were given to white 
men. 
The Chicago branch of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored 
Peopl e has been gathering evidence on this 
matter through its committee on legislation 
and wil l press fo r such amendments to the 
proposed bil l as wil l protect the colored 
porters. Colored people i n other States 
should be warned to look into the "full-crew" 
legislation pending i n their legislatures and 
to examine with special scrutiny innocentlooking sections which attempt to describe 
the flagmen as those who "shall have had at 
least one (1) year's experience i n train or 
yar d service." There isn't a colored porter 
i n Illinois who could meet that qualification. 
INDIANAPOLIS. 
THE Indianapolis branch reports thirteen 
new members for the month of March . 
The followin g committees have been appointed: A press committee, consisting of 
Mrs. Henderson, Mrs. Bel l and Mrs. Fox , to 
watch the newspapers for all items of 
colored news; a committee, wit h Mrs. Norrell 
as chairman and including Mrs. Clay , Mrs. 
Porte r and Mrs. Willis, to investigate the 
rumor of the cruel treatment of colored 
women at the women's prison. Amon g other 
things it is said that the colored women are 
compelled to shovel gravel from wagons at 
the prison. 
Meetings have been held by the branch 
Marc h 7, Marc h 12 and Marc h 21. The meetin g on Marc h 12 was a publi c meeting at 
the Olivet Baptist Church. 
QUINCY. 
THE Quincy branch has started an active 
campaign i n the interest of the rights 
of colored citizens, and has presented memorials to their representative i n the State 
legislature against the four bills recently 
introduced which discriminate against the 
colored people. 
U P ! SING TH E SON G 
B y JAME S D . CORROTHER S 
I
A M a Negro, but I sing and sing, 
Burnin g wit h kiss divine that made 
me so. 
0 brother mortal, likest to the snow, 
Tur n not i n coldness from the song I bring, 
Bu t listen to my lyre's low murmuring , 
Wher e down the cypresses I sadly go, 
Throug h deepening twilight, lest the faint 
winds know 
Th e secret of some tender little thing 
That haunts and haunts me, and they tell 
it all -
All , all my sorrows and ambitions, too! 
Fo r these o'ercome me; these, through dreamy 
fall , 
Kee p calling, calling ; beckoning, as to 
. you : 
"Up ! Sin g the song! Me n shall forget 
your race, 
No r blush to keep the image of your face." TH E BURDEN 
LIFE . 
THI S Negro, Tom Law , had been work -
in g for Davis, it is said, i n the 
neighborhood of eleven years. H e was a 
trusted and expert 'hand' on the truck farm. 
Tom La w took sick and, being unable to 
work, went home. Davis, being afraid he 
might lose a valuable 'hand,' took his son, 
both being armed wit h revolvers, i n his 
automobile and went to the house of Tom 
La w for the purpose of forcin g him to 
return to work. La w told them that he was 
really too sick to work. Davis became worked 
up into a fur y and told him i f he di d not 
work for him he wouldn't work for any one 
else. H e first beat him unmercifully over 
the head wit h his pistol, after which both 
he and his son shot him several times, while 
he continued to beg them to spare his life . 
Davis is about six feet one or two inches, 
while Tom La w is small of stature, old and 
feeble of health."—(A letter from Florida.) 
WORK. 
THE doors of Detroit manufacturing 
institutions are practically closed to 
the Negro youth who wants to become proficient i n any of the skilled trades and arts, 
according to attorney Ir a W . Jayne , of the 
Society for the Prevention of Cruelt y to 
Children. 
"Mr . Jayne , after six months' effort, succeeded yesterday, through Supt. Dolan , of the 
poor commission, i n procurin g a job i n a 
manufacturing plant for a fifteen-year-old 
Negro boy of unusual mechanical abilit y who 
wanted to learn a trade to support his mother 
and six younger brothers and sisters. 
" 'Abou t the only lines of endeavor open 
to the Negr o boy are that of the porter, 
waiter, bellboy, messenger or bootblack,' said 
Mr . Jayne this morning. 'This boy is un ­
usually strong and healthy, bright and 
ambitious. H e has a mother an d six brothers 
and sisters younge r than himself dependent 
on him. His case is such an unusua l one 
that every director of the society made a 
personal effort to find the la d a position. 
"'W e have applie d to the Y . M . C. A . 
employment agency an d to the poor commission. They tried to help, but reported 
failure because of the lad's color, until 
yesterday when Supt. Dola n succeeded. W e 
have man y just such cases. This boy is 
above the average, and I became desirous of 
seeing him trained fo r some wor k other than 
that of a menial.' 
" 'The difficulty i n placin g Negr o children 
i n suitable positions is one of the serious 
handicaps met by the poo r commission,' said 
Supt. Dolan . 'Fe w employers want them and 
some of the excuses offered fo r turnin g the 
race down are humorous. Others candidly 
declare they cannot hire a Negr o because o f 
his color.' "—Detroit News. 
PROPERTY . 
DEA R EDITO R : 
Please let me say a few words to the 
readers of TH E CRISIS . 
I was born about forty years ago down 
i n the little mountain town of Cumming , Ga.. 
Forsyt h County. M y father bought propert y 
i n this town and we all live d happ y fo r a 
few years. Mothe r an d father died, but we 
kept the property. A few years ago the 
town started to grow and propert y went up . 
Bank s were built, cotton oil mills and a 
fertilize r plant. A large tract of lan d was 
sold to colored men and women i n town lots. 
Things went well until last September, and 
since then churches and schoolhouses have 
been burned, colored men beat, one lynched 
and two hanged fo r the same crime and over 
1,000 have left the county for safety. I have 
just received a letter from Mr . Alex . Gra y TH E BURDE N 41 
Hum , a renter of mine, stating that my 
house had been dynamited and he and his 
wif e and three small children had been compelled to move out of the county. 
Wil l some one please advise me what steps 
to take i n a case like this? Hopin g to hear 
from some reader of TH E CRISI S and a friend 
to the race, I am, 
Yours truly, 
(Signed) H . S. H aywood . 
m 
TH E THEATRE . 
DURIN G the week of Februar y 9-15 
Sothern and Marlowe were in 
Shakespearean repertoire at the Shubert Theatre, 
Kansa s City , Mo . A s is generally known, the 
colored people are placed i n the rear seats 
o f all theatres i n that city, some of them 
selling the seats to colored people from the 
last row forward, but only so fa r forwar d 
as the demand for seats on the part of the 
whites permits. Some colored people, refined 
and intelligent, purchased seats i n the last 
row. On presenting the tickets they were 
told that they could enter and stand, but 
could not occupy the seats fo r which their 
tickets called. They were informed that 
their money would be refunded i f they did 
not care to enter under these conditions."— 
( A letter from Kansas.) 
INSULT. 
I A M an employee o f the Illinois Centra l 
Railroa d Company , i n their general 
offices at Chicago, 111., known on the payroll 
as a messenger. Her e I might add that there 
are a number of colored employees here, such 
as private-car men and so on, there being 
three of this number, myself included, that 
have strictly clerical duties, though classed as 
messengers. There are mino r things that we, 
through habit, are forced to endure, as is 
usual for any man of color i n simila r positions. Bu t the point that I wish to brin g out 
is this: This company issues to its many 
employees suburban time passes. W e are 
included in this distribution of passes, but 
appearin g across the face i n large type is 
the wor d 'colored.' No w we are not ashamed 
of this, fa r from such, but upon the passes 
used by the white employees the prefix 'Mr. ' 
is invariabl y used regardless of position of 
the user, where we are obliged to put u p 
wit h only part of our names. Fo r instance, 
if the holder is Willia m Dean, his pass bears 
his name and description, thus: 'Wil l Dean 
(colored), messenger.' 
" I have had occasion to read what this 
company terms 'Rules and instructions 
governing issuance of passes to its officers,' 
signed by the vice-president and general 
manager, a part of which I wil l quote: 
'Passes issued to wives and daughters or 
other dependent members of employees' 
families should bear the prefix Mrs. or Miss, 
as the case may be. Bu t i n the case of 
Negroes the prefix of Mrs. or Miss must be 
omitted, using the first name i n full or 
abbreviated. Stamp the word "colored, " and 
across the fac'e of same stamp "not good on 
parlor cars or on sleeping cars."'" — ( A 
letter from Chicago.) 
TH E "JI M CROW" CAR. 
THE Negroes down i n this part of the 
"lan d of the free," who do any travelin g i n these hot June days, i f they have ordinary susceptibilities of common decency and 
fair play, must feel deep resentment at the 
way in which they are treated by nearly every 
road i n the South. It is a burnin g shame to 
compel Negroes to pay the same fare as that 
pai d by white passengers, and then give them 
cattle-car accommodations. 
I n these warm and perspiring days Negroes 
are cooped u p i n the smallest possible space 
i n one end of the baggage car. Bu t they 
are not even allowed to occupy this limited 
space, for the news butcher comes along and 
occupies two seats in the "Ji m Crow " corner 
and the conductor generally occupies two 
seats wit h his belongings usually just across 
from the newsboy. 
Whe n the few seats i n the Negro compartment are filled, notwithstanding the law provides that the Negro passengers may then 
be seated i n the car for the whites, the 
Negroes, regardless of numbers and regardless of heat and all conveniences, crowd the 
aisles and stand on the platform until leavin g passengers make room for them. 
The picture is a most unpleasant one, and 
these conditions wil l continue and get worse 
with the increase of Negro travel, until the 
Negro begins a systematic organized protest 
to the railroad authorities, to the State corporation boards and to the Interstate 
Commerce Commission at Washington.—St. 
Luke's Herald. 42 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Publishers Chat 
The JUNE CRISIS will print the 
best of the papers read at the 
National Conference. 
The JULY CRISIS will be the 
annual Educational Number, with 
pictures of the leading colored 
scholars. 
Our edition this month is 30,000. 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
16 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A. G. DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M . 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon 
champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity 
for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. 
Belongs in the library of every friend of social 
justice. Pric e 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAME S F. MORTON , JR. 
241 West 143d Street New York, N. Y. 
[DELHI DIAMONDS 
Semiprecious gems. Diamond's best resemblance. TRIUMPHAN T BRILLIANCY . 
AMAZIN G NE W CREATION . Imitating 
all precious gems, produced in white and 
colors. Resist all diamond tests. Cut with 
facets like diamonds. EXTREMELY LO W 
PRICES . Written GUARANTE E with every 
'Delhi." 14 K . SOI,lit GOL D mountings. 
Catalogue 
Inspection FRE E FRE E DELH I DIAMON D CO. , CHICAGO , DE P 80 
Something New 
Kelly Miller's 
Monographic Magazine 
Issued monthly. Complete treatment of some phase of the race 
problem in each issue. 
"Education for Manhood" in the 
April number. 
Price, 10 cents a single copy; 25 
cents for three months' subscription; 
$1 per year. 
Rates to agents: 7l/2 cents a copy 
on orders under ten; S cents a copy 
on orders over fifteen. 
Agents wanted everywhere. On 
account of liberal rates, remittance 
must accompany order. Address 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y 
Washington ----- - D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 43 
TELLIN G A STORY 
To friends who know you, may be easy, but "putting one over" to 
strangers is quite different. 
Telling a busy, business man about your services or your merchandise is still less 
a "cinch," for he hears the same story every day a dozen or more times. 
A clever speaker, before a sleepy or hostile audience, puts a good, stiff punch 
into his very first remark. This "knocks 'em off their feet" and they listen. 
Your business letters may be good, but if they lack the "punch" they won't "pull. " 
Correct business stationery is the "punch" that hits the busy man "right in the eye" 
and makes him read your letter. 
We'll show you the sort of stationery we create, if you write us. 
W e print for Mr . Conde Nast, of Vogue; we print TH E CRISIS . 
ROBER T N . WOOD , Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T NE W YOR K 
'Phone 6667 Lenox 
"HAL F A MAN " 
The Status of the Negro in New Yor k 
B y 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a foreword by Dr. Franz Boas of Columbia University 
Chapte r I. Ho w the colored people wo n their civil and politica l rights. 
Chapters II. and III. Th e Negr o tenement and the life of the poor. 
Chapters IV . and V . Ho w the colored man earns his living , wit h a full description of the professions; the ministry, the stage. 
Chapte r VI . Th e colored woman , her discouragements and successes. 
Chapte r VII . A vivi d description of the life of the well-to-do Negroes. 
Chapte r VIII . Th e Negr o in politics in Ne w York . 
Chapte r IX . Th e author's personal views on the race question. 
Price $1.00; by mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
'This boo k is for sale in the Boo k Department of The 'Crisis, 26 Vese y St., N . Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 44 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
very Business Opportunity for which YO U 
have teen looking may possibly he here on this page. 
EARN WHILE YO U LEAR N 
A splendid opportunity for 
ambitious young men and 
women. 
We teach Shorthand, Typewriting , Bookkeeping 
and Business Arithmetic , according to the latest 
methods of modern business science. Earnest, 
efficient, instructors. 
We also maintain an EMPLOYMEN T BUREA U to 
assist our students and graduates in securing positions. Man y of them now hold steady positions 
with some of New York's largest business houses. 
The service of the Burea u is FREE . Correspondence 
invited. Address 
Harlem Commercial School 
F . WALTE R MOTTLEY , Principa l 
47 West 139th Street New Yor k 
SELLS LIKE HOT CAKES 
Agents wante d 
everywher e to sell 
this ironing wax in 
pad form. It perfumes the clothes 
with a lasting violet 
perfume. 
WAX-IN-PA D MANUFACTURER S 
Lynbroo k New Yor k 
AGENTS $45.00 to $80.00 
A Week 
Thousands of dollars paid to agents 
already in the field. Will Gunckle, of 
Ohio, got $240 worth of orders first 
week. A. Bernider, of Kansas, made 
$30 in four hours. Made eight calls, took 
sis orders. Well, of Missouri, made $10 
tn one hour. Hamilton, of Wyoming, 
made $60 first two days. We want good agents in every 
county in the United States, Canada and Mexico. MF W INVENTIO N Just out. Nothing like it. FOLD - INE. w in VCP ) i ixjn IN G BAT H TU B Give s t Q ever y 
home a complete bath room in any part of the house—without 
expense. Biggest, quickest, surest money-maker of the 
century for agents. Territory being rapidly assigned. Send 
your application to-day. 
1005 ^ PROFIT
 W a Dacl 1 yo u wit n ou r
 cap^ i
 an d 
0
 1 1 experience. We give you complete instructions, assistance and co-operation. No charge fdr territory. Don't delay. Send your name at once. Write plainly 
and give name of your county. Complete particulars FREE . 
Write to-dav. 
ROBINSON MFG. CO., Ill Vance St., Toledo,0. 
$
1 0 00 A DA Y AN D MOR E 
T O LIV E AGENT S 
100 per cent, profit; sells to every colored man 
and woman on earth.. This is the quickest kin d of 
easy money. Send 15 cents i n stamps or coin for 
50-cent sample and terms; money back if not satisfied at first glance 
INTERNATIONA L SPECIALTIE S CO . 
Republi c Buildin g Chicago, 111. 
SPAR E TIM E WOR K 
Colored agents, male or female, are wanted everywhere to take orders for our high-grade calling 
cards, invitations, etc. We are furnishing highgrade calling cards i n correct styles and sizes for 
ladies or gentlemen at 50 cents for 100 or 25 cents 
for 50; no extra charge for address. Bi g demand 
everywhere. Libera l commissions allowed. Outfit 
free, Exclusiv e territor y given. Writ e now for 
terms. 
TH E HOUS E O F CHOWNIN G 
Indianapolis - Indiana 
LE T U S STAR T YO U I N BUSINES S ANY ­
WHERE . Don't be a wage slave ; get out of the 
rut; get grit and develop backbone and go in 
business for yourself. If you are capable of earning from $5 to $10 a day you are the person we 
are looking for. B y uniting with, us you are on 
a beeline to large income and independence. WRIT E 
NO W FO R OU R PROPOSITION ! 
The NELSON SUPPLY COMPAN Y 
Silverware Specialties Harrisburg, Pa. 
JUS T THIN K O F I T 
Gordo n Safety Razor s made to retail for 25c. Shaves 
as smoothly as some of the highfpriced razor s 
Splendid seller. Wil l last a lifetime. Sample , 10c. 
GORDO N COMPAN Y 
Northwestern Buildin g Chicago, 111. 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBL E ME N 
wh o can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PE R MONT H acting as 
AGENT S for the sale of our propertie s in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . 
Th e real comin g country, wher e there are 
opportunitie s and openings for all. Writ e 
us to-day, givin g you r age and experience, 
and we wil l offer yo u a FIN E PROPOSI ­
TIO N WHIC H WIL E MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVES REALT Y CO. 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ame s Bldg. Muskogee, Okla. 
AGENTS— Bi g money . Johnson-Flyn n 
fight and other copyrighted . Negr o pic ­
tures. Portraits. Pillo w Tops. Catalo g 
FREE . 30 days' credit. 
PEOPLE S PORTRAI T CO . 
Station U , Chicago, 111. 
BOKAR A DIAMONDS . Agents, everyone, to wear 
and sell our famous Bokar a diamonds. "Write for 
sample offer and catalogue free. 
NORTHWESTER N JEWELR Y COMPAN Y 
Dept. 24 
2141 Summerdal e Ave . Chicago, 111. 
$50TO $100 A MONTH 
I 
LU 
WAN T ACTIV E MA N EAC H LOCALIT Y 
^16 to 60 years. Introduce us to friends. 
Gran d world-wide Society. Pays largest 
I sick, injury, death benefits for smallV
6AB° St ' Hel Pfu1 ' inspiring, PROPIT -
^ABLE ! Made thousands happy and 
prosperous. Wh y not YOU ? Writ e 
kctuick for big Cash-Bonus offer. 
1-L-U 238, COVINGTON , KY . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 45 
REA L ESTATE 
Buy Brooklyn Property 
Ar e yo u a bonafide purchaser? Hav e 
yo u mone y to invest? No w is the time. 
Value s are low. $500 cash buys well-built 
bric k house. Balanc e on easy terms. Con ­
venient location, etc. House s for sale in 
every section of the city. Fo r particulars 
see 
G . JOHNSO N 
196 Putnam Ave. Brooklyn, N. Y. 
WANTE D 
500 Negro families (farmers preferred) to settle on FRE E Government Lands in Chaves County, New 
Mexico. Blackdom is a Negro colony. 
Fertile soil, ideal climate. No "Jim 
Crow" Laws. For information write 
JAS. HAROL D COLEMA N 
Blackdom, New Mexico 
Telephone 4048 Prospec t 
JOH N B . MOSELE Y 
REA L ESTAT E and INSURANC E 
640 Fulto n Street Brooklyn , N . T . 
Own Home in the North 
If not, why not? We have an increasing demand 
for ambitious, progressive colored people who are 
seeking homes i n the North. W e are the medium 
through which these demands can be supplied. 
Onl y such as can satisfy us that they are desirable 
wil l be considered. Get our Propert y Bulletin. 
It is free for the asking. 
P . H . SYKES , Rea l Estat e 
Cor . 19th and Ellswort h Sts. Philadelphia , Pa . 
A PLAC E T O STOP 
HOTE L WASHINGTO N 
First-class Service for First-class People 
3252 Wabash Avenue, 
Chicago, 111. 
FURNISHE D ROOM S for respectable people. Al l 
modern conveniences. Appl y 33 West 131st 
Street, New York . 
TYPEWRITERS 
Remingtons, Densmores, 
Jewetts , $11.50 each; 
Franklins, PobtalB, Ham ­
monds, $9 each. Bargains in 
Underwoods, Smiths and all 
others. Al l guaranteed. 
Supplies. 
Standard Typewriter 
Exchange 
23B Par k Row, New Yor k 
UNDERTAKERS 
Telephone Columbus 3935 Open Al l Night 
RODNE Y DAD E and BROS . 
Undertake n and Embalmer e 
Notar y Publi c 
Funera l Parlo r and Chape l Free . 
Licensed Lad y Embalme r Prompt Servic e 
286 Wei t 63d Street New York , N . V . 
Between Broadwa y and 8th Avenue 
Le t
 Adler 
The Organ 
Maker 
Take 
Your Own 
Time to Pay 
I have originated the 
wonderful Adler plan of selling organs which has 
made fhe"AdIer"a. household word; more than 75,000 
of these famous organs are now in the homes of the 
people. The time has arrived—-this very day—for yoa 
to send for my Wonderful Free Organ Catalog. Learn 
how you can have the World's Best Organ- winner of 
highes*. prize at St. Louis World's Fair—sent to your 
home for 30 Days' Trial without paying a cent. 
Jost send for my Catalog. Select the Adler Organ 
you like best. I will ship it at once. Have it a month 
free. Send no money until you decide to buy. Then, 
if you decide to keep it, after thorough examination, 
pay me at your convenience in small amounts. You 
take no risk and if, at the end of a year, the "Adler" 
fails to make good on every point 1 will refund every 
dollar you have paid. I give the longest and strongest 
f
aarantee ever made on an organ—for 50fullycars. 
save you 548.75 because I sell direct from the $500,000 
Adler Organ Factory (greatest in existence). The 
Adler P/'n wrecks all retail organ prices. 
Write For Free Organ Book. Name 
and Address o~i Postal—or 
Mail the 
Coupon 
C.I, . 
Adler , Pres't 
Adle r Orga n Co., 
3506 W. Chestnut St.. Lonlsville, Ky . 
Send roe—FREE —my Copy of your Wonderful 
Organ Book. 
NAM E I 
ADDRES S I 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 46 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
MUTUA L TEACHERS' 
AGENCY 
Recommends teachers for schools; secures 
employment for teachers. Blanks and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N. W . Washington, D. C. 
REGALIA 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalogue upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L . Jones, Pres. 
N . E . Cor . 8th and Plu m St». 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
SITUATION WANTE D 
Youn g man, 19, competent, holder of a College 
of Preceptor's Thir d Class Certificate, with knowledge of bookkeeping and experience in general office 
work, desires good clerical position in office. Ha s 
first-class recommendation. Address ' 'R. C, " care 
Advertising Dept., TH E CRISIS , 26 Vese y St., N . Y . 
Want to establish some suitable line of business in a desirable town. Wil l invest with a 
partner or outright. Address "Investment," 
care TH E CRISIS. 
Reddick's World's Greatest 
Polishing Mitt 
FO E POLISHIN G AL L METALS , SIGNS , PIANOS , 
.FURNITURE , GUNS , HARNESS , AUTOMOBIL E 
BODIES , LAMPS , HARDWOO D FLOORS , ETC . 
Full y Protects the Han d Saves Tim e and Labo r 
A n incomparable duster. A combination shoe 
polisher. Can be used with or without oil or polish. 
Mad e of special 
tanne d lamb's 
wool on the hide, 
' thoroughly cleaned 
and combed of 
all grit. Wil l 
not scratch the 
finest surface. 
Adopted by the Pullma n Company for porters' 
mse on the best trains and used in the best hotels, 
office buildings, theatres, garages, furnitur e houses; 
on dining cars, ocean liners, yachts and thousands 
of households because it's the best practical polishing device on earth. 
B y mail postpaid 25c. each (stamps or currency). 
A splendid proposition for agents. Writ e to-day 
for particulars. 
J. E. REDDICK 
1028 South 17th Street Philadelphia, Pa. 
WANTED—ON E MA N O E WOMA N I N EVEE Y 
locality to start a Cand y Kitchen . Best payin g 
small business on earth! Fe w dollars starts you. 
Get away from wage slavery- Writ e for particulars. Nativ e Herbariu m Co., Ambler , Pa . 
Mass BAT H TU B 
Costs littlfl, no plumbing, requires b'ttle water. 
Weight 15 pounds, and folds into small roll. 
Full length batna, far better than tin tubs. Luta for 
years. Write for special agent* offer and description. ROB™so* 
Mro. Co., H I Vanc e SI T°l*a°>0. Mfra. Turkian Bath Cabinet*. 
Swell, Nifty Suit 
FREE ! 
Get in Quick! Most marvelous tailoring 
offering ever made. Be our salesmanage r in your town—$250 a 
month. Enough coin to fill your 
pockets. Nifty suits for you to 
wear—ALL FREE . Make $60 to 
$75 a week selling our nifty 
suits. It's easy! Orders turned 
over to you. No experience, no 
money necessary. 
W E PAY EXPRESS 
ON EVERYTHING 
You pay nothing — absolutely 
nothing. EVERYTHIN G guaranteed, too. 
Write—Hurry ! Sen d a 
posta l 
card right away for this great 
free offer. Never anything like it. 
Get our book of beautiful samples 
and full particulars—all free. 
You assume no obligations whatever, so write at once. 
American Woolen Mills Co. 
Dept. 551 Chicago, 111. 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.00 
A value unequaled. Sold on 
Si.00 Profit Margin. Writ e 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD , OHI O 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United Status 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 47 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPL E 
OFFICES : 26 Vesey Street, New York. Incorporated May 25, 191 I 
OFFICER S 
Nationa l President—Mr . Moorfleld Storey, Boston, 
Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Rev. Joh n Hayne s Holmes, New York . 
Mr . Joh n E . MUholland , New York . 
Bishop Alexande r Walters. New York . 
Rev . Garne t R . Waller , Baltimore , Md . 
Miss Mar y Whit e Ovington, Brooklyn , N . Y . 
Chairma n of the Boar d of Directors— 
Mr . Oswald Garrison Villard , New York . 
Treasurer—Mr . Walte r E . Sachs, New York . 
Directo r of Publicit y and Research— 
Dr . W . E . B . D u Bois, New York . 
Nationa l Organizer—Dr . M . C . B . Mason, Cincinnati. 
Secretary—Miss Ma y Chllds Nerney, Brooklyn , N . Y . 
The, Fift h Annua l Conference wil l be held in Philadelphia 
Apri l 23, 24 and 25, 1913 
AMON G TH E SPEAKER S WIL L BE : 
Hon . Mooriiel d Storey Bisho p James W . Caldwel l 
Hon . Rudolp h Blankenbur g Prof. Kell y Mille r 
Rabb i Joseph Krauskop f Mr . Henr y W . Wilbu r 
Mr . Oswal d Garriso n Villar d Dr. James H . Dillar d 
Dr. W . E . B. D u Bois Mrs. L . H . Hammon d 
Rev . Sydney Herbert Co x Dr. M . C. B. Maso n 
President Joh n Hop e . Mr . John E . Milhollan d 
Mr . W . Ashbi e Hawkin s Unite d States Senator Mose s E . Clap p 
Mr . Joh n Mitchel l Justice Wendel l Phillip s Stafford 
SESSION S A T WITHERSPOO N HALL , TH E FRIENDS ' MEETIN G 
HOUS E AN D TEMPL E KENESET H ISRAEL . TH E PUBLI C IS 
CORDIALL Y INVITED . 
MEMBERSHIP BLANK 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE . 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in Class 
paying $ a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name . , 
Address 
Class 1. Donors, paying $100 to $500 per Class 3. Contributing Members, paying 
year. $2 to $10 per year. 
Class 2. Sustaining Members, paying Class 4. Associate Members, paying $1 
$25 per year. per year. 
The subscription to TH E CRISIS is $1 extra, except to members paying $2 or more, 
who signify their wish that $1 of their dues be considered a CRISIS subscription. 
Al l members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the 
Annual Conference of the Association. 
PLEAS E MAK E CHECK S PAYABL E T O NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , 26 VESE Y STREET , NE W YOR K CITY . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 48 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LEGA L DIRECTOR Y 
This is a ready reference of some of the 
best lawyers in the country. 
fjgjflf you are a lawyer and your name is 
not listed here you should write us at once. 
Residence 2546 Michiga n Office Phone 
Bel l Phone E-2161 Hom e 58 Mai n 
C. H . CALLOWA Y 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Notar y Publi c 
117 W . 6th Street Kansa s City , Mo . 
FRANKLI N W . WILLIAM S 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Notar y Publi c 
Rea l Estat e Conveyance r 
206 Parris h Street Durham , N . C. 
Office L . D . Telephone 3297 Marke t 
Residence L . D . Telephone, 5277-M Marke t 
GEORG E A. DOUGLA S 
Counselor-at-Law 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Buildin g 
113 Marke t St., Cor . Washington, Newark, N . J . 
General Practic e Notar y Publi c 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
"Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Lif e Buildin g 
Minneapolis,' Minn . 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
Attoraey-at-Law 
908 Walnu t Street 
Philadelphia, Pa . 
Tel . 2026 For t Hil l Cabl e Address, Epbe n 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
34 SCHOO L STREE T Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbi e Hawkin s George W . F . McMeche n 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore , Md . 
Phones: Office, Bel l 4059; New 420-M. 
Residence, New 733-A. 
THOS . E . GREENE , JR. 
Attorne y and Counselor-at-Law 
Notar y Publi c 
Malone y Block Youngstown, Ohio 
LEGA L DIRECTORY—Continued 
Telephones: 
Centra l 104W 
Mai n 61 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
Attorney-at-Law Notar y Publi c 
1607 Williamso n Bldg . Cleveland, O. 
ELIJA H J . GRAHAM , Jr. 
Attorney-at-Law and Notar y Publi c 
1026 Marke t Street Wheeling , W . Va . 
ARCHITECT S 
TAND Y & FOSTE R 
Architects 
1931 Broadway New York 
Telephone 5368 Columbus 
WIGINGTO N & BEL L 
Architects 
Karbach Block Omaha, Neb. 
H . HENR Y HARRI S 
Architect 
Cor. 8th and Princess Streets 
Wilmington, N . C. 
MOVING 
Telephone 4214 Greeley 
BRANIC' S EXPRES S 
PACKIN G AN D SHIPPIN G 
ANDRE W J . BRANI C 
459 SEVENT H AVENU E New Yor k Cit y 
Order s b y mail or 'phone receive prompt attention 
TRUNK S STORE D 25c. PE R MONT H 
Official Expressma n for the C . V . B . A. 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephone 5277 Morningsid e 
DR . GERTRUD E E . CURTI S 
Surgeon Dentist 
188 West 135th Street, New York City 
Telephone 4885 Morningsid e 
DR . D. W . O N LE Y 
Surgeon Dentist 
S. W . Cor . ISS d St. and Leno x A VE . , New Yor k 
Office Honrs: 9 to 12 a. m., 1 to 9 p. m. 
Sunday s b y Appointmen t 
SCOT T BROS. ' NEW S DEPO T 
A complete assortment of all the leading magazines and periodicals. Agents for TH E CRISIS . 
328 State Street Milwaukee , Wis. 
Telephone Gran d 3892 
LUN A M . SCOTT , Manager 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 49 
Established 1876 Telephone 1708 Harlem 
The MAND O 
Mozart Conservatory of Music, Inc. 
2105 Ma d ison Avenue Ne w l ork. 
Branche s of Instruction: 
Violin , Violoncello, Harmony , Ensembl e Playing , 
Chambur Music . Th e course of instruction adopted 
throughout all departments is thorough and precisely the same as taught in the leading conservatories in this city and in Europe . 
Th e Conservatory Sextette and Concert Orchestra, 
Mrs. Eliz a Mando , Conductor, is open for engagements for oonoerts and all occasions where superior 
music is required. Term s reasonable. 
Fo r further information address 
MRS . ELIZ A MANDO , Director 
HARRIE T GIBBS-MARSHALL , President LOUI S G . GREGORY , Financia l Secretary 
HARR Y A . WILLIAMS , Vice-President GREG0111 A A . FRASER , Recording Secretary 
The Washington Conservatory of Music 
and School of Expression 
Piano, Violin, Wind Instruments, Piano Tuning, Vocal Expression, History of 
Music Theory and Modern Languages 
Th e first and only Missio n Musi c Schoo l founded and controlled by Negroe s 
i n America . 
Man y scholarships awarded. Talented students never turned away unaided. 
902 T Street, N. W . WASHINGTON , D. C. 
Mrs. DAIS Y TAPLE Y 
Teache r of voice and piano, wil l take a limited 
numbe r of pupils during the summer months. 
Choruse s trained, soloists coached. Engagements 
for concerts solicited. Fo r terms and appointments 
address the studio: 
172 West 133d Street NE W YOR K 
HARMON Y AN D COMPOSITIO N 
TAUGH T B Y MAI L 
Interesting and Comprehensive Course. 
Small monthly payments. 
Address 
J . HILLAR Y TAYLO R 
Directo r Th e Success Piano School. 
43 O Street, N . E . Washington, D . 0 . 
Bel l Telephone. 
Mme. MARIE JACKSON STUART'S 
School of Expression, Musi c and Dramati c Ar t 
A thorough, well-defined course of instruction, 
designed to give the student a comprehensive grasp 
of each subject in the shortest time. Terms 
reasonable. 
Drama s staged. Amateur s trained. Play s revised. 
ADDRES S 
33 West 131st Street New Yor k 
Miss MINNIE BROWN 
SOPRAN O 
Ma y be engaged for commencements, concerts and 
recitals Fo r terms address: 
172 West 133d Street NE W YOR K 
Care of Tapley Studio 
MME . FANNI E BELL E D E KNIGH T 
Dramati c and Dialec t Reader. Engagements solicited. Students given special training in the 
Delsarte Method. Instruction also given in Dialect, 
Englis h Gramma r and Rhetoric . 
Terms Reasonable. 
Telephone Morningside 9045 
Studio : 231 W . 134th St. New Yor k Cit y 
Telephone Connection 
"DEACON" JOHNSON 
(That Cheerful Entertainer ) 
Leader, Mandoli n and Second Teno r with 
TH E "DEACON " JOHNSO N QUARTE T 
Montrea l New Yor k Philadelphi a 
Permanent Address: 
Time s Sq. Sta., Bo x 317, New Yor k Cit y 
TUR N YOU R SPAR E 
MOMENTS INTO CASH 
The increasing sales of TH E CRISI S have so 
far exceeded our expectations that we must 
have more representatives to look after our 
interests in each locality. 
The work is dignified as well as profitable, 
and will not interfere with your present 
occupation. Address 
Sales Manager of TH E CRISIS 
26 Vesey Street New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 50 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
FluffsMoquet 
TRADE MARK 
REGISTERED 
TH E PERFEC T WAS H 
FO R TH E HAI R 
Contains no soap; composed of 
materials better suited for the purpose. Insures you r hair the cleanest, 
fluffiest, most delightful and satisfying wash it has ever enjoyed. 
Send 2-cent stamp for tria l package. Agents wanted. 
American 
Manufacturers 
13 2 Nassau Street New York 
The TRAINE D MA N 
I S TH E ON E WH O GET S 
TH E POSITIO N HIGHE R U P 
If yo u wil l give us a small amount 
of your spare time, we wil l fit yo u for 
the position higher up—the position that 
pays salary, not wages. 
W e train men in higher accounting 
and business efficiency, and the course 
of instruction is designed b y Charle s E . 
Mitchell , certified publi c accountant. 
Ou r graduates are prepared to pass 
any state or territory examination in 
bookkeeping. 
Enrol l to-day—the call for competent bookkeepers cannot be supplied. 
Twentiet h Century Business 
Methods 
Bo x 81 Institute, W . Va . 
The 
Perfect Washing Machine 
Saves you r time, 
labo r and hands 
from rubbin g on 
the washboard. 
"Washes you r 
clothes b y compressed ai r and 
suction, the water 
an d soap being 
forced through the 
clothes. Work s 
on the principl e 
of the vacuum 
carpe t cleaner. 
You r clothes 
are not subject to 
the wea r that is 
caused by the 
beating and batting process used 
by other makes. 
Wit h this washe r 
it is soap and 
„ - water that do the 
Price $1.50 wor k 
Lac e curtains and the most delicate 
fabrics can be cleaned without the 
slightest damage. Wil l wash a tub of 
clothes in 5 to 10 minutes. 
An y woman, or even a child, can operate this washer. 
Sent prepaid on receipt of retail price , 
$1.50. Anybod y can afford to bu y it; 
nobody can afford to be without it. 
AGARD NOVELTY CO., Distributors 
38 West 136th Street New Yor k 
Good proposition for agents. 
Madam 
M y toilet articles will add the 
final touch of refinement and 
good taste to your dressing table 
Earle's Skin and Complexion Foo d $ .25 
Princess Hair Oi l 50 
L a Quinine Hair Toni c 50 
Antiseptic Toilet Wate r 25 
Earle's French Ba y Rum 25 
Earle's Viole t Extrac t 35 
Earle's Violet Wate r 50 
Earle's Lila c Wate r 50 
Agents wanted everywhere. Writ e for term's. 
JAME S T. EARL E 
Manufacturing Perfumer 
5 Collins Street Newport, R. I. 
BOUN D VOLUME S O F 
TH E CRISI S 
A bound volume of TH E CRISI S is always a 
handy reference book for your library or 
reading" room. 
We have the binders now, fitted with adjust 
able arrangement so you can fix them yourself. 
The words "TH E CRISIS " is stamped on front 
and back, making it convenient to place on 
you r shelf. Price 7 5 cents, postpaid. 
Address 
TH E DUNBA R COMPAN Y 
2 6 Vesey Street New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS . ABSTRACT S FRO M TH E FOURTEENT H 
ANNUA L STATEMEN T O F 
The North Carolina Mutual 
and Providen t Association 
Home Office: DURHAM , NORT H CAROLIN A 
FO R TH E YEA R ENDIN G DECEMBE R 31, 1912 
JOH X MERRICK , President A . M . MOORE , Secretary 
C. C. SPAULDING , Vice-Presiden t 
Gross income, 1912 $313,516.95 
Increase over 1911 53,312.93 
Increase in assets 28,614.93 
Amoun t claims paid, 1912 137,403.22 
ASSET S 
Real Estate (unencumbered) $66,856.50 
Loan s on Rea l Estate 10,141.60 
Nort h Carolin a State Bond s 20,400.00 
South Carolin a Securities. . 13,400.00 
Georgia , Atlant a Cit y 
Bonds 5,395.75 
Cas h in Bank s 5,367.67 
Other Loans 3,838.68 
Ban k Stock 2,000.00 
Interest and Rents Due 904.34 
$128,304.54 
LIABILITIE S 
Legal Reserve $79,132.60 
Unadjusted Claims 205.00 
Premiums Pai d in Advanc e 3,750.00 
Bills Payabl e 830.00 
Estimate d Taxes, etc., 1913 6,000.00 
Accrue d Endowments 1,000.00 
Surplus 37,386.94 
$128,304.54 
INSURANC E DEPARTMEN T 
O F SOUT H CAROLIN A 
FIT Z HUG H McMASTER , Commissioner 
Columbia , South Carolin a 
Apri l 1, 1913. 
State of South Carolina . 
This is to certify that the Nort h Carolin a Mutua l and Providen t Association, 
of Durham, N . C , has deposited with me as Insurance Commissioner, in trust, in 
accordance with law, Stock 'Certificate No. 1393, 4'/2 per cent. Brown Consols of 
the State of South Carolina , in the sum of $16,000. 
Th e above security is to be held by me as Insurance Commissione r in trust 
i n accordance with law. 
F. H . MCMASTER , 
Insurance Commissioner. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . CAP E MAY . N . J . 
This magnificent hotel, located in the heart of the most beautiful seashore resort in the world'; 
replete with every modern improvement, superlative in construction, appointments, service, and refined 
patronage. Orchestra daily. Garage, bath houses, tennis, etc., on premises. Special attention given to 
ladies and children. Send for booklet. E . W . DALE , Owner . 
Provident Hospital and Training School 
for Colored Nurses 
Aim: To keep its technic equal to the best 
Founde d 1891 
Th e first training school for colored 
nurses in this country, Freedman's 
excepted. 
Comprise s a training school for 
nurses, hospital, dispensary, and 
thoroughly equipped children's department; when funds are ample, postgraduate work maybe undertaken. 
Th e hospital is open to all. Th e 
races co-operate in the board of 
trustees, in the medical staff in 
administration; the institution 
only one of its kin d in which a co' 
man ma y act as interne. 
Cost of buildings and equipment 
$100,000; free from debt. Endowment 
$50,000, contributed mostly by frills 
made by colored men. Additiona l 
endowment needed, $50,000. 
Th e nurses' course covers three 
years; trainin g and instruction given 
b y both races, according to the highest 
modern standards. 36th and Dearbor n Sts. , Chicago , III. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 