The CRISIS 
Vol. 20-No . 4 AUGUST, 1920 Whole No. 118 
ON E DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R FIFTEE N CENTS A COP Y Why a Branch of the 
N. A. A. C. P. 
in Your Community 
Ten years ago the N. A. A. C. P. was in its infancy. To-day 
it is a powerful, aggressive and militant working force for full 
citizenship rights for the American Negro. 
But, a chain is no stronger than its weakest link. The 
strength of the N. A. A. C. P. chain is in its 325 branches and 
over 90,000 members in 43 states. The weakness of the N. A. 
A. C. P. chain is in the fact that it has not yet reached every 
Negro in America. 
The Negro who wants to be able to vote in any state, to have 
'educational opportunities for his children, justice in the courts, 
and to abolish lynching and discrimination of every kind, can 
secure these rights only through a strong, well-supported organization which never sleeps and is always on the job. 
If you have no N. A. A. C. P. branch in your community, 
write to-day for information on how to organize a Branch of 
the N. A. A. C. P. in your community, to 
The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
70 FIFT H AVENUE, NEW YORK , N. Y . 
National Officers Executive Officers 
President Chairman of the Board MOORFIEL D STOREY MARY WHIT E OYINGTON 
Vice-Presidents Secretary
JOHN R. SHILLAD Y 
REV. JOHN HAYNE S HOLMES 
ARCHIBAL D H. GRIMKE Treasurer 
BISHOP John HURST J. E. SPINGARN 
ARTHU R B. SPINGARN Director of Publications and Research 
OSWAL D GARRISON VILLAR D DR. W. E. IS. Du Bois 
TAMES WELDO N JOHNSON. Field Secretary 
WILLI AM PICKENS, Associate Field Secretary 
WALTE R F. WHITE. Assistant Secretary TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CON ­
DUCTE D B Y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS ; JESSI E REDMO N FAUSET , LITERAR Y EDITOR ; 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINES S MANAGER . 
Vol. 20-No. 4 AUGUST, 1920 Whole No. 118 
PICTURES Page 
COVER . Portrait of a Young Singer. Photograph by Green. 
"HUH ! I DON'T WAN T T O LOO K A T NO PRETT Y GIRL." 169 
TH E NINE NEW BISHOPS 182 
PLANTATIO N MELODIES. After the etching by Albert A. Smith 184-5 
ARTICLES 
TH E SLEEPER WAKES . A Novelette. Jessie Fauset. Illustrated by 
Laura Wheeler 168 
TH E PROPHET. A Poem. Joseph S. Cotter 173 
TH E POLITICAL CONVENTIONS 174 
WILBERFORCE. W. E. B. DuBois. Illustrated 176 
TH E END OF JIM WATERS . A Letter 183 
AFTE R A READING OF "DARKWATER. " A Poem. Elizabeth Curtis 
Holman 186 
DEPARTMENTS 
OPINION 165 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D 
PEOPLE 179 
MEN OF TH E MONT H 183 
TH E LOOKING GLASS 187 
TH E HORIZON 191 
TH E SEPTEMBE R CRISIS 
Did you know that the N. A. A. C. P. sent 2 special reporters, one white and one colored, to Haiti? Read about it in the September CRISIS. October brings our Homes Number. 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Th e date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entere d as second class matte r Novembe r 2, 1910, at the post of2ce at New York , Ne w 
York , under the Ac t of Marc h 3, 1879. 16 2 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM , NORT H CAROLIN A 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Science! The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economici 
The Department of Social Service 
TER M OPENS SEPTEMBER 21, 1920 
For further information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y 
Washington , D . C . 
J . STANLE Y DURKEE , A.M. , Ph.D. , President 
EMMET T J . SCOTT , A.M. , LL.D. , Secretary-Treasurer . 
Collegiate and Professional Schools 
Junior College, covering the Freshman and Sophomore years, and leading to the Senior Colleges. 
Senior College, consisting of the Schools of Liberal Arts, Education, Journalism and Commerce 
and F:nance, granting respectively the degrees, A.B, or B.S.; A.B. or B.S. in Education ; B.S. in Journalism; B.S. in Commerce. 
School of Applied Science, four year course, giving degree, B.S. in C.E.: B.S. in E.E. ; B.S. 
in M.E. ; B.S. in Architecture; B.S. in Agriculture, and B.S. in Household Economic?. 
School of Music, four year course, giving degree of Mus.B. 
School of Religion, three year course, giving degree of B.D. (Also Diploma and Correspondence 
Courses.) 
School of Law , three year evening course, giving degree of LL.B . 
Sc-hool of Medicine, including Medical, Dental, Pharmaceutical Colleges. Four year course for 
Medical and Dental students; three years for Pharmaceutical students. Following- dedegrees given: M.D., D.D.S., Phar.C. 
Students may enter for Collegiate Work at the beginning of any quarter. 
REGISTRATIO N : 
Autum n Quarte r September 27 to 29, 1920 
Winte r Quarte r Januar y 3, 1921 
Spring Quarte r Marc h 19 and 21, 1921 
Fo r Catalog; and Information, write 
DWIGH T O. W. HOLMES , Registrar 
HOWARD UNIVERSITY, Washington , D. C . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 16 3 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Atlant MOREHOUS E COLLEG E a University (Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) Is beautifully located In the City of Atlanta , Qa. 
The courses of study Include Hig h school, forma l 
School and College, wit h Manua l trainin g and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are graduates 
of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth and Wellesley. Fift y 
years of successful work have been completed. 
Students some from al l carts of the south. Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further Information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , OA, 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE Beautifu l Situation. Healthfu l Location. 
Best Mora l and Spiritua l Environment, 
Splendid Intellectua l Atmosphere . 
Note d for Honest and Thoroug h "Work. 
Institution offers ful l courses in the following- departments: College, Normal , Hig h 
School, Gramma r School, Domesti c Science, 
Nurs e Training- and Industrial. 
Good water , steam heat, electric lights, 
natura l drainage , splendid dormitories. Ex ­
penses ver y reasonable. 
Begins Septembe r 15, 1920. 
Fo r catalog and other information address 
PRESIDENT . J . KELL Y GIFFE N 
Knoxville , Term . 
1870 CLAR K UNIVERSIT Y 1920 ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Over 100 arre« if beautiful campus. Twelve buildin g 
with new $100 000 administratio n buildin g with modern 
chape l an d gymnasiu m unde r con3truction. Strong faculty—Religious atmosphere—Athfetics—Co-educational. Ad ­
mission only by application. 
REARRANGE D COURSE S O F STUD Y 
Junio r High School—7th an d Rth Grade s and 1st and 
2nd Years' Hig h Schoo l Courses, with Certificate. 
Junio r College—3rd an d 4th Yea r Hig h Schoo l with 
Freshma n an d Sophomor e years of College work, will) 
Diploma . 
College—Fou r years aliove Hig h School, or two years 
above Junio r College Course , with degree of A .B . 
Domesti c Science—Commerce—Normal— 
Pre-mpdica l Course 
51st yea r of nine months opens September 22, 1920. 
$16.00 per mont h pays tuition, hoard, room an d laundry . 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING , President 
The Florida Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahassee, Florida 
LINCOL N UNIVERSIT Y is ranked In Class 1 
among- colleges for colored students by the 
America n Medica l Association. 
Th e College and Theologica l Seminar y 
e n se 1 9 2 0 Address °P p t 21
PRESIDEN T JOH N B. RENDALL , D.D. , 
Lincol n University , Cheste r County, Pa . 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
Fo r information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musica l and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
Hig h standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. Fo r literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY CHARLOTTE . N . C . 
Biddle University. operated under the auspice of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, h u four Depart ­
menu—High School. Art* and Sciences Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course la the requirement for entrance to the first tear 
of the High School. 
The School of Art* and Sciences offers two course. 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific, in the 
scientific. German Is substituted for Greet or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class Is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely English. 
Greek and Hebrew are taught in the others. 
All students In the High Scho«l Dept. are required 
to take trades In (lit Industrial Dept. 
For further information, address 
President H. L. MoCrorey. 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University Atlanta, Ga . 
Co-Educational The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian Influence. Wel l equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics! under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College Preparatory, Nor ­
mal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training , Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester begins September, 1020. 
Fo r further information address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN , President 
BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, CHAIRMAN TRUSTEE BOARD 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 164 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Wiley University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and Okla ­
homa State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University, University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented or. its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W. DOGAN , President 
The Cheyney Training 
School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNA . 
Courses include the regular academic and 
professional subjects and special departments 
in domestic art, domestic science, manual 
training and agriculture. Board and tuition 
$126. Next regular term begins Wednesday, 
September 15, 1920. Summe r school for 
teachers in active service, beginning July 1. 
Board and tuition for the month $20.00. Fo r 
further particulars and catalog write Leslie 
Pinckney Hill , Principal, Cheney, Penna. 
THE NEGRO 
AGRICULTURAL and 
TECHNICAL COLLEGE 
of North Carolina 
Just the place for youn g men. Fal l 
Ter m begins September 1st, 1920. 
Thoroug h theoretical and practica l 
courses given by the followin g departments : 
ACADEMIC , MECHANICAL , 
AGRICULTURAL , TEACHE R 
TRAINING , MILITAR Y 
Youn g men, this_ is quite an opportunity. If you do not kno w of the facilities of this college, address 
JAMES B. DUDLEY, President 
Greensboro, N . C. 
COLEMA N COLLEG E 
GIBSLAND , LA . 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Home Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and A . B . H . Society of Ne w York . Students from six different states. Graduates ex­ empted on first grade by Louisiana , Arkansa s and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN , President 
ST. MARY' S SCHOOL A n Episcopa l boarding school for girls, under the direction of the sisters of St. Mary . Address: TH E SISTER-IN-CHAB.GE , 6138 Germantown Avenue, Philadelphia , Pa . 
Hartshorn Memorial College 
Richmond, Va. 
A separate school for higher education of girls 
Thirty seven years of success 
Offers superior advantages 
College, Normal, Academic, Junior 
and Music courses 
Expenses moderate 
Send for catalog to the President 
Talladega Theological Seminary TALLADEGA , ALABAM A 
Is training men and women for the 
Gospe l Ministry at home and abroad. Students 
are also being trained for work in the fields of 
Social Service, 
Religious Education, 
The Young Mens Christian Association and 
The Young Women's Christian Association. 
The Seminary has an enviable record of 48 years. 
For literature and full information address 
JAME S P . O'BRIEN , Dean, 
399 "W. Battl e St., Talladega , Ala . 
VA. UNION UNIVERSITY 
RICHMOND , VA . 
Founded 1865 
College, Academi c and Theologica l departments. Th e school of Arts and Sciences 
offers classical and scientific courses. Special 
emphasis on Pre-Medica l Work . Theologica l 
department confers B.Th . and B.D . Fore ­
most in Debating and Athletics. Fo r furthe r 
information, address WM . J . CLARK , President. 
STATE UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. Founde d 1879. 
Th e only Institution i n the Stat e havin g fo r its objec t 
Collegiate, Ministerial , Medical , an d Lega l trainin g fo r Col ­
ored citizens in Kentucky . 
Specia l trainin g i n Insurance , Socia l Service , Nursln c an d 
Hospita l Work . 
Normal , Commercial , Music , Domesti c Science , Missionar y 
(raining class. 
Evenin g classes, correspondenc e course. Degrees offered. 
President C. H . Parrish 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS 
Vol. 20. No. 4 AUGUST, 1920 Whole No. 118 
OPINION 
of W.E.B. Du Bois 
FRO M G . B. S. 
I A M so busy al l my lif e considerin g wha t I shall do being white 
that I have never had time to 
settle wha t I should do i f I were 
black. 
" I do not know enough about the problem 
of the Africa n i n Americ a to justify me i n 
lyin g about it. I am quite awar e that this 
consideration does not usually act as a deterrent; but i n my case it does. 
" I am muc h obliged to you for the invitation to contribute to your journal ; and 
i f ever anythin g wort h sayin g on your 
subject occurs to me, I shall bear you i n 
mind. " 
GEORG E BERNAR D SHAW . 
TH E TAS K 
THER E is one sentence in the 
resignation of Mr. Shillady, 
our former secretary, which 
has arrested the attention of 
us all. He says: " I am less confident than heretofore of 
the speedy success of the Association's ful l 
program, and of the probability of overcoming, withi n a reasonable period, the 
forces opposed to Negr o equality, by the 
means and methods whic h are withi n the 
Association's powe r to employ. " 
This is the frank judgment of a 
white man of high ideals and broad 
sympathy who came to our problem 
wit h thorough training in methods of 
social uplift. Fo r two years he has 
studied the Negro problem from a 
peculiar vantage ground, knowing it 
without and within, making close 
friendships with black folk all over 
the land and studying their problem 
through thousands of calls and letters. 
This man after such experience 
says: 
1. We cannot solve the Negro problem quickly; 
2. There are strong forces opposed 
to Negro equality; 
3. Our means and methods of meeting these forces are limited. 
Mr. Shillady does not say that our 
problem is insoluble or that Negro 
hatred in this land is unconquerable 
or that the methods of the N . A . A . 
C. P. are ineffective. On the contrary 
Mr. Shillady believes in our organization thoroughly and in the ultimate 
triumph of the Negro. But he does 
make definite answer to those soidisant philosophers who insist that 
this problem is a simple matter of this 
or that—"simply" go to work, "simply" go to school, "simply" stop attacking white women, etc. The 
Negro problem is a human problem of 
work, education, crime, democracy, 
art and life, with all their age-long 
complications and intertwinings. But 
it is more than that. It is not simply 
ignorance but ignorance with a determined, powerful, clear-eyed, organized effort on the part of millions 
of enemies to keep Negroes ignorant. 
It is crime backed by the devilish 
conspiracy to use and encourage 
Negro crime as a means of discrediting all Negroes. It is not simply a 
matter of regular, efficient work, but 
it is work accompanied by peonage, 
theft and abuse which harks back to 
the 13th century and is almost incomprehensible to modern laborers. 
Al l this is the Negro problem. We 
Negroes know it and know it well. To 
us Mr. Shillady's conclusion is no 
news. Bu t to white people and especially to white social workers, it 
should come as a mighty—an insistent, a ringing warning. No longer 
is it admissible to side-track and 
165 166 TH E CRISIS 
dodge this terrific human cause. Here 
are 90,000 people banded together to 
solve it. Their methods are peaceful, 
legal, reasonable. If Americ a is not 
prepared to solve this social problem 
by such methods what else does she 
propose? If the N . A . A . C. P. has 
not the power in hand to solve this 
problem, there is the nation of 100 
millions which has the power. We 
called to our aid one of the best of 
America's social workers. The haters 
of black folk beat him and maltreated 
him and scarred him like a dog because he tried to talk quiet reason to 
Texas. Here is the problem and what 
wil l white men do about it? • 
BISHOPS 
WE congratulate the M . E . 
Church that after a fight 
of 25 years it has elected 
as bishops two men of 
Negro descent. It has not alone made 
Negro bishops, but it has by this act 
served notice on the M . E . Church, 
South, and on the copperhead Zion's 
Herald of Boston that there will be 
no union of Methodists without the 
Negro as a man and a brother. There 
are still white Christians in Zion. 
PETTINES S 
GOD save us from petty 
things!" prayed the Wise 
Man. Once upon a time 
some of our girls planned 
a party in honor of Kate. They 
asked for a list of her friends. 
Amon g others Kate suggested Jane. 
But Mrs. Smith, at whose home 
the party was to be held, was not 
"friendly" with Jane and moreover 
Jane and Sallie who were also invited, did not agree. Mar y was 
asked and telephoned that she would 
bring her friend Paula along. But 
Alice thereupon announced that she 
would not come if Paula came. Rose 
and Sarah are "not speaking" and so 
Sarah could not be asked and for 
(Similar reasons Berenice vetoed 
Flora . An d so forth. 
This is not fiction. It actually took 
place among colored college girls less 
than a year ago in Harlem. 
God save us from petty things. 
CLOTHE S 
IT was in a Southern city and the 
white people were on the one 
and favorite subject — the 
"Nig-ra" . This time it was 
health, a safe and absorbing subject. 
They were told of the horrible danger 
of having their clothes washed in 
Negro cabins and of their consequent 
personal interest in the Negroes' 
health. 
There ensued that succession of little purrs and squeals which some 
ladies consider evidence of the highest breeding. 
Bu t one Southern white woman 
rose and said calmly, "Yes, there is 
danger, but there's more danger to 
the Negroes in your dirty clothes than 
to you from the clean and sterilized 
washing which they return." 
Then followed the eloquent silence 
• that does not need words. 
WANTE D 
A CIVI L engineer and an architec t 
to teach their professions i n a 
Texa s school at a minimu m salar y of $100 a month. 
In Louisiana : Instructors of 
highe r mathematic s and advanced physics; 
English ; history ; Frenc h and Spanish ; 
carpentry and cabinet work . 
"Th e entrance salar y for instructors i n 
the high school here is One Hundred 
Dollars ($100) per month. This is increased 
annuall y unti l the maximu m is reached. 
The maximum salary is One Hundred 
Thirty-five Dollars for a term of ten months. 
Legislatio n is now pendin g whic h wil l probably result i n this schedule bein g raised 
at the beginnin g of next term. " 
In West Virginia : "A n instructo r who 
has specialized i n the biologica l sciences 
and is capable of doing junio r college work , 
holding a degree from a standar d institu ­
tion. " 
In Nebraska : " A ma n at $3,000 per yea r 
to serve as Commissione r of the Colored 
Commercia l Club . H e must be a ma n who 
knows business and labor problems as they 
relate to the colored people and their place­OPINION 167 
merit and absorption into the economic and 
socia l fabric. " 
A correspondent wants: "An y good place 
or school where a person can take a ful l 
course i n embalming- or funera l directing.'* 
Fro m a Missionar y Association : "Fo r a 
number of years I have studied the 
Commencement Number of THE CRISIS with all 
its pictures of young people and the various schools i n whic h they are finishing. I 
wan t to ask i f you have available any list 
of colored students i n northern universities 
already compiled, whic h it would be proper 
fo r me to ask to borrow i n connection wit h 
our wor k whic h wishes to employ such candidates for regula r secondary and college 
positions. The salaries are not large 
enough to entice people of superior trainin g 
unless there is a considerable motive beyond 
their application. It is true, however, that 
every yea r we get a few of such people and 
it seems to me that i f we can get i n touch 
wit h them earl y enough, we could get more. 
I find tha t the various colleges and universities to whom I writ e directly and to whom 
I am writin g directly even at this minute, 
especially i n the large r places, do not take 
the trouble to go thoroughly into a matter 
of this kind . The y put it al l into the mil l 
and grin d it and it comes out i n a very 
forma l way . 
I N GEORGI A 
BORN and raised i n Griffin, Ga. , 
and havin g an occasion to visit 
my old home a few weeks ago, 
because of the death of my 
1 father, I found conditions so 
changed one woul d be startled. Whe n I 
wa s a boy the Manleys, Boyds, Dismuke s 
and other whit e families, too numerous to 
mention, ha d a more kindl y disposition 
towards the Negr o tha n those now i n 
power. 
" I read, wit h interest i n The Griffin Daily
News and Sun (the mouth-organ for 
Spalding County), of the great progress the 
Boar d of Trad e was making , but the saddest 
thin g tha t came under my observation was 
the wholesale beating and il l treatment of 
the Negr o i n genera l throughout Spaldin g 
County. 
"Whil e there a Negro , Fletche r Perdue 
b y name, had hired a hand who had left 
a whit e ma n by name of Grad y Westl y of 
the Birdi e Settlement; he was unmercifully 
beaten fo r no other reason than he hired 
the colored man . 
"I n October, 1919, a n old man , Tom Alle n 
b y name, was beaten i n the same settlement 
b y a crowd of whites because he disputed 
the wor d of a storekeeper about the size 
of a lamp chimney. 
"Late r Tom Miller, of the same settlement, wa s unmercifull y beaten and his 
front teeth knocked out when the officers 
of the law came to his house b y nigh t in ­
stead of durin g the day. He had not committed an y crime but the officers were i n 
search of another Negro ; he refused to 
open his door, wit h the above results. 
"Joh n Brown , who was livin g on the place 
of Haskel l Bass was beaten unmercifully. 
"Doug h Stah l was also beaten. Osca r 
Ami e was taken out and beaten. These are 
not all, there are numerous simila r cases. 
A young man, Elle s by name, was beaten 
to death i n Sunnyside near Spaldin g because he told a whit e ma n that he was just 
from the army and di d not feel like going 
to work immediately. 
"Th e Daily News is always makin g a 
plea for Spaldin g County and Georgia . Ho w 
can any Negr o wit h sense stay i n a place 
where beating, killin g and every means of 
il l treatment is as common as 'pi g tracks".' 
" I want to advise every Negr o seeking a 
location to flee from Spaldin g County, for 
there no justice nor consideration awaits 
them. I advise Negroes to come to Cleveland or some other place where ' A ma n is a 
ma n fo r a' that.' " 
IN MISSISSIPPI 
MOVE D here from Montan a four 
years ago, and I can say that of 
30 states i n which I have either 
traveled or lived I have seen none 
so backwar d as this one." 
(a white man). 
IN PHILADELPHI A 
MR. HAH N has handed me your 
letter of Marc h 1 i n regard 
to an appointment you made 
for a vocal pupil. It is wit h 
great regret, I have to tell 
you that it has always been the policy of 
this school to decline to give instructions 
to any pupils tha t do not meet all our 
requirements. This is a privilege , whic h 
any privat e school has, and you must 
therefore understand tha t i f we have a 
rule not to accept some classes of pupils 
it is entirely withi n our province. Yo u 
would have spared yourself and the young 
person for whom you made arrangements 
if you had mentioned the fac t when you 
made arrangements that she was colored. 
"W e have man y such applications and 
regret that we are unable to find any suitable means of meeting their requirements. " 
CHARLTO N L . MURPHY , 
Managing Director, Zeckwer-Hahn, 
Philadelphia, Musical Academy. 
CO-OPERATION 
I NOTICE D your article on cooperation in the February 
CRISIS. What do you think of 
suggesting through the columns of TH E CRISIS, the possibility 
of training persons in the co-operative idea by having the schools 
organize such ventures for the purpose of handling student supplies and 
also of giving some definite attention 
to this subject in the work in economics? R. P. SIMS . TH E SLEEPER WAKE S 
A NOVELETT E IN THRE E INSTALMENT S 
JESSI E FAUSE T 
AMY recognized the incident as the beginnin g of one of her phases. Alway s 
from a child she had been able to tell when 
"something was going to happen. " She 
had been standing i n Marshall's store, her 
young, eager gaze intent on the lovely little 
sample dress whic h was not from Paris, 
but quite as dainty as anythin g that Paris 
could produce. It was not the lines or even 
the texture tha t fascinated Am y so much, 
it was the groupin g of colors—of shades. 
She knew the combination was just righ t 
for her. 
"Le t me slip it on, Miss, " said the saleswoman suddenly. She had nothing to do 
just then, and the gir l was so evidently 
charmed and so pretty—it was a pleasure 
to wait on her. 
"O h no, " Am y had stammered. " I 
haven't time. " She had already wasted 
two hours at the movies, and she knew at 
home they were waitin g for her. 
Th e saleswoman slipped the dress over 
the girl's pink blouse, and tucked the linen 
colla r under so as to brin g the edge of the 
dress next to her pretty neck. The dress 
was apricot-color shadin g into a shell pink 
and the shell pink shaded off again into the 
pearl and pink whiteness of Amy's skin. 
The saleswoman beamed as Amy , entranced, 
surveyed herself naivel y in the tall lookingglass. 
Then it was that the incident befell. Tw o 
men walkin g idl y through the dress-salon 
stopped and looked—she made an unbelievably pretty picture. One of them wit h a 
short, soft brown beard,—"fuzzy" Am y 
thought to herself as she caught his glance 
i n the mirror—spok e to his companion. 
"Jove , how I'd lik e to paint her! " Bu t 
it was the look on the other man's face 
that caught he r and thrille d her. "M y God ! 
Can't a gir l be beautiful! " he said half to 
himself. The pair passed on. 
Am y stepped out of the dress and thanked 
the saleswoman half absently. She wanted 
to get home and think, think to herself 
about that look. She ha d seen it before 
in men's eyes, it had been i n the eyes of 
the men i n the moving-pictur e whic h she 
had seen that afternoon. Bu t she ha d not 
thought she could cause it. Shu t up i n 
he r littl e room she pondered over it. He r 
beauty,—she wa s reall y good-looking then— 
she could stir people—men! A gir l of seventeen has no psychology, she does not go 
beneath the surface, she accepts. Bu t she 
knew she wa s entering on one of he r phases. 
She was alway s livin g i n some sort of 
story. She had started i t when as a chil d 
of five she had drive n wit h the tall , proud, 
whit e woma n to Mrs. Boldin's home. Mrs. 
Boldi n was a bride of one year's standin g 
then. She was slender an d very, ver y comely , wit h he r ric h brown ski n and her hair 
that crinkle d thick and soft above a low 
forehead. The house was stil l redolent of 
new furniture ; Mr . Boldi n wa s spick and 
span—he, unlik e the furniture , remained 
so for tha t matter. The whit e woma n ha d 
told Am y tha t this henceforth was to be 
her home. 
Am y was curious, fond of adventure ; she 
did not cry.- She did not, of course, realiz e 
that she was to stay here indefinitely, but 
i f she had, even at tha t age she would 
hardl y have shed tears, she wa s alway s too 
eager, too curious to know, to taste wha t 
was going to happen next. Stil l since she 
had had almost no dealings wit h colored 
people and knew absolutely none of the 
class to whic h Mrs. Boldi n belonged, she 
did ventur e one question. 
"A m I goin g to be colored now? " 
Th e tal l whit e woma n had flushed and 
paled. "You— " she began, but the words 
choked her. "Yes, you are goin g to be colored now, " she ended finally. She wa s a 
proud woman, i n a moment she ha d recovered her usua l poise. Am y carrie d wit h 
he r fo r man y years the memor y of tha t 
proud head. She never saw he r again . 
Whe n she was sixteen she asked Mrs. 
Boldi n the question whic h i n the ligh t of 
that memor y had puzzled he r always. "Mrs . 
Boldin , tell me—am I whit e or colored? " 
An d Mrs. Boldi n had told he r and told 
her trul y that she did not know. 
"A—a—mee! " Mrs. Boldin's voice 
mounted on the last syllabl e i n a shril l 
168 TH E SLEEPER WAKE S 169 
crescendo. Am y rose and went downstairs. 
Dow n i n the comfortable, but rathe r 
shabby dining-room which the Boldins used 
after meals to sit in , Mr . Boldin , a tall black 
man , wit h aristocrati c features, sat reading ; littl e Cornelius Boldi n sat practicin g 
on a cornet, and Mrs. Boldi n sat rocking. 
In al l of their eyes was the manifestation 
of the ligh t that Am y loved, but how trul y 
she loved it, she was not to guess til l years 
later. 
"Amy, " Mrs. Boldi n paused i n her rocking , "di d you get the braid? " O f course 
she had not, though 
tha t was the thin g she 
had gone to Marshall's 
for. Am y alway s forgot essentials. If she 
went on an errand, and 
she always went will ­
ingly , it was for the 
pure jo y of going. 
Wh o knew wha t angels 
migh t meet one un ­
awares ? No t that Am y 
thought i n biblica l or 
i n literar y phrases. She 
was i n the Hig h School, 
it is true, but she was 
simpl y passing through, 
"gettin g by " she would 
have said carelessly 
Th e only readin g that 
had ever made any impression on he r had 
been fair y tales read 
to he r i n those long remote days when she 
had lived wit h the tall, 
proud woman ; and descriptions i n novels or 
histories of beautiful, 
stately palaces tenanted 
by beautiful, stately women. She could pore 
over such pages fo r hours, her face flushed, 
her eyes eager. 
A t present she cast about for an excuse. 
She had so meant to get the braid . "Ther e 
was a dress—" she began lamely, she was 
never deliberately dishonest. 
Mr . Boldi n cleared his throa t and nervously fingered his paper. Cornelius ceased 
his awfu l playin g and blinked at her shortsightedly through his thick glasses. Bot h 
of these, the ma n and the littl e boy, loved 
the beautiful, inconsequent creature wit h 
her airy, irresponsible ways. But Mrs. 
Boldin loved her too, and because she loved her 
she could not scold. 
"O f course you forgot, " she began chidingly. Then she smiled. "Ther e was a 
dress that you looked at perhaps. Bu t 
confess, didn't you go to the movies first?" 
Yes, Am y confessed she had done just 
that. "An d oh, Mrs. Boldin , it was the 
most wonderful picture—a girl—suc h a 
pretty one—and she was poor, awfully . An d 
somehow she met the most wonderful people 
and they were so kin d to her. An d she 
Huh ! I don't want to look at no pretty girl!' 
marrie d a ma n who wa s just tremendously 
ric h and he gave her everything. I did so 
want Cornelius to see it. " 
"Huh! " said Cornelius who had been listening not because he wa s interested, but 
because he wanted to cal l Amy's attention 
to his playin g as soon as possible. "Huh ! 
I don't want to look at no pretty girl . Di d 
they have anybody looping the loop i n a n 
airship? " 
"You' d better stop seeing pretty gir l pic ­
tures, Amy, " said Mr . Boldi n kindly . 
"They'r e not always true to life . Besides, 170 TH E
I know where you can see all the pretty 
- girls yo u wan t without bothering to pa y 
twenty-five cents for it. " 
Am y smiled at the implied compliment 
and went on happil y studyin g her lessons. 
The y were al l happ y i n their own way. 
Am y because she was sure of their love and 
admiration , Mr . and Mrs. Boldi n because 
of he r beauty and innocence and Cornelius 
because he knew he ha d i n his foster-sister 
a listener whom his terribl e practicin g could 
never bore. H e played brokenl y a piece he 
had found i n a n old music-book. "There's 
an aching void in every heart, brother." 
"Wher e do you pick up those old things, 
Neely? " said his mother fretfully. Bu t Am y 
could not have he r favorite's feelings in ­
jured . 
" I thin k it's lovely, " she announced defensively. "Cornelius, I'll ask Sadie 
Murray to lend me her brother's book. He's 
learnin g the cornet, too, and you can get 
some new pieces. Oh , isn't it awfu l to have 
to go to bed? Good-night, everybody. " She 
smiled her charming , ever ready smile, the 
mere reflex of youth an d beauty and content. 
"You do spoil her, Mattie," said Mr. 
Boldin after she had left the room. "She's 
only seventeen—here, Cornelius, yo u go to 
bed—but it seems to me she oug-ht to be 
more dependable about errands. Thoug h 
she is splendid about some things, " he defended her. "Loo k how willingl y she goes 
off to bed. She'll be asleep before she 
knows it when most girls of her age would 
want to be i n the street." 
Bu t upstairs Am y was fa r from sleep. 
She li t one gas-jet and pulled down the 
shades. The n she stuffed tissue pape r i n 
the keyhole and unde r the doors, and li t 
the remainin g gas-jets. The ligh t thus 
thrown on the mirro r of the ugl y oak dresser was perfect. She slipped off the pin k 
blouse and found two scarfs, a soft yellow 
and a soft pink,—she had had them i n a 
scarf-dance for a school entertainment. She 
wound them and draped them about her 
pretty shoulders and loosened her hair. In 
the mirro r she apostrophized the beautiful, 
glowin g vision of herself. 
"There" , she said, "I'm lik e the gir l i n 
the picture . She had nothin g but her beautifu l face—and she di d so wan t to be 
happy. " She sat down on the side of the 
rathe r lump y bed and stretched out her 
 CRISIS 
arms. "I- wan t to be happy , too. " She 
intoned it earnestly, almost lik e a n incan ­
tation. " I wan t wonderfu l clothes, and 
people around me, men adorin g me, an d the 
worl d before me. I want—everything ! It 
wil l come, it wil l al l come because I wan t 
it so." She sat frownin g intentl y as she 
was apt to do whe n ver y muc h engrossed. 
"An d we'd al l be so happy. I'd give Mr . 
and Mrs. Boldi n money! An d Cornelius— 
he'd go to college and lear n al l about his 
old airships. Oh , i f I onl y knew how to 
begin! " 
Smiling , she turned off the lights and 
crept to bed. 
II 
Quit e suddenly she knew she wa s going 
to ru n away. Tha t wa s i n October. B y 
December she ha d accomplished he r purpose. No t that she wa s the least bit un ­
happ y but because she must get out i n the 
world,—she felt caged, imprisoned. 
"Trenton is stifling me," she would have told you, 
i n her unconsciously adopted "movie " diction. Ne w Yor k she knew was the place 
for her. She had her plans al l made. 'She 
had sewed steadily after school fo r two 
months—as she frequently did whe n she 
wanted to bu y he r season's wardrobe , so 
besides her carfar e she had $25. She went 
immediately to a whit e Y . W . C. A. , stayed 
there two nights, found and answered an 
advertisement for clerk and waitress i n a 
small confectionery and bakery-shop, wa s 
accepted and there she was launched. 
Perhap s it was because of he r earl y experience when as a tin y child she wa s taken 
from that so different home and left at Mrs. 
Boldin's, perhaps i t wa s some fault i n he r 
own disposition, concentrated and egotistic 
as she was, but certainl y she felt no pangs 
of separation, no fea r of he r future . She 
was cold too,—unfired though so to speak 
rathe r than icy,—an d fastidious. This last 
quality kept her safe wher e moralit y or 
religion, of neither of whic h ha d she any 
conscious endowment, woul d have availe d 
her nothing. Unbelievabl y then she live d 
two years i n Ne w York , unspoiled, un ­
touched, goin g to her wor k on the edge of 
Greenwic h Villag e earl y and comin g back 
late, knowin g almost no one and yet altogether happ y i n the expectation of somethin g wonderful, whic h she knew some da y 
must happen. TH E SLEEPER WAKE S 171 
It was at the end of the second year that 
she met Zora Harrisson . Zor a used to come 
into lunch with a" group of habitues of the 
place—all of them artists and writers Am y 
gathered. Mrs. Harrisson (for she was 
marrie d as Am y late r learned) appealed to 
the girl because she knew so well how to 
afford the contrast to her blonde, golden 
beauty. Purple , dark and regal, developed 
i n velvets and heavy silks, and strange 
marin e blues she wore, and thus made Am y 
absolutely happy. Singularl y enough, the 
girl , intent as she was on her own life and 
experiences, had felt up to this time no 
yearnin g to know these strange, happy beings who surrounded her. She did miss 
Cornelius, but otherwise she wa s never 
lonely, or i f she was she hardl y knew it, 
fo r she ha d always lived an inne r life to 
herself. Bu t Mrs. Harrisso n magnetized 
her—she could not keep her eyes from her 
face, from her wonderful clothes. She 
made conjectures about her. 
The wonderful lady came i n late one afternoon—an unusua l thin g for her. She 
smiled at Am y invitingly , asked some bana l 
questions and their first conversation began. The acquaintance once struck up 
progressed rapidly—afte r a few weeks Mrs. 
Harrisso n invited the girl to come to see 
her. Am y accepted quietly, unawar e that 
anythin g extraordinar y was happening. 
Zor a noticed this and liked it. She had 
an apartment i n 12th Street i n a house in ­
habited only by artists—she was no mean 
one herself. Am y was fascinated by the 
new worl d into which she found herself 
ushered; Zora's surroundings were very 
beautiful and Zor a herself was a study. 
She opened to the girl's amazed vision fields 
of thought and conjecture, phases of whose 
existence Amy , who was a builde r of phases, 
had never dreamed. Zor a had been a poor 
gir l of good family . She had wanted to 
study art, she had deliberately marrie d a 
ric h ma n and as deliberately obtained i n 
the course of four years a divorce, and she 
was now livin g i n Ne w Yor k studyin g by 
means of her alimon y and enjoying to its 
fullest the lif e she loved. She took Am y 
on a footin g wit h herself—the girl's refinement, he r beauty, her interest i n colors 
(though this in Am y at that time was purel y sporadic, never consciously encouraged), 
all this gave Zor a a figure about whic h to 
pla n and buil d a romance. Am y had told 
her the truth, but not all about her coming 
to Ne w York . She had grown tired of 
Trenton—he r people were al l dead—the 
folks wit h whom she lived wer e kin d and 
good but not "inspiring " (she had borrowed 
the term from Zor a and it was true, the 
Boldins, when one came to think of it, were 
not "inspiring"), so she had ru n away. 
Zor a had gone into raptures. "Wha t an 
adventure! M y dear, the world is yours. 
Why , wit h your looks and your birth , for 
I suppose you reall y belong to the Kildare s 
who used to live i n Philadelphia , I think 
there was a son who ra n off and marrie d 
an actress or someone—they disowned him 
I remember,—you can reach any height. 
Yo u must marr y a wealthy man—perhaps 
someone who is interested i n art and who 
wil l let you pursue you r studies." She in ­
sisted always that Am y had ru n away i n 
order to study art. "Bu t luck like that 
comes to few, " she sighed, remembering her 
own plight, fo r Mr . Harrisso n had been decidedly unwillin g to let her pursue her studies, at least to the extent she wished. 
"Anyway you must marry wealth,—one can always get a divorce, " she ended sagely. 
Amy—sh e came to Zora's every nigh t 
now—used to listen dazedly at first. She 
had accepted willingl y enough Zora's conjecture about her birth , came to believe it 
in fact—but she drew back somewhat at 
such wholesale exploitation of people to 
suit one's own convenience, stil l she did not 
probe too fa r into this thought—nor did she 
grasp at all the infamy of exploitation of 
self. She ventured one or two objections, 
however, but Zor a brushed everything aside. 
"Everybod y is looking out for himself, " 
she said airily . " I am interested i n you, 
for instance, not for philanthropy's sake, 
but because I am lonely, and you are charmin g and pretty and don't get tired of hearin g me talk. You' d better come and live 
wit h me awhile , my dear, six months or a 
year. It doesn't cost any more for two 
than for one, and you can always leave 
when we get tired of each other. A girl 
like you can always get a job. If you are 
worried about being dependent you can pose 
for me and design my frocks, and oversee 
Julienne"—he r maid-of-all-work—"I'm sure 
she's a stupendous robber." 
Am y came, not at all overwhelmed b y 
the good luck of it—good luck was around 
the corner more or less for everyone, she 172 TH E CRISIS 
supposed. Moreover, she was beginning to 
absorb some of Zora's doctrine—she, too, 
must look out fo r herself. Zor a was lonely , she did need companionship; Julienne 
was careless about change and odd blouses 
and left-over dainties. Am y had he r own 
sense of honor. She carried out faithfull y 
her share of the bargain , cut down waste, 
renovated Zora's clothes, posed for her, listened to he r endlessly and bore wit h her 
fitfulness. Zor a was trul y grateful for this 
last. She was temperamenta l but Am y had 
good nerves and her strong natura l inclina ­
tion to let people do as they wanted stood 
her i n good stead. She was a littl e stolid, 
a littl e unfeeling under her lovely exterior. 
He r looks at this time belied her—her perfect ivory-pin k face, her deep luminous eyes, 
—ver y brown they were wit h purpl e depths 
that made one thin k of pansies—her charming , rathe r wide mouth, her whole face set 
i n a frame of very soft, very live , brown 
hair whic h grew i n wisps and tendrils and 
curls and waves back from her smooth, 
young forehead. Al l this made one look 
for softness and ingenuousness. The in ­
genuousness was there, but not the softness—except of her fresh, vibran t loveliness. 
On the whole then she progressed famousl y wit h Zora . Sometimes the latter's callousness shocked her, as when they woul d 
go strollin g through the streets south of 
Washingto n Square. The children, the 
people al l foreign, all dirty, often very artistic , always immensely human, disgusted 
Zor a except for "loca l color"—she reall y 
could reproduce them wonderfully. Bu t 
she almost hated them fo r being wha t they 
were. 
"Br-r-r , dirt y little brats! " she would say 
to Amy . "Don' t let them touch me." She 
was frequently amazed at her protegee's utter indifference to their appearance, for 
Am y herself was the pink of daintiness. 
The y were turnin g from MacDougal l into 
Bleecke r Street one day and Am y had patted a child—dirty , but lovely—on the head. 
"The y are all people just like anybody 
else, just like you and me, Zora, " she said 
i n answe r to her friend's protest. 
"Yo u are the true democrat, " Zor a returned wit h a shrug. Bu t Am y did not understand her. 
No t the least of Amy's services was to 
come between Zor a and the too pressing 
attention of the men who thronged about 
her. 
"Oh , go and talk to Amy," Zora woul d 
say, standin g slim and gorgeous in some 
wonderfu l evening gown . She was an extraordinaril y attractive creature, ver y whit e 
and pink, wit h grea t ropes of dazzlin g gold 
hair, and tha t look of no-age whic h only 
America n women possess. A s a matte r of 
fac t she wa s thirty-nine , immensely sophisticated and selfish, even, Am y thought, a 
littl e cruel. He r present mode of livin g 
just suited her; she could not stan d any 
condition tha t bound her, anythin g at all 
exigeant. It wa s useless for anyone to try 
to influence her. If she did not wan t to 
talk, she woul d not. 
The men used to obey he r orders and seek 
Am y sulkil y at first, but afterward s wit h 
considerably more interest. She wa s so 
lovely to look at. Bu t they really , as Zor a 
knew, preferred to tal k to the older woman , 
fo r whil e wit h Zor a indifference wa s a role, 
second natur e by now but stil l a role—wit h 
Am y it was natura l and she was also a 
trifle shallow. She had the admiratio n she 
craved, she was comfortable, she asked no 
more. Moreove r she thought the men, wit h 
the exception of Stuart Jame s Wynne , 
rathe r uninteresting—they were faddists 
fo r the most part, craz y not about art or 
music, but merely about some phase such 
as cubism or syncopation. 
Wynne , who was much older tha n the 
other half-dozen men who weekl y pai d Zor a 
homage—impressed he r by his suggestion 
of power. H e wa s a retired broker, im ­
mensely wealth y (Zora , who ha d know n hi m 
since childhood, informe d her), ver y set and 
purposeful and ver y polished. H e wa s perhaps fifty-five, widely traveled, of medium 
height, ver y whit e ski n and clear, frosty, 
blue eyes, wit h sharp, prou d features. H e 
liked Am y from the beginning , her childish ­
ness touched him. I n particula r he admire d 
her pliability—no t knowin g it was reall y indifference. H e had been marrie d twice ; 
one wif e had divorced him, the other ha d 
died. Bot h marriage s wer e unsuccessful 
owin g to his dominant, rathe r unsympa ­
thetic nature. Bu t he had softened considerably wit h years, though he stil l had 
decided views, was gla d to see that Amy , i n 
spite of Zora's influence, neither smoked 
nor drank. He liked her shallowness—she 
fascinated him. . TH E 173 PROPHET 
Zor a had told him much—just the kin d 
of romanti c story to appea l to the rich , 
powerful man . Her e was beauty forlorn , 
penniless, of splendid birth,—for Zor a once 
havin g connected Am y wit h the Philadelphi a 
Kildare s never swerved from that belief. 
Am y seemed to Wynn e everythin g a girl 
should be—she was so unspoiled, so untouched. H e asked her to marr y him. If 
she had trie d she could not have acted more 
perfectly. She looked at him wit h her wonderful eyes. 
"Bu t I am poor, ignorant—a nobody," she 
stammered. "I' m afrai d I don't love you 
either,"' she went on i n her pretty troubled 
voice, "though I do like you .very, very 
much. " 
H e liked he r honesty and her self-depreciation, even he r coldness. The fact that 
she was not flattered seemed to him an 
extr a proof of her .native superiority. He , 
himself, was a representative of one of the 
South's oldest families, though he had lived 
abroad lately. 
" I have money and influence," he told 
he r gravely, "but I count them nothing 
withou t you. " An d as fo r love—he would 
teach he r that, he ended, his voice shakin g 
a little . Underneat h all his chilly , polished 
exterior he reall y cared. 
"It seems an unworth y thin g to say, " he 
told her wistfully , fo r she seemed ver y 
youn g beside his experienced fifty-five years, 
"but anythin g you wanted i n this worl d 
could be yours. I could give it to you,— 
clothes, houses and jewels. " 
"Don' t be a n idiot, " Zor a had said when 
Am y told her. "O f course, marr y him. 
He'l l give you a beautiful home and position. He's probably no harde r to get along 
wit h than anybody else, and i f he is, there 
is always the divorce court. " 
It seemed to Am y somehow that she was 
drivin g a bargain—how infamous a one 
she could not suspect. Bu t Zora's teachings 
had sunk deep. Wynn e loved her, and he 
could secure for her wha t she wanted. "An d 
after all, " she said to herself once, "i t 
reall y is my dream comin g true. " 
She resolved to marr y him. There were 
two weeks of delirious, blissful shopping. 
Zor a was very generous. It seemed to Am y 
that the whole world was contributing largesse to her happiness. She was to have 
just wha t she wanted and as her taste was 
perfect she afforded almost as much pleasure to the people from whom she bought as 
to herself. T n particula r she brought rapture to an exclusive modiste i n Forty-second 
Street who exclaimed at her "so perfect 
taste". 
"Mademoisell e is of a marvellous, of an 
absolute correctness," she said. 
Everythin g whirle d by. Afte r the shoppin g there was the small, impressive wedding. Am y stumbled somehow through the 
service, struck by its awfu l solemnity. Then 
later there was the journey and the bi g 
house waitin g them i n the small town, fifty 
miles south of Richmond . Wynn e was originall y from Georgia , but business and 
social interests had made it necessary for 
him to be nearer Washingto n and Ne w 
York . 
Am y was absolute mistress of himself and 
his home, he said, his voice losing its coldness. "Ah , my dear, you'll never realize 
wha t you mean to me—I don't envy any 
other man i n the world. Yo u are so beautiful, so sweet, so different! " 
(Continued in the September CRISIS) 
The Prophet 
JOSEP H S. COTTE R 
HE saw Lif e masquerade i n Babylon , 
H e saw Lif e jaded by the mysti c Nile , 
Whil e weavin g tapestry of bric k and stone 
To mesh its merrimen t and seal its smile. 
He brought the fore-time to this after-time, 
H e questioned workers, warriors, poets, 
sages. 
The n whispered to himself: "No r tribe, nor 
clime , 
No r God, nor Devi l can unwed the ages." 
The Prophe t felt the ache that we are feeling, 
The Prophe t saw the greed that bows us 
under; 
An d heard the echo of our tense appealing 
Fo r brotherhood that dares not halt nor 
blunder. 
The Past wil l be the Present. Le t us make 
To-day to-morrow for our children's sake. TH E POLITICAL CONVENTIONS 
IN the Democratic Convention which 
nominated James M. Cox of Ohio as president, we had, as Negroes, no part. 
Nevertheless over 200 of the 1,000 votes cast were 
based on a Negro population which is disfranchised. A s to Cox, he is to those forces 
in the Unite d States whic h wis h to preserve things as they are—who wis h to organize the Unite d States even more thoroughly than now as a profit-making institution for the Few—h e is to these an idea l 
candidate and quite as good as Hardin g 
for those who own and propose to ru n this 
land. The Republica n Convention had for 
us more personal interest but scarcely more 
encouragement. The Republicans are the 
victims of their own change of policy. The y 
tried after the wa r to establish democracy 
i n the South on the basis of the enfranchised Negr o vote. This vote was too poor 
and ignorant to maintai n itself without the 
aid of schools and organized industry. 
Schools were too costly and organized in ­
dustry could make a better bargai n wit h 
the forme r masters than wit h the forme r 
slaves. The result was the disfranchisement of 1876 and the Corrup t Bargain . 
If the Nort h kept its hands off the Negr o 
problem the South would organize industr y 
and make profits that would satisfy the 
North . On the politica l end, however, the 
South got by fa r the best of the bargain . 
They both in their conventions and in 
Congress had the full representation of the 
Negr o population. The Republicans, on the 
other hand, do not dare upset the Corrup t 
Bargai n by disfranchisin g the South and 
on the other hand are bothered i n their 
own convention by a body of delegates 
which represent no votes and whic h can 
represent no votes so long as the South is 
solid, and this the South knows and this it 
is that keeps the South solid. 
On the other hand, withou t endangering 
this solidarity, the whit e South has learned 
that it can by manipulatio n secure a good 
deal of the patronage and power of the 
Republican party. Any group of white 
Southerners can hold a meeting, elect delegates 
and claim to be the ful l representatives of 
the nascent whit e Republica n part y of the 
South. Immediately Mr . Willia m H . Taft 
goes into hysteric s wit h pathetic praise . 
I n the Republica n convention we ha d the 
followin g representatives: 
Delegates at Large: Georgi a 3, Florid a 2, 
Mississipp i 2, Louisian a 2, Kentuck y 1, 
Tennessee 1, Oklahoma 1, Texas 1; of 
District Delegates we had: Georgia 9, North 
Carolin a 7, Louisian a 6, Mississipp i 5, 
South Carolin a 7, Florid a 5, Kentuck y 3, 
Oklahoma 3, Virginia 3, Maryland 2, 
Illinois 1, District of Columbia 1. Besides 
this we had certain purely honorary 
Alternates at Large from Massachusetts, New 
York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Missouri, 
Maryland and Alabama. In Missouri a colored 
alternate served when the whit e delegate 
confessed to receiving illegitimat e campaig n 
funds. The press was silent on this evidence of race superiority. I n the cases of 
six states there were contests and to realize 
just wha t these contests mean let us consider a littl e history. 
Since, because of disfranchisement, the • 
organization of the Republica n part y i n the 
South is not based upon votes, everythin g 
depends on possession of the part y machin ­
ery. U p until about 1912 this part y ma ­
chinery was i n the hands of colored men, 
but whit e people Nort h and South volubl y 
advised the best Negroes to get out of politics, and most of them followed this advice, 
thereby leavin g politica l matters i n the 
South largel y i n the hands of the worst element of the race ; although not wholl y so, 
because a certain numbe r of determined, 
self-respecting Negroe s absolutely refused 
to give up all interest i n politics. 
The next move on the Dart of the white s 
was to secure control of party machinery . 
A t first they attempted this baldl y b y simpl y 
organizing:' a "Lil y White " committee or 
convention and declarin g themselves the 
Republica n party. Fea r of the northern 
Negro vote, however, kept the National 
Republican Committee and the Convention 
from recognizing this movement i n most 
States although the "Lil y Whites " gained 
practica l control i n Texas, Arkansa s and 
several other States. Th e nex t step was 
for the "Lil y White " faction to make sure 
of havin g Negr o support b y getting certain 
complacent Negroe s to support them. 
174 TH E POLITICAL CONVENTIONS 175 
This is illustrated i n Mississippi. Two 
years ago the nationa l committeeman for 
Mississipp i died. The Republican State 
Convention elected Perr y Howard , a reputable colored lawyer. The National 
Republican Committee, meeting at St. Louis, refused to seat Howar d i n the face of his 
clear righ t and based their contention on 
the fact that certain colored men, Isaiah 
Montgomer y and Eugene Booze, testified for 
the whit e opponent, Mulvihill . Mulvihill 
was seated. I n this way he got control of 
the part y machinery and thus Mississipp i 
is practicall y under the control of the whites. 
The same thin;: was attempted in 
Georgia in 1912. A white man was made 
nationa l committeeman succeeding a colored man, Judso n Lyons. This white man 
was afterwar d driven out of the state under 
indictment as a "dope fiend", but he selected 
another white man, Roscoe Pickett, as his 
successor. Th e colored men thought, however, that his successor should be a colored 
ma n and every effort was made to keep 
control of the part y machinery. The colored men were able to enlist the help of 
well educated Negroes and the efforts of 
the whit e partisans to lock them out of 
the hall and to hold a rump convention 
were frustrated. The Nationa l Committee, 
despite its wish , had to seat a majorit y of 
colored delegates who were determined to 
elect a colored committeeman. They knew, 
however, that the Credentials Committee 
would overtur n their action. Their candidate, Henr y L . Johnson, therefore announced 
that he would not be a candidate for election as committeeman. The delegates refused to select anybody else until after the 
Credentials Committee had reported to the 
Convention, their report had been accepted 
and the Committee discharged. Then the 
Georgi a delegates announced to the convention that despite the fact that Mr . Johnson 
was not a candidate they had selected him 
as Nationa l Committeeman, and Chairma n 
H'-nr y Cabot Lodge announced this decision to the ful l convention. It was contested. H e polled the Georgi a delegation 
i n the presence of the convention and announced Johnson's election. When , however, this was put before the convention for 
confirmation an overwhelmin g "No" went 
up from the floor and the galler y showing 
distinctl y the attitude of the whole part y 
towar d Negroes. 
The Republicans of the Centra l West 
were standing by the Negroes on account 
of the bi g Negr o vote, but those of Ne w 
Englan d and the fa r West were against 
them. Fo r a moment Lodge was puzzled 
and consulted his parliamentarians. He 
then announced that according to "Rul e six " 
the selection- of the delegates was final and 
that Henry L. Johnson, the Negro, was 
National Committeeman from Georgia. 
In Florid a the regula r organization held 
no election for officers, according to the 
rules. A group of "Lil y Whites " held a 
convention i n a place where Negroes were 
not admitted and elected officers and delegates. Thereupon a colored organization 
held a convention and elected officers and 
delegates. A t Chicago the first or regula r 
organization was recognized, including both 
white and colored delegates. 
A t the Shelby County, Tennessee, convention the colored delegates were not admitted. They went to the state convention 
and threatened to bolt. The state convention ordered that they be admitted to the 
organization and also put a colored man on 
the state delegation at large. Whe n the 
distric t conventions of Shelby and neighborin g counties met, the whites tried to lock the • 
colored delegates out but the colored delegates succeeded i n entering in such large 
numbers that they outvoted the whites and 
the whites withdrew to the corridor. R. R. 
Church , a young colored man, was elected 
delegate. The Nationa l Committee recognized his regularit y and seated him, but the 
white opponents of Churc h telegraphed for 
delegations of southern white women from 
various Tennessee cities. They came before 
the Credentia l Committee and threatened 
that the women would bolt the state ticket 
if Church was retained as delegate. 
Thereupon the Credentials Committee unseated 
him, and a white man was made delegate. 
In Louisian a the state committee held 
their meeting in the Grunewal d Hote l where 
no Negroes were allowed even as servants. 
Whe n Walte r Cohen and his colored delegation appeared they were denied admission. 
The y together with white friends organized 
their convention and elected delegates. 
These delegates were seated and the committee adopted the rule that hereafter conventions must not be held i n places ordinaril y inaccessible to colored people. 176 TH E CRISIS 
This is the situation. Neithe r candidate 
is a friend of the Negr o nor of democracy. 
Neithe r convention was fair to us. The 
Democrati c platform said nothin g that fa ­
vored us; the Republicans made a halfhearted remar k on lynching . W e are, 
therefore, under no obligations. We are 
free of entanglin g alliances. 
WILBERFORCE 
W . E . B . D u Bois 
WILBERFORCE University was 
established by the white Methodists for 
Negr o education i n 1856. It was purchased 
by the Africa n M . E . Churc h under the 
leadership of Danie l Payn e i n 1863. It 
became the single center of education for 
the A . M . E . Churc h until about 1880 when 
the establishment of other church schools 
diverted funds whic h migh t have come to 
Wilberforce . In order to help the growt h 
of the school the trustees applied to the 
State of Ohio for aid and on Marc h 19, 1887, 
a law was passed establishing the 
"Combined Normal and Industrial Department 
at Wilberforc e University" . 
Perplexin g questions immediately arose 
as to the lega l relation of the two schools, 
but the Attorne y Genera l of Ohio made the 
followin g decision as earl y as 1903: 
"It must always be borne in min d tha t 
this department is separate and distinc t 
and independent from Wilberforce 
University. The statute makes it so, and indeed were it not for this provision of the 
statute the act providin g fo r State aid to 
this department of Wilberforc e Universit y 
would be unconstitutional. The constitution of Ohio expressly prohibits any Stal e 
aid to any sectarian institution. " 
Notwithstandin g this, the church school 
has been allowed to name four of the nine 
trustees, and has always contended, despite 
the law, tha t the two institutions were one. 
Moreover, the State trustees are usuall y 
busy men and do not attend board meetings 
regularly . The Universit y trustees, on the 
other hand, consist of the bishop of the 
district, the president of the university , 
who is under the control of the bishop,* 
and two ministers or layme n whom the 
bishop names; all these are usuall y i n attendance. Thu s the presidin g bishop dominates both institutions. Th e present presidin g bishop is Joshu a H . Jones and his 
son is dean of the church school. In 1916 
*The Bisho p being chairma n of the standin g Executiv e Committe e of the Boar d of 
Trustees. 
the Episcopa l Committe e of fifty members 
of the Genera l Conference of his church 
found Bisho p Jones guilt y of "mal-administration, stealing, lyin g and conduct unbecoming a Christia n gentleman " an d voted 
that he be reprimande d by the Conference. 
O n the other hand, fo r the last ten years 
the superintendent of the State department 
has been Willia m A . Joiner. His position 
has been most difficult. A s a loya l gradu ­
ate of the church school he wished to main ­
tai n close union between the two institu ­
tions. On the other hand, he must be a n 
honest and progressive servant of a great 
State. 
Th e latte r duty he performed withou t the 
shadow of criticism. He found at the 
Wilberforce State school in 1910 three large 
halls and seven small buildings, most of 
them i n bad repair, valued wit h the lan d at 
$240,000; 13 teachers at an average salar y 
of $65 per month ; a hig h school of second 
grade wit h 165 enrolled. Toda y there are 
20 buildings of excellent architectur e and 
repair, includin g recitation buildings, shops, 
gymnasium, hospita l and dormitorie s valued 
at $900,000. Ther e are 32 teachers at an 
average of $100 a mont h and 620 students. 
The State appropriatio n has increased from 
$29,000 a yea r to $100,000 and the hig h 
school has become a ful l course State accredited norma l school entitled to a State 
certificate withou t examination . Superin ­
tendent Joine r has expended $800,000 of the 
money of the State of Ohio durin g his term 
and the Audito r o f the State writes: 
" I wan t to thank you for the promp t cooperation you have given this department 
i n the administratio n of the fiscal affairs 
of your institution . I have alway s felt 
that you were one public servant tha t wa s 
earnin g you r salar y and was givin g the 
best there wa s i n you for the success of 
the institutio n over whic h you preside. I 
believe that the State has received from 
the Industria l Departmen t of Wilberforc e 
Universit y more value fo r one hundre d 
cents of investment than from any other 
institution in the State. " WILBERFORC E 177 
J . A. GREG G J . H . JONES 
This is a record of whic h the Negr o has 
a righ t to be proud and yet without warn ­
ing , Mr . Joine r and his facult y have been 
forced by Bisho p Jones to resign! 
Why ? 
Whil e the State institution was prospering , the church institution was havin g a difficult time. It was i n debt even for salaries, its buildings were fallin g into decay 
and it could not attrac t men because it had 
no money. Its president, the well-known 
Dr . Willia m Sanders Scarborough, was a 
scholar and a teacher rathe r than an executive and was forced into this office against 
Lis natura l inclinations. He received little 
financial or mora l support in his thankless 
task. H e was surrounded i n part by men 
of hig h characte r wit h the spirit of sacrifice, lik e the late Ear l Finch , Chaplai n 
Stewar d and Professor Green ; but the trustee board was a large, unwield y and unin ­
terested body and the rea l power la y i n 
Bisho p Jones' hands. 
Ha d it not been for the generosity of the 
State, the church school would have either 
closed or been thoroughly reorganized. The 
universit y not only receives a direct payment of $5,000 a yea r for teaching State 
students, but it also is allowed to collect 
nearl y $2,000 annuall y i n tuitions from 
State students; it shares equally without 
cost or responsibility the services of a $20,-
000 wate r system, an electric lightin g plant, 
$12,000 wort h of books and supplies placed 
i n the library , a libraria n at $1,200 per 
year, a preceptress at $1,000; instruction 
i n musi c and drawing , $2;200; a physica l 
trainin g teacher at $1,090; use of a hospital 
wit h trained nurse and medicines at $1,600; 
use of filtration plant, $800; heat, ligh t and 
housin g fo r all hig h school students at 
$1,000; use of auditorium fo r church chapel 
and entertainments, $1,200. 
W. S. SCARBOROUG H W. A. JOINE R 
This makes the equivalent of a tota l contribution of over $12,000 a year from the 
State to the university i n retur n fo r whic h 
the university furnishes a librar y build ­
in g from Andre w Carnegie , teaches State 
students i n certain advanced subjects, and 
owns the ground on which one of the State 
buildings is placed. Full y three-fourths of 
the expenses of Wilberforc e Universit y are 
paid directly and indirectly by the State of 
Ohio. 
Manifestl y such a situation continually 
invites criticism and State interference. 
Notwithstandin g the generosity of the 
State, the church has continually complained 
and brought pressure for more unhampered 
use of State funds. The superintendent 
was thus always i n a dilemma between the 
strict law of the State and the vigilanc e of 
its responsible officials, and the demands of 
the church and power of the bishop; and 
he was always blamed for any failur e of 
the State to yield a point 'or for any tendency on the part of the State to take more 
complete control of its own school. 
Severa l times it has been proposed to 
make the State school independent. A bil l 
to this effect was introduced at the last Ohio 
legislature and Mr . Joine r was accused of 
fatherin g it. This he denied. Finall y the 
bill was amended so as to increase the number of State appointed trustees and thus 
avoid the domination of the church. This 
bill passed the legislature by a large ma ­
jorit y but Governor Cox vetoed it because, 
as he said, it did not go fa r enough. There ­
upon he appointed a committee of investigation consisting of senators, representatives and distinguished educators who made 
a long, thorough and sympathetic investiga ­
tion of the institution in person, examinin g 
witnesses and documents. 
Their report is illuminating ; It finds "the 178 TH E
grounds and buildings of the State school i n 
excellent shape, and the financia l and business management of Superintendent Joine r 
and his financia l clerk al l tha t could be 
desired. Wilberforc e is a magnificent location fo r the school fo r Ohio's colored boys 
and girls. Th e buildings have been well 
placed, and care has been taken to harmonize some, leavin g healthy distance between each. " 
O f the church school it says: 
"Th e salaries pai d by the universit y are 
much too low to invit e competent professors. 
"Th e class-rooms at the universit y are 
very antiquated; they are not even semifireproof. The chemistry room is in a low 
ceilinged basement, poorly lighted, insufficiently ventilated, besides being short on 
up-to-date apparatus. " 
Notwithstandin g this the committee" is 
mindfu l of the struggles of old Wilberforce : 
"Th e har d wor k done by the founders of 
Wilberforc e Universit y and the man y sacrifices the support of that institutio n has 
required of the A . M . E . Churc h durin g 
the nearly sixt y years sinc3 its beginning, 
have enshrined Wilberforc e i n the hearts of 
their people, and that their wor k has been 
as well done as limited means permitted, 
shows today. " 
The committee, therefore, recommended 
tha t the State department be erected into 
a norma l and vocationa l college to be known 
as the Wilberforce State Normal and 
Vocational College; that this college should be 
governed by a board of seven trustees, al l 
of whom should be appointed by the 
Governor and none by the university, as is the 
case now, but tha t the new college be conducted i n harmon y and close co-operation. 
This unanimous recommendation was laid 
before the Governor, but before action was 
taken the legislatur e adjourned. 
Immediately Bisho p Jones and his friends 
went to work. A drive was made throughout the church and some $50,000 i n cash, 
besides pledges, raised to pay off the debt 
on the church school, includin g back salaries, and to add a few thousand to the 
endowment fund. No t satisfied, however, 
wit h this commendable effort, whic h shows 
that the A . M . E . Churc h can support Wil ­
berforce i f it will , Jones went further. H e 
induced Governor Co x to fill two vacancies 
on the State board wit h friends of Jones. 
Immediately the board met and was reorganized with one of these new appointees, 
Dr. Fran k Johnson of Cincinnati , as chairman. The new board forthwit h forced the 
 CRISIS 
resignation of Superintendent Willia m A . 
Joiner, abolished the position of W . W . 
Cooke, formerl y supervisin g architec t of 
the United States Treasury and then 
Director of Vocational Training; dismissed 
the libraria n and the instructo r i n auto mechanics. Immediately five other of the best 
technica l instructors resigned. 
Disma y overwhelmed the institution . A 
"celebration" of Joiner's dismissa l wa s begu n by some students but it "back-fired " 
into a wholesale "strike " of 700 students 
against (as the placards said) "To o Muc h 
Jones" . The rumo r was tha t the younge r 
Jones was to succeed President 
Scarborough but the only confirmation so far has 
been the dismissal of President 
Scarborough after 40 years of service and the appointment of Bisho p Jones over the Ohi o 
distric t by the Genera l Conference. A s 
one of the oldest and staunchest churc h 
officers of Wilberforce writes us: 
"Everything is chaos!" Later advices tell us that 
the Rev. Joh n A . Gregg , of Florida , has 
been elected to succeed President 
Scarborough. 
It is doubtful i f one could imagine a situ ­
ation fraugh t wit h more danger to the race : 
here is a man, W . A . Joiner, who has made 
a splendid executive. N o one disputes this, 
not even his enemies. If it were true that 
he sought to increase the effective powe r of 
the State i n its own school he woul d have 
been abundantl y justified by the facts. H e 
has been dismissed by a ma n whose reputation has been blasted by his own church . 
If we let this pass unrebuked wha t can we 
say i f the State of Ohio puts whit e men i n 
charge at Wilberforc e on the groun d that 
"Negroe s cannot conduct a school"? 
O n the other hand, the A . M . E . Churc h 
can and must conduct a school at 
Wilberforce; but it must be as efficiently run as 
the State school and have an income of at 
least $50,000 a year. It must cease to be 
a beggar and a mendicant. Th e futur e of 
Wilberforc e lies not i n the surrende r of the 
State school or the illega l stealing of State 
funds or i n submission to the bludgeoning 
methods of the Joneses; but rathe r i n the 
buildin g of two grea t institutions i n the 
finest Negr o educationa l center i n Americ a 
—consistin g of a universit y and hig h school 
conducted by the Africa n Methodist Churc h 
and a Vocationa l College conducted by the 
State of Ohio, legall y separate, but racially , 
culturally , and i n pla n and outlook, one. National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored-People 
DULUTH 
A SPLENDI D example of branch activity and cooperation with the 
National Office is given in the part played by 
the St. Pau l and Minneapolis Branche s of 
the N . A . A . C. P. i n investigating the recent lynchings at Duluth , Minn . 
On June 16 the press of the country reported the lynchin g of three Negroes at 
Duluth , Minnesota , by a mob of 5,000 persons, who overpowered the police and firemen, took possession of police headquarters 
and seized the Negroes along wit h three 
others who were released after a mock tria l 
was held. Al l were being held i n connection wit h a n attack said to have been made 
upon a whit e girl . 
The Nationa l Headquarters of the N . A . 
A . C. P . immediately wire d its St. Pau l and 
Minneapolis Branche s askin g that an investigation be made as to the facts i n the 
case. Governor J. A. Burnquist of 
Minnesota is President of the St. Paul Branch, 
and a direct appeal for the apprehension 
and punishment of the lynchers was made 
to him as Governor of the State. 
Eac h of the branches sent investigators 
to the scene of the lynchin g and ful l reports have been rendered to the Nationa l 
Office. Amon g other things, one of the in ­
vestigators was able to secure affidavits 
from fourteen other colored men who were 
being held i n jai l on the same charge for 
whic h the three were lynched. This investigato r says, "It is not certain that any of 
the Negroe s lynched or those now under 
arrest are guilt y of the crime charged. It 
is not even certain that the girl was assaulted. " O f the fourteen Negroes being 
held he says, "Eac h and every one of them 
protests his innocence. None of them knew 
any of the men lynched. None of them saw 
the crime committed, i f one was committed. 
These men are extremely ignorant and I do 
not believe they could tell a lie so consistently that I could not catch them i n it. " 
Th e reports from both branches show 
that there was grea t negligence on the part 
of police officials. The y report that early 
in the afternoon of the date of the lynchin g 
the police department was notified by a 
responsible part y that a mob bent on lynch ­
ing the Negroes was forming , and that the 
Commissione r of Safety made no substantia l 
effort to prevent the lynching. The report 
says: "Fo r two hours or more immediately 
preceding the lynching , trucks loaded wit h 
ruffians ra n up and down the mai n streets 
past the Centra l station wit h ropes draggin g 
behind the trucks. The ruffians who occupied the trucks would stop and make 
speeches, telling the crowds that the girl 
was dying , that they were going up to the 
police station and hang the Negroes and 
that they invited the crowds to joi n them. 
In the trucks they had ropes, hammers, steel 
saws to cut the bars and large timbers to 
ja m their wa y to the prisoners. I n the 
meantime the Commissione r was at the station givin g stric t orders that under no circumstances were the police to use firearms 
for fea r blood would be shed." 
No t only did the Minneapolis Branc h 
investigate the facts leading up to the lynching , but whil e on the ground the President 
of the Branch , who himself made the investigation, assisted i n the organization of the 
Dulut h Branc h of the Nationa l Associatio n 
for the Advancement of Colored People. 
A recent communication from Governor 
Burnquist gives the encouraging informa ­
tion that twelve persons have been indicted 
and arrested on first degree murde r charges 
on account of alleged participation i n the 
lynchings. The grand jur y has not yet completed its investigation. The Governor assures the Association that the State departments are cooperating in every wa y 
possible. 
THE HILL EXTRADITION CASE 
ROBER T L . HILL , alleged president of 
* the Progressive Farmers and 
Household Union of America, the organization 
charged wit h incitin g the Arkansa s riots 
of October, 1919, has been released on bond. 
Mr . Hug h T. Fisher, the attorney who, together wit h Messrs. Elish a Scott, Jame s 
179 180 TH E CRISIS 
H . Gu y and A . M . Thomas, has been representing the N . A . A . C. P. i n the Hil l extraditio n case at Topeka , Kansas, reports 
that a reduction of Hill's bond to 82,000 has 
been secured and that an order has been 
issued providin g for his appearance before 
the Federa l Court at Leavenworth , Kansas, 
for the October term. This, says Mr. 
Fisher, releases Hill from jail and gives his attorneys sufficient time to secure his discharge i n October. 
This points to an ultimat e victor y i n a 
case whic h has assumed nationa l importance, the case upon whic h hangs the whole 
charge of conspiracy on the part of colored 
people i n southeastern Arkansa s to massacre the whites of that section. It was 
Hil l who was accused of being the instigator 
of the whole trouble. He fled the state of 
Arkansa s and for two months his whereabouts remained unknown , i n spite of al l 
the efforts put forth to locate him. In 
December Hill wrote to the N. A. A. C. P. 
Late r he was arrested i n Topeka , Kansas, 
and from that time on the Associatio n has 
been fighting his extraditio n to Arkansas. 
Friend s i n Topeka have secured employment for Hill . 
BUDGET 
THE Nationa l Associatio n has made it a 
point to spare CRISI S readers all financia l statements. The Associatio n notes have 
been given over to the story of its lega l 
and educationa l activities, to its publicity, 
etc. W e are breakin g our rule, however, 
in this numbe r to present to CRISI S readers 
the quotas whic h have been assigned to the 
323 branches i n the organization. (Some 
of the most recently formed branches have 
not been included i n this list.) 
These quotas were given to branches at 
the request of the Cleveland Conference. A t 
that time Mr . Shillady , our retirin g secretary, was asked to prepare a budget and 
a method for raisin g the budget. I n answer 
to this request Mr . Shillad y presented to 
the Atlant a Conference the followin g budget 
and quotas. 
TH E BUDGE T 
For Administrative Work and 
Supervision $8,000 
For Field Organization, 
Investigation and Traveling Expense.... 17,000 
Fo r Departmen t of Branche s and 
Branch Bulletin 3,000 
Fo r Educatio n and Publicity... . 11,600 
Fo r Office Expense , Rent, Clerks, 
Postage, etc $18,400 
Fo r the Figh t Against Lynching . . 10,000 
Fo r Lega l Defense 10,000 
Gran d Tota l for Al l Purposes. $78,OOO 
The budget includes $10,000 for lega l 
defense work . It was felt at the Atlant a 
Conference that the Associatio n should secure the services of a competent lawye r as 
soon as it knew it could count on branc h 
support. This ma y increase the estimate. 
The second request, the methods of raisin g the budget presented, wa s answered by 
the assignment of quotas to al l branches. 
These quotas represent money sent to the 
Nationa l Office i n memberships and contributions. The y do not include money fo r 
special funds, for CRISIS and Branch 
Bulletin subscriptions, and for sales. It was 
suggested that the quotas be raised, first, 
by the membership drive ; second, i f on Jul y 
1, the branc h lacked its quota, tha t it spend 
the next six months raisin g the money i n 
whateve r wa y seemed wisest,—by lectures, 
entertainments, donations secured from public spirited citizens; the branc h holdin g to 
the chief issue tha t by the end of the yea r 
it should have sent to 70 Fift h Avenue , Ne w 
York , its money pledged. 
On Jul y 1, the Nationa l Office had heard 
from 95 branches accepting their quotas as 
here printed. Ther e are, however, the ma ­
jorit y of branches yet to be heard from. 
Will not each Crisis reader who is a member of a branch find out whether its quota 
has been accepted and then turn and help in 
raising the money? We have some branches 
whose officers are inactive . If you who are 
reading this are a la y member of such a 
branch, wil l you not realize that you have 
a righ t to see that a public meeting is called 
and that your branc h resumes its activity ? 
It is of the utmost importanc e tha t the 
Nationa l Office learn from each unit i n its 
organization whethe r it can rely upon it 
for the amount of money of its apportionment. 
Anyon e desiring to know more regardin g 
the finances should send five cents to the 
Nationa l Office fo r the June issue of the 
Branch Bulletin. Name s of Branche s and 
1920 apportionment follow: 
ALABAM A IDAH O 
Anniston-Hobson C . $125 Boise $60 
Blocton GO ILLINOI S 
Birmingham 750 Bloomington-Normal 200 N. A . A . C. P. 13 1 
Ensley $60 Centralia $100 Lincoln $160 TENNESSE E Mobil e 200 Chicago 2000 Omaha 700 Chattanooga $100 Montgomery 600 Decatur 60 NEVAD A Jackson 100 Selnia 235 I-I-.III.MUII 100 Reno 30 Knoxvill e 125 Tuscaloosa 226 Joliet 60 NE W JERSE Y Memphis 600 Uniontown 100 Madison 60 Atlantic City 100 Nashville 260 ARIZON A Maywood 60 Camden 160 TEXA S Bisbee • 1oo Moline 125 Jersey City 300 Austin 150 • Flagstaff 60 Peoria 160 Montclair 100 Baileyville 76 Phoenix 126 Quinc y 126 Newark S60 Beaumont 600 Tucson 76 Rockford 150 Orange 800 Benchley 76 ARKANSA S Springfield 160 Paterson 100 Brya n 150 Edmondson 100 INDIAN A Plainfield 176 Caldwell 76 For t Smith 100 Elkhar t 100 Trenton 200 Corpus Christi ... . 76 Gran d Lake 76 For t Wayn e 200 NE W MEXIC O Corsicana 100 Jonesboro 60 Gar y 200 Albuquerque 76 Cuero 100 Littl e Rock 260 Indianapolis 400 NE W YOR K Dallas 760 Pine Bluff 176 Lafayette 200 Binghamton 76 E l Paso 250 CALIFORNI A Mario n 100 Buffalo 200 For t Wort h 160 Bakersfield 76 Munci e 100 New Yor k City 2000 Galveston 100 Fresno 76 South Bend 75 Rochester 200 Gonzales 76 Hanfor d 60 Terr e Haut e 300 Syracuse 126 Greenville 76 Imperial Valle y ... . 100 IOW A NORT H CAROLIN A Hearne 76 Lon g Beach 60 Cedar Rapids 100 Asheville 76 Highbank 75 Lo s Angeles 450 Davenport 200 Charlotte 126 Houston 260 North California . . 750 Des Moine s 300 Durham 126 Jones Prairi e 75 Pasadena 60 Keokuk 460 Fayetteville 75 Leggett 75 Riverside 75 Ottumwa 175 Greensboro 100 Marshall 100 Sacramento 125 KANSA S Lexington 75 Marli n 75 San Bernardino . . . 100 Atchison 200 Raleigh 126 Mar t 75 San Diego 300 Crawford Co 100 Rocky Moun t 76 iViumford 200 San Jose ... , 100 Empori a 150 Wilmington 175 Orange 150 San Monic o Ba y . . 60 Kansas City 360 Winston-Salem ... . 125 Palestine 150 Stockton 50 Leavenworth 225 OHI O San Antonio 900 Vallejo 100 Parsons 100 AKro n 275 Seguin 60 COLORAD O Topeka 200 A-liance 75 Silsbee 50 Cannon City 30 Wichita 200 Canton 100 Temple 75 Colorado Springs . . 200 KENTUCK Y Chillicothe 100 Texarkana 125 Denve r 300 Bowling Green ... . 150 Cincinnati 400 Waco 100 L a Junt a 60 Cynthiana 75 Cleveland 1800 Waelder 76 Pueblo 200 Earlington 100 Columbus 400 Wharton 125 Rouse 60 Frankfor t 125 Dayton 250 Yoakum 100! CONNECTICU T Henderson 125 Elyri a 75 UTA H Bridgeport 200 Hopkinsville 150 Green Co 200 Salt Lake City 100 Hartfor d 200 Lexington 250 Lorain 76 VIRGINI A New Have n 200 Louisville 1800 Mansfield 75 Alexandria 125 Stamford 60 Maysville 75 Miami Co 76 Charlottesville ... . 75 DELAWAR E Paducah 125 Middletown 75 City Point 76 Wilmington 200 Owensboro 100 Operlin 100 Danville 125 D . of COLUMBI A LOUISIAN A Portsmouth 75 Falls Church 200 Washington 2000 Alexandria 100 Springfield 175 Graham 75 FLORID A Baton Rouge 100 Toiedo 600 Louisa Co 60 
Jacksonville 300 Lynchbur g 250 New Orleans 500 Unio n Co 75 
Ke y St. Rose 150 Urbana 250 West 125 Martinsville 75 
Munso n Shreveport 250 Wellsville 60 60 Norfolk 200 
Palatka 125 MAIN E Youngstown 100 Petersburg 200 
Pensacola 150 Portsmouth 100 Portland 75 Zanesville 75 
St MARYLAN D OKLAHOM A . Augustine 100 Pulaski 75 Tallahasse 100 Baltimore 760 Ardmor e 75 Richmond 500 Tamp a 100 MASSACHUSETT S Bo1ey 100 Roanoke 125 Boston 3200 Chilesville 100 GEORGI A Salem 100 Fall Rive r 75 Eni d 100 Alban y 100 WASHINGTO N New Bedford 400 Logan Co 150 Americus 100 Everett 75 Springfield 225 McAliste r 76 Athens 100 Seattle 350 MICHIGA N Muskogee 126 Atlanta 1500 Spokane 350 Adria n 25 Oklahoma City ... . 300 August a 125 Tacoma 150 An n Arbo r 100 Okmulgee 100 Brunswick 126 WISCONSI N Bay City 75 Rusk 75 Columbus 100 Benton Beloit 76 Harbo r .. . 76 Sapulpa 100 Cordele 76 Detroit 1500 Wewoka 75 Milwaukee 225 Dublin 75 Flint 150 OREGO N WES T VIRGINI A Hawkinsvill e 60 Grand Rapids 176 Portland 100 Beckley 75 Maco n 150 Hamtramack 75 PENNSYLVANI A Bluefield 100 Milledgeville 60 Jackson 85 Braddock 125 Charleston 300 Rome 200 Kalamazoo 150 Carlisle 100 Clarksburg 100 Savannah 100 Lansing 150 Cheyney 100 Huntington 150 Thomasville 175 Muskegon 60 Easton 100 Morgantown 75 Valdosta 76 Niles 60 Eri e 160 Parkersburg I" 0 
Waycross 60 Saginaw 60 Franklin 75 Wheeling . 100 MINNESOT A Ypsilanti 100 Harrisbur g 160 _ WYOMIN G 
Minneapolis 300 RHOD E ISLAN D Johnstown 160 Sheridan 75 
St. Paul 300 Newport 75 Meadville 76 CANA L ZON E 
MISSISSIPP I Providence Isthmian ... . 75 600 Merce r Co 100 
Moun d Bayou 100 SOUT H CAROLIN A Monongahela 75 CANAD A 
Vicksbur g 76 Aiken 100 New Castle 100 Montreal 75 
MISSOUR I Anderson 100 Philadelphia 1600 Windso r . 75 
Cape Girardeau .. . 75 Beaufort 176 Pittsburg 1000 PHILIPPINES ' 
Kansas City 350 Charleston 600 Reading 126 Pampanga 100 
St. Louis 850 Columbia 400 Washington 150 
Springfield 100 Darlington 200 West Chester 125 
NEBRASK A Florence 100 Williamsport 100 
Beatrice 75 Orangeburg 200 Yor k 76 TH E NIN E NE W BISHOP S 
W . D . JOHNSO N M . W . CLAI R W . A . FOUNTAI N 
T. W . WALLAC E W . T . VERNO N A . J . CARE Y 
R . E . JONE S W . S. BROOK S J . W . WOO D 
182 Men of the Month. TH E NINE NEW BISHOPS 
IT is no exaggeration to say wit h Bishop 
Thirkiel d that the election of two colored 
bishops by the grea t M . E . Churc h "is the 
most significant event i n the religious history of the Negr o since emancipation. Their 
election by a body of 800 delegates from 
the whole world , not grudgingly , but wit h 
contagious enthusiasm and the vision of its 
significance as' related to the whole world , 
is an event of far-reaching importance. It 
foreve r gives assurance that ours is not a 
whit e man's church but a church as broad 
as humanit y and as all-inclusive as the redemptive blood of Jesus Christ. " 
Robert Elija h Jones, one of these bishops, 
was bor n i n Nort h Carolin a i n 1872 and 
educated at Bennett and Gammon . Since 
1897 he has been on the staff of the 
Southwestern Christian Advocate and for the last 
16 years he has been the editor of this paper, 
which is one of the best colored journals i n 
the country. Bisho p Jones wil l have 
charge of the colored Methodist churches of 
Louisian a and adjacent parts of the South, 
takin g the diocese presided over formerl y 
by Bisho p Thirkield . Matthew W . Clair 
was born i n West Virgini a i n 1865 and educated at Morga n College. Fo r 17 years 
he was pastor of Asbury Church in 
Washington where he erected a new edifice at a 
cost of $85,000. Fo r the past 7 years he 
has been Distric t Superintendent. Bisho p 
Clai r has been assigned to Liberi a for the 
next four years. 
„ Th e A . M . E . Church , meeting at St. 
Louis, elected 5 bishops. Archibal d James 
Care y was born i n Atlant a i n .1868 and educated at Atlanta and the Chicago 
Theological Seminary. He has long held charges 
in Chicago where he also has been Chie f 
Examine r of La w Claims under the city 
government. Willia m Alfre d Fountai n was 
born i n Elberton , Ga. , i n 1870 and educated 
at Morris Brown . Since 1911 he has been 
president of Morris Brow n College. 
William Decker Johnson was born in 
Georgia in 1869 and has been Presiding Elder 
for a numbe r of years and secretary of 
the Boar d of Trustees of Morris Brow n 
College. Willia m Tecumseh Verno n was 
born in Missouri and educated at Lincol n 
and Wilberforce . H e was the first president of Western University and was 
Register of the United States Treasury under 
Roosevelt. Afterwar d he was president of 
Campbell College, Jackson, Miss. , and pastor of Avery Chapel in Memphis. W. 
Sampson Brooks was born in Maryland and is 
chiefly known by his extraordinar y feat of 
payin g off for Bethe l A . M . E . Churc h i n 
Baltimore , the largest church i n the denomination, a mortgage of $90,000. 
The A. M. E. Zion Church General 
Conference at Knoxville, Tenn., elected 2 bishops. Thoma s Walke r Wallace , the youngest 
of al l the bishops eleclfed this spring , was 
born i n Alabam a i n 1879 and educated at 
Livingstone . Since 1912 he has been editor 
of the Western Star of Zion. Joh n Wesle y 
Woo d was born i n Georgi a i n 1865 and has 
been missionary secretary of the church 
since 1912. 
TH E EN D OF JIM WATER S 
Dea r Sirs: 
I RECEIVE D your letter and contents 
noted and are very sorry that i have 
ben so late i n answerin g it, but wil l note 
below: 
"Ji m Waters a half crazy Negr o was 
workin g for M r Haywoo d a white man about 
11 Mile s from Wrightsville , near Scott, Ga , 
An d as i fo r got the date, they claim that 
they caught the Negr o and his littl e 11 Yea r 
old girl behind the barn, and i n tha t they 
claim that he raped her, but the general 
opinion is that it wa s not no rape. 
"An d they got after the Negr o a lots of 
farmers, and rand him down in the woods 
and he got awa y from them and to show 
183 ALBER T A . 
SMITH , the 
youn g colored artist 
wh o has just gone to 
Paris to finish his education, was trained 
i n the public schools 
of Ne w Yor k and the 
Ethica l Cultur e Hig h 
Schoo l and has studied at the Nationa l 
Academy of Design . 
I n the last school he 
has twice wo n the 
Suyden Bronze 
Medal, besides honorable 
mention and a first 
and third priz e i n 
etching, and also a 
Chalone r Priz e i n 
competition wit h art 
students of the 
United States. 
Smit h is a chauffeur, a musician 
playin g three instruments, and an artist. Tw o of his etchings, includin g the 
one here reproduced, 
were accepted for 
the Sprin g exhibition of the Nationa l 
Academy of Design . 
"PLANTATIO N MELODIES. " AFTE R 
184 Albert Smith 
TH E ETCHIN G B Y ALBER T A . SMIT H 
18 5 18 6 TH E
that he was half craz y he had ben work ­
in g for this same Haywoo d 1 1 Years, and 
i talked wit h M r Haywoo d my self and he 
said tha t he was one of the best Negroe s 
he ever had workin g f; r him he furthe r 
stated that he neve r did resent from anythin g he told him to do, alway s done it 
wit h pleasure. 
"Afte r they ru n him off from the house 
that evening the Negr o come back to the 
house that nigh t and layed 20 feet from 
the house in bushes listin g at all they said 
about him, and he also said tha t he was 
going up to the house to see M r Haywood , 
but after he saw so man y Automobile s al l 
around the house and up the road that he 
would not go in the house. 
"H e seam to think that M r Haywoo d was 
stil l his friend and he said after then he 
come on through Wrightsvill e the next day 
and went on to Wadle y G a and after working there 3 days he went back up to 
Sunhill Ga and went to plowing, and the white 
folks from here was all over the woods 
Da y and nigh t lookin g for him and put out 
a $200.00 rewar d fo r his Capture , and a 
pemp Negr o workin g fo r Bailiff Rowlan d 
heard that Ji m Waters was at Sunhil l Ga , 
and he goes up there and Locates him and 
then notify the Bailiff Rowlan d about it and 
him and Polic e Taple y goes up there and 
get him and places him i n jai l on Tuesday 
night about 9 O Clock. 
"An d he stayed there al l night, and 
crouds of whit e mens was going down to 
the jai l all nigh t talkin g wit h him, and 
whil e the croud was talkin g wit h him that 
night, Ji m said, I wis h that M r Haywoo d 
would hurra h up and come on and get me 
out so i can go home and go to plowing , 
and one white man said yes Da m it you 
wan t never plow N o more unless you plow 
i n HELL . 
"The y said all kin d of bad thin g to him 
and cursed him, and then Wednesday mornAFTE R A READIN G
 CRISIS 
in g Sheriff Rowlan d phone Sheriff Watso n 
of Learanc e Count y Dublin , G a to come over 
here and get Ji m Waters and carr y hi m 
to Dublin , as the crime claimed to ben commited in Learance County and not in 
Johnson. 
"S o sheriff Watso n stated, let M r Osca r 
Smit h have him a littl e country Deput y 
Sheriff livin g 1 1 miles from town . An d 
as he starts off from town at 8. O Cloc k 
wit h him he claimed tha t the mob stopped 
him about 3 Mile s from Wrightsville . A t 
Aikin s Chape l a colored church , and takes 
him there and lync h him. 
"An d just about all the whit e mens i n 
town was out there hardl y no clerks i n the 
stores. Autumobile s ful l and afte r the 
lynchin g littl e whit e childre n al l over town 
playin g wit h the empty shells from the 
pistols tha t done the lynching . 
"An d M r Haywoo d stated on the street 
that he talked wit h the Negr o before they 
lynched him, and he said he said tha t the 
Devi l made him commit tha t crime . 
"Just as the croud was fixtin g to lync h 
him. they ask M r Haywoo d di d he wan t 
to shoot him first then he shot him, and it 
seam not to kil l quick enough and his boy 
1 7 years old, supposed t j be, said hell let 
rr.e shoot him , and he walke d righ t up to 
him and put his pistol righ t at his HEAR T 
and shot him dead, and cursed him, and ji m 
hun g down there all the evening and his 
mother and father come and got him and 
whil e takin g him down from the tree his 
mother said o lord my poor son, and a 
white ma n M r Lee Barn s stated To hell 
wit h your D Son. 
"S o gentlems we hard y know wha t to do 
here in the South. A lots of the Negroe s 
are leavin g here now for the North , i n 
great numbers. 
"Rac e riots do not stop them at all . 
"OBLIGE. " 
 OF "DARKWATER " ELIZABET H CURTI S HOLMA N 
I DI D not think . . . I did not know . . . 
Wha t pale excuse is this I make 
In answe r to my brother's woe. 
Age-long , for deep injustice sake! 
Across his mute and patient soul, 
Whil e I have gone my heedless way, 
The shadows of a fate migh t roll 
Tha t deepened nigh t and darkened day. 
. . . Bu t I have read a burnin g page, 
Tha t glowed wit h whit e an d soul-wrun g 
fire, 
An d now no more I ma y engage 
M y conscience wit h a feeble hire . 
Fo r all the wron g I did not heed, 
Chance-born i n happie r paths to live , 
I cr y unto my brother's need 
One wor d of love and shame . . . forgive ! The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
THOMA S CURTI S CLAR K i n Unity: 
The y are not dead, the soldiers fallen 
here; 
Their spirits wal k throughout the world 
today; 
The y stil l proclaim their message fa r and 
near: 
"Migh t is not right ; God's truth must 
have its way! " 
The cold, damp soil cannot these heroes hide, 
These knightl y lads who did not fea r to 
die 
Tha t liberty and freedom still migh t bide: 
Weep not for them, though here they 
lowly lie. 
Go forth and tell their message to the world ; 
In vai n their fight, i n vai n the foe with ­
stood, 
Unless above all kingdoms be unfurled 
Th e pure white flag of love and brotherhood. 
* * * 
We have received Mammy's Chillun and 
Other Poems by U . G. Wilson , an Address 
on Ethnology by Prof. U . S. M . Maxwell , 
and The Negro's Reaction to the World War 
by Prof. Robert T. Kerlin. Professor 
Kerlin's paper was read before the Southern 
Sociologica l Congress in Washington , D . C. 
H e concludes: 
I do not declare whether race-consciousness as we see it developing in the colored 
people of our land is a good or an evil 
thing , whether it augurs well or ill , is a 
blessing or a curse. I only note it as a 
momentous sociological fact. Bu t I append 
this one comment: That, if it means alienation—yea , as the signs read, hostility ; if 
it means separation of interests—yea, as 
the signs read, warfar e of interests, wit h 
the bitte r sentiment that "m y gain is your 
loss, my loss you r gain" ; if it means a 
struggle , now for equality, and later, under the goading sense of age-long injustices 
and barbarities, for supremacy—who, then, 
can thin k on the subject but wit h shuddering? Wh o that loves his country and humanit y and has at heart the common welfare—yea , who tha t knows aught of his 
own interests->-but wil l take thought, deep, 
sincere, searching thought, to discover and 
pursue a wa y of successful livin g together? 
* * * 
Harpe r and Brothers issue The Negro 
Faces America by Herbert J. Seligmann . A 
review of this book wil l appear later. 
AMRITSAR 
r T" , H E report of the Hunte r Committee on 
Amritsa r recalls old stories and starts 
new OIKS . The committee which was 
composed of five Britis h and three Indian 
investigators differed i n their findings to 
such an extent that two reports—a majorit y and a minority—hav e practicall y 
been submitted. Helena Normanto n says 
in the Nation: 
Interest wil l center first upon Dyer's massacre owin g to its sensationally dramati c 
character. Tha t a Britis h Genera l could 
pitilessly exhaust his ammunition upon 
thousands of unarmed and unwarned 
Indians squatting upon the ground at an open 
air meeting, leave the dead unburied and 
the dyin g untended, and forbid fo r a number of hours even their remova l by means 
of a Curfew Orde r is something new to 
civilization . 
The Majorit y Report admits: 
On the evidence before us there is nothin g to show that the outbreak i n the Punjab 
was part of a pre-arranged conspiracy to 
overthrow the Britis h Government i n Indi a 
by force. We thin k it distinctly improbable—notwithstanding wha t Genera l Dye r 
said i n his evidence—that the crowd gathered i n the Jallianwal a Bag h would have 
dispersed upon notice being made that they 
should do so and much more likel y that 
recourse to firing would have been necessary to secure obedience to his proclama ­
tion (i. e., forbidding public meetings) . . . 
notice to disperse would have afforded those 
assembled i n ignorance of the proclamation 
and other people also an opportunity to leave 
the Bag h and should have been given. If 
the notice had been disregarded Genera l 
Dye r would have been justified in firing on 
the crowd to compel it to disperse. I n 
continuing to fire for so long as he did it 
appears to us that Genera l Dye r committed 
a grave error. . . . We believe that he 
honestly considered that he was called" upon 
i n the discharge of his duty to take the 
extreme step which he did. .. . I n continuin g to fire as long as he did it is evident that Genera l Dye r had i n view not 
merely the dispersal of the crowd that had 
assembled contrary to his orders, but the 
desire to produce a mora l effect i n the 
Punjab. .. . I n our view this was unfortunately a mistaken conception of his 
duty. If necessary a crowd that has assembled contrary to a proclamation issued to 
prevent or terminat e disorder ma y have to 
be fired upon; but continued firing upon 
18 7 188 TH E
that crowd cannot be justified because of 
the effect such firing ma y have upon people 
in other places It has not been 
proved to us that any wounded people were 
in fact exposed to unnecessary suffering 
from want of medica l treatment. 
The action taken by Genera l Dye r has also 
been described by others as havin g averted 
a rebellion on a scale simila r to the Mutiny . 
It does not, however, appea r to us possible 
to draw this conclusion particularl y i n view 
of the fact tha t it is not proved that a conspirac y to overthrow Britis h power had 
been formed prio r to the outbreaks. 
* * # 
"Whitewash! " says Miss Normanton . 
The evidence published by the Indian 
National Congress, collected from victims of 
the massacre, substantiate her opinion. The 
editor of Young India writes: 
Genera l Dye r was called i n to take charge 
of Amritsar. The first thin g that he did 
after his arriva l in the town was to make 
various arrests. H e then issued a procla ­
mation makin g it unlawfu l for people to 
gather in meetings, processions, or i n groups 
of four persons. "Ther e is abundant evidence," the Report claims, "to show that 
very few citizens knew anythin g about it, " 
and many of the villagers who had come 
streamin g into the city for the Hind u Ne w 
Year's Da y knew nothing of the proclama ­
tion. Th e Report claims that the meeting 
held that afternoon was purposely orga ­
nized by one Han s Raj , who later turned 
out to be a Government agent, wit h the 
view of attractin g as large a gatherin g into 
the restricted enclosure as possible, and 
then subjecting them to wha t Genera l Dye r 
was disposed to call "the most mercifu l 
treatment " by " a rai n of 1,650 bullets, " accordin g to his own testimony. 
Afte r the Amritsa r massacre the reig n 
of martia l law began. It was enforced i n 
a variet y of ways: "(1 ) The street i n whic h 
Miss Sherwood was assaulted was set apart 
fo r flogging people and for makin g those 
who passed through it to crawl on their 
bellies. (2) Al l were made to salaam, i n 
theory Englis h officers only, but i n practice 
every Englishman , on pai n of being arrested and suffering indignities. (3) Floggin g 
was administered, publicly and otherwise, 
even for trivialities. (4) Al l the lawyers 
of the town were made special constables 
without cause and made to work like ordinar y coolies. (5) Indiscriminat e arrests 
were effected of persons, irrespective of 
status, and durin g detention they were subjected to humiliations, discomforts, and in ­
describable tortures for the purpose of extortin g confession or evidence, or for the 
purpose of merely humiliatin g them. (6) 
Specia l tribunals were formed for tryin g 
offenses which resulted i n gross injustice i n 
the name of law, leavin g the aggrieved 
parties withou t a righ t of appeal. " 
In Lahor e the same cruelty prevailed. A 
body of 500 students i n the city were made 
 CRISIS 
to carr y their bedding on their heads and 
wal k about seventeen miles i n the hot summer sun to report for roll call four times 
a day. 
* * * 
The Englis h press-is not unanimous out 
the Mancheste r Guardian takes an unequivocal stand. It says: 
Le t us i n justic e remark , first, tha t Anglo -
Indian opinion is by no means unanimous. 
The Times of India, whic h is perhaps the 
weightiest representative, particularl y of 
official opinion, agrees full y wit h Mr . 
Montagu's verdict, and only pleads fo r forgiveness on both sides. Th e Indian Daily 
News upholds the Minorit y Report, an d the 
Civil and Military Gazette accepts tha t of 
the majority , though apparentl y wit h reservations. U n the other hand, the Pioneer 
is convinced tha t Genera l Dye r wil l have 
the whole-hearted sympath y of the vast ma ­
jorit y of his countrymen i n India . W e pic ­
ture a ma n coolly directin g rifle-fire upon 
a helpless crowd strugglin g to escape 
through narrow alleys, pickin g out the spots 
where the crowd was thickest as the best 
targets, and we are asked to believe that 
the vast majorit y of Anglo-Indians, when 
they form this pictur e i n their minds, wil l 
experience a whole-hearted sympath y wit h 
such a man . If this is reall y the feeling of 
many Englis h people i n India , it is certain 
that they are not fit to be i n India . The 
country must have got on their nerves. Th e 
Statesman, once noted for liberalism and 
independence, and the Englishman, whic h 
is supposed to be representative of the 
planters, both defend Genera l Dye r on the 
groun d that be prevented worse things. 
at, we wonder, could have been worse 
for the name of Britai n tha n the "crawlin g 
order" ? If anyone wanted to poison forever the relations between the races, could 
he do better than devise the utte r humilia ­
tion of forcin g men—charged wit h no crime 
—to wriggl e to and from their homes on 
their stomachs throug h the filth of the 
street? This is the sort of indignit y tha t 
migh t be invented by a malicious schoolboy 
wit h a twist in his nature . Ar e we to take 
it as the considered opinion of the average 
Anglo-India n plante r tha t it is the kin d of 
thin g tha t is "good enough fo r Indians" ? 
If so, the said planters need to begin their 
education over again . Fo r us the lesson is 
clear. It is not til l Indians obtain effective 
self-government that they wil l be safe 
against the insults and injurie s whic h such 
a state of min d ma y put upon them. Tha t 
such opinions can be expressed i n organs 
of repute shows that, fo r al l our boasted 
politica l capacity, men of our race are no 
more to be trusted i n a position of privileg e 
and superiority over anothe r race than any 
of the "lesser breeds withou t the law. " Th e 
psychology of these classes is only too clear. 
The y are afraid , and tha t is wh y they uphold violence and cruelty. The y are afrai d 
because they are conscious of treatin g their 
Indian fellow-subjects wit h contempt and TH E LOOKING GLASS 189 
J. Arthur Hamlett, editor of the sometimes wit h scant justice, and, being a 
Christian minority , they go in fear of retaliation. Index, writes to 
REFUTATION 
THE deliberate attempt of the Chicago A
 Tribune to fasten the blame for the 
riots i n connection wit h the "Bac k to 
Africa " movement on Dr. D u Bois and the 
N . A . A . C. P . has resulted i n a host of 
answers from both whit e and colored lovers 
of justice. The editor of the Minneapolis, 
Minn. , Appeal writes: 
The Chicago Tribune, which for years has 
done everythin g in its power to stir up race 
prejudice, laid the cause of the trouble to 
the writing s of Dr. W . E . B. D u Bois and the 
N . A . A . C. P . and i n a bitter editoria l in ­
timated tha t these influences were endeavorin g to force "socia l equality" , whatever 
that ma y mean. It is not likel y that three 
men i n al l the motley crowd even knew that 
there is such a person i n the world as D u 
Bois. 
The n came some colored men who played 
into the Tribune's hands by givin g out in ­
terviews whic h either denounced D u Bois or 
damned him wit h fain t praise by saying 
tha t his philosophy was all righ t for hig h 
brows but dangerous for the men i n the 
ordinar y walk s of life . One of the most 
disgustin g of these is alleged to have been 
given by Mr . Anderson , said to be one of 
the assistant editors of the Chicago 
Defender. We trust Mr. Anderson did not say 
wha t was ascribed to him, as from his talk 
the readers of the Tribune would be led to 
infe r tha t he was an advocate of segregation of every kind . An d then he commented 
on intermarriag e whic h reall y had no place 
i n the controversy, havin g been interjected 
by the Tribune without any reason whatever. Mr . Anderso n appears to have done 
some queer talkin g when he said he was 
very anxious to keep the Africa n blood 
pure as, so The Appeal is informed, Mr . 
Anderso n is more whit e than black, one 
parent havin g been of pure Caucasian ancestry and the other more than half white. 
Al l that talk should have been left unsaid. 
Th e Tribune write r garbled the story of 
"Th e Comet " from D u Bois' book, "Dark ­
water" , and made it appear that the point 
was "the matin g of a white woman and a 
Negr o from whic h a new race wil l spring. " 
This is absolutely false. The colored hero 
who saved the lif e of a whit e woman had 
no thought of matin g wit h the woman as 
he was alread y the husband of a brown 
woma n and the fathe r of a dark baby. The 
story ends wit h the pathetic meeting of the 
fathe r and the mother who held i n her arms 
the corpse of their dead baby. 
Prof. D u Bois has never taught treason 
and tha t wa s the cult of the miscreants 
who burned the America n flag. H e has advocated a fight by lega l means for the remova l of the hindrance s whic h hampe r the 
progress of the colored people. 
Dr. Du Bois from 
Evanton , 111.: 
Prof. Coe, of Columbi a University , was in 
Evansto n this week and spoke at Garrett 
Biblica l Institute to a white audience, wit h 
two or three exceptions. H e discussed the 
article in the Chicago Tribune and severely 
criticised the attitude of the paper i n tryin g to connect you wit h the disturbance. 
He paid you a very hig h compliment, also 
your book and the great work you are doing i n givin g expression to the feeling and 
ambitions of black people, and directed the 
white audience to give more attention to 
the condition which calls forth such writing s 
and utterances from you and others. He 
insisted that the cause be treated instead of 
the symptoms. 
* * * 
B . K . Armstrong , a colored social worker, 
writes i n the Chicago News: 
It is not writing s such as those of Dr. D u 
Bois that have aroused the spirit of radicalism in the colored race, but the constant oppression of our people. 
The Negro is not plannin g or plotting an 
annihilation of the white race. H e wants 
only his place i n the sun. He wants politica l equality. Unfortunatel y whenever a 
movement for politica l equality is started, 
enemies of the race cry out that that means 
social equality, and it comes to nothing. 
* * * 
"Darkwater " inspired this letter from 
Robert D . Seward, a young college student 
of Kalamazoo , Michigan : 
In books I have found much—friends, 
kindl y councilors. . . . Wha t part your 
book ma y pla y i n my life I cannot tell and 
may never know. I am by no means a fatalist but it seems to me i n my sober hours 
that only the Guidin g Good can determine 
the place and the kin d of my life work. A t 
present I tell myself that I wil l have a year 
i n Harvard , one or two i n France , one or 
two i n Japa n as a teacher. There ? Perhaps. 
Bu t I cannot be sure. I migh t remain i n 
Japan . There, it seems to me wil l be the 
most vita l social changes of the worl d with ­
i n the next few years. If I should retur n 
to Americ a I believe I should find great 
satisfaction in helpin g the Negr o people i n 
some way. I can say wit h as much truth 
as for any people that I love the Negr o 
people. I have not the fait h and experience 
to see the good in the common crowd as 
they pass but I have love and fait h enough 
to want to see tha t good and to sincerely 
try. I am fortunate I think wit h regard to 
my feeling towar d Negroes. M y mother had 
a likin g and a respect for them. She used 
to tell sometimes about a college classmate 
of hers, a Negro , who was tarre d and feathered fo r tryin g to teach in the South. Fro m 
her I gained a great childish respect for 
the few Negroes I knew. So I have never 
had the misfortune to be brought up wit h a 190 TH E
stupid prejudice. A s I have said I cannot 
tell my lif e work but i f not directly for 
said Dr. Reed. "And he can find it in Negroes I wil l earnestly tr y to help solve 
Liberia.the probleI m by gettin found g white folk it s to havso, e
the good sense to keep stil l about their 
prejudices, as my father has done, so as 
not to inflict them on their children. 
THE NEGRO PRESS SPEAKS 
THE Pittsburgh American, 
ON Pittsburgh , Pa. , quotes the 
SELLIN G Negr o Associated Press: 
TH E VOT E Delegate venality is evidently 
on the wane. A t least one gets 
the impression that it is fast disappearing 
from the infrequent gossip concerning its 
prevalence among the colored men who have 
been numbered as workin g forces i n the 
Chicago Republican Convention. No Africa, of Madagascar, of Morocco, 
Dixmude, National Convention in which colored men the Dardanelles,
have been active participants has been so 
free of the charge of this disgusting practice as this year's nationa l gatherin g ox the 
chieftains of the party. 
Heretofore charges of venal practices 
have been counted as outstanding features 
of the part the colored men have played 
in the varyin g deliberations of the conflictin g elements seeking to shape police s and 
name candidates. Eve n the names of men 
popularl y placed beyond the reach of unsavory implicatio n have been dragged before the public gaze and exhibited as clearcut examples of prostituted politica l activity . 
The result has been a distinc t loss of respectful consideration and a crimina l dissipation of politica l influence. 
Th e turnin g of the road has been reached. 
A new situation has made its bow and a 
firmer place of respect is about to be found 
for colored men i n the higher councils of 
the Republica n party. Younge r men wit h 
fixed policies and clearer vision have come 
upon the scene. Threadbar e traditions have to the almost universal attitude of the 
Germans we quote this extract from the been cast into the waste basket of our Christianthinkin g and i n their place has come the Pilgrim, a paper 
determination to honestly fit i n the machinery whic h operates the workin g of the genera l government. 
Ou r hope for the future is to be found i n 
whatever makes for the sounder maintenance of Republica n institutions. Because 
white men of uncertain knowledge of their 
social responsibility practice briber y is no 
reason wh y colored men should fal l to the 
level of the bribed. 
* * * 
Th e Texa s Freeman, Houston, 
O N Tex., says: 
FARMIN G A far m of 25 acres of fine 
I N LIBERI A land is given by the Liberia n 
government to every Negr o 
from America , according to Dr. Joh n H . 
Reed, of Monrovia , Liberia , now i n this 
country. In this land abundant crops of 
coffee, sweet potatoes, rice, wheat, cocoa, 
an entrance into the temple of Deol or rubbe r can be raised i , and there are good 
(British India). markets fo r them when harvested. 
 CRISIS 
"Unlimite d opportunit y for progress is 
wha t the America n Negr o seems to want, " 
and so will every 
other colored ma n who goes there and does 
his part. Liberi a needs America n Negroe s 
and America n Negroe s need Liberia. " 
THE SENEGALESE AGAIN 
GENERA L DEGOUTTE , i n charge of 
the Allie d Force s occupyin g the Rhin e 
country, says i n La Petite Gironde, Bordeaux, France , on the occasion of the departure of the Senegalese for Asi a Minor : 
It is wit h the deepest regre t tha t I see 
the last of these men. The y have alway s 
shown themselves deserving of their glowin g reputation. Th e conquests of Centra l 
the Somme, the 
Aisne , Verdu n and the Avre , constitute their 
titles to glory. 
Throug h the cordiality , simplicit y an d 
good humor whic h they have displayed i n 
their relations wit h the inhabitants of the 
countries they have occupied, they have won 
the good wil l of al l they have met. 
The propagand a of hate against everythin g Frenc h has not affected them. The y 
proudly point to the purit y of their customs, 
the lofty ideals of their duty as men and 
soldiers and to their glorious past, i n answer to the accusations of people who forget only too well their own crimes i n Africa , 
Franc e and Belgium. 
I salute their flag whic h though new is 
already shinin g wit h glory . 
* * * 
La Petite Gironde continues: 
The mention made by the Genera l of propaganda refers to America , whose prejudice 
against Negroes is well known . I n contrast 
published by the 
Germa n clergy : 
"Th e black troops i n occupation have on 
the whole conducted themselves ver y creditably. Wha t complaints have been made 
have been directed against tha t shameless 
group of young Germa n women who are 
not so much afrai d of being seduced as of 
failur e to seduce others." 
* * * 
A Havas dispatch says: 
The departur e of the Senegalese troops 
took place unmarke d by the slightest disturbance. 
Some of the Germa n women brought the 
soldiers flowers. 
* * * 
Meanwhil e the Paris Temps remarks: 
Some Englis h officers have been arrested 
and wil l be held for court-martial. The y 
have been charged wit h stirrin g up strif e 
among the Hindu s and wit h havin g forced The Horizon 
COMPILE D B Y MADELIN E G . ALLISO N 
MUSI C AND AR T 
NEGROE S at Lynchburg , Va. , have 
given the drama "Rahab " at the 
Academy of Music , under the direction of 
Mrs. France s Cox. The receipts were 
$1,035. 
C A recita l has been given at Steinert Hall , 
Boston, Mass., by pupils of Mme . Grace P . 
Carter. Notabl e among participants was 
Ell a D . Halse y who rendered "Befor e the 
Crucifix " and "Th e Cr y of Rachael " wit h " a 
singularl y ric h contralto voice and a compellin g personality to whic h was added perfect poise and technique." 
The Colored Actors' and Performers' Association of Ne w Yor k Cit y has been granted a charter. Th e organization has been 
formed to provide a clubhouse and promote 
mutua l interest and development. 
C Rolan d Haye s has given a recita l at 
Aeolia n Hall , London . The Daily Telegraph 
says of the Negr o spirituals on his program: 
"It is stil l to be regretted that our audiences persist i n treatin g these lovely things 
as comic songs. Perhaps Mr . Haye s wil l 
add more of them to his next program, for 
this is music we cannot make for ourselves." 
Th e Morning Post says that Mr . Haye s delivered Puccini's "Che Gelida Manina" , i n 
Italian , and Beethoven's "Adelaide " wit h extreme refinement and "set an example which 
man y Englis h singers would do well to copy, 
by combining clear diction wit h unbroken 
phrasing. " 
C The Ne w Englan d Conservatory of 
Musi c graduates Bcrnic e A . Bonner, who 
has gained exceptional distinction i n pianoforte, harmon y and ensemble. 
C Willia m Ellis, a colored youth at Fort 
Smith , Ark. , has made a wate r color paintin g of Douglass Fairbanks. The picture 
has been purchased by the Ne w Theatre . 
C Eunic e Thompson graduates from the 
school music course at Oberlin 
Conservatory. 
C Mrs. Ma e Puryea r Guy , soprano, has 
given a recita l at Beloit College, Wisconsin . 
C Mar y Ross Dorsey, elocutionist, has 
given at Boston, Mass., her fifth annua l 
recital. Mrs. Dorsey was assisted by Mme . 
Antoinette Games, coloratur a soprano of 
Chicago, and the choir of Unio n Baptis e 
Church . 
G A t the Musi c Club, Boston, Mass., an 
"Imaginar y Dance " from an "Imaginar y 
Suite " was rendered from an origina l manuscript by Mariett a Bonner, a colored student 
C J. Rosamond Johnson and his Inimitabl e 
Fiv e have appeared at the B . F . Keith's 
Palace Theatre, Ne w York . Sam M'Ke e in 
the Morning Telegraph says of the act: 
"Ther e wouldn't be much of a race problem 
if all Uncl e Sam's children were the same 
fine type of America n native citizen as J. 
Rosamond Johnson and his fellow players. " 
C The Boar d of Educatio n at Birmingham, 
Ala. , has appointed Kathlee n P. Howar d as 
Supervisor of Musi c i n colored schools. 
Miss Howar d is a graduate from the Musi c 
Course at Fisk . 
POLITICS 
REPUBLICAN S of the 21st District, 
Philadelphia, Pa., have elected 
Washington L. Glenn as a member of the 26th 
War d Executiv e Committee against two 
white candidates. A t the time of his election Mr. Glenn was Registrar for the 
District, having served 8 years. 
C Mrs. Joh n B . Hall , a colored citizen of 
War d 13, Boston, Mass., has been selected to 
represent the Sixth Suffolk Senatorial 
District in the Women's Division of the 
Republican State; Committee. 
C At Hamtramack, Mich., Thomas W. 
Anderson, a Negro, was elected a member of 
the Boar d of Review on the Republican 
ticket. Mr . Anderso n is water inspector and 
clerk of the Common Council. 
C A t Providence, R. I., the Juli a War d 
Howe Republican Women's State 
Organization has been formed to work in conjunction wit h the Women's State Republican 
191 192 TH E
Committee . Mrs. Berth a G. Higgin s was 
elected president. 
MEETINGS 
AT the 12th annual session of the 
California State Conference of Social 
Agencies, Mrs. Beatric e Thompson, a colored woman, spoke on the "Educatio n of 
Colored People" . 
(I Two summe r conferences have been held 
by the Nationa l Boar d of the Y . W . C. A . 
i n the interest of colored work. One was 
at Jackso n College, Jackson, Miss. , for student and city work ; the other was at the 
Nationa l Trainin g School, Durham , N C , 
for student work . Th e tota l attendance was 
212. Th e girls represented 15 states, 7 denominations and nearl y 100 schools, as compared wit h 40 schools represented at the 
Talledeg a Student Conference a yea r ago. 
The program lasted 10 days and included 
recreation, technica l classes, group meetings 
and lectures. A pageant entitled "Th e 
Ligh t of Women " was presented at both 
conferences. The author is Frances 
Gunner, a colored city secretary. This subject 
was the histor y of Negr o women. The cost 
of the conferences, $2,000, was borne largel y 
by the Nationa l Board . 
G The 13th annua l convention of Colored 
Graduat e Nurse s wil l be held at Tuskegee 
Institute, Ala. , August 17-20. 
C The Nationa l Negr o Business League 
wil l convene i n Philadelphia , Pa. , August 
18-20. 
TH E CHURC H 
CENTRA L BAPTIS T CHURC H at 
Pittsburgh , Pa. , i n a drive raised $77,­
436—$2,000 more than the goal. The pastor 
is the Rev. W . Augustu s Jones. 
C Ebeneze r Baptist Churc h at Pittsburgh , 
Pa. , has raised $21,000 i n cash towar d a 
$30,000 goal. The Rev. J. C. Austi n is 
pastor. 
C The 46th annual session of the New 
England Baptist Missionary Convention has 
been held i n Baltimore . A . J . Care y was 
elected president. 
C The name of the Freedmen's Aid 
Society of the M. E. Church has been changed 
to "Th e Boar d of Educatio n for Negroes" . 
A n educational director is to be appointed 
to supervise teachers and curriculum. 
Additional appropriations amounting to $50,000 
have been made to institutions to cover 
 CRISIS 
necessary increases i n salarie s and the extension of the wor k of teachers. This 
brings the appropriation s fo r al l purposes 
of school operation to $295,000, whic h is an 
advance of $150,000 over tha t of eight 
years ago. 
(I The Rev. Joh n P . Wrag g has been appointed Agenc y Secretary fo r the Colored 
People of the Unite d States at the America n 
Bibl e Society i n Ne w York . 
G. The Rev. Fran k A . Pinank o has been 
made genera l superintendent of missionar y 
wor k of the A . M . E . Zio n Churc h at Gol d 
Coast, West Africa . 
C The Bishop's Counci l of the C. M . E . 
Churc h has elected Bishop s N . C. Cleave r 
of St.. Louis, Charles H. Phillips of 
Nashville and Dr. Charles H. Phillips, Jr., of 
St. Louis, as delegates to the World's 
Ecumenical Conference of Methodism which will 
convene i n London , England , next year. 
NATIONA L URBA N LEAGU E 
REPLIE S to 111 questionnaires sent by 
the Ne w Yor k Urba n Leagu e to firms 
whic h employ more than 500 persons each, 
askin g tha t Negroe s be given a chance i n 
skilled work, indicat e wide r industria l opportunity. One company said tha t heretofore Negroe s had asked only fo r jobs as 
porters. Th e Brookly n Urba n Leagu e made 
a survey seeking opportunitie s fo r wor k 
with about 300 factories in Brooklyn. 
Several of the replies indicated that the only 
reason for not employin g colored labor wa s 
the fac t tha t colored men and women ha d 
never applied. 
(I Willia m N . Evan s of the Chicago Urba n 
League has been lecturing on "How to 
Handle Negro Labor" at the International 
Harvester Company's School for foremen. After 
the seventh lecture a decidedly improve d relationship between foremen and colored 
workme n was seen, and the latte r are being 
advanced to skilled positions—a consideration never before accorded colored workme n 
b y this company. Mr . Evan s has secured 
the placement of a colored woma n i n charge 
of women workers at the Alter Light 
Company's Plant which employs 100 girls. 
C Emm a V . Carter, Women's Employmen t 
Secretary of the Armstron g Association , last 
year induced 28 girls to enter the 
Philadelphia Trade School for Girls. These workers are being absorbed by factories as rap ­
idly as they finish their course of training . ID S TH E HORIZON 
C At the convention of the American 
Federation of Labor in Montreal, Abraham 
Lefkowitz , a member of the Executive 
Boar d of the Nationa l Urba n League and 
President of the Ne w Yor k Teachers' Union , 
secured the adoption of the followin g resolution which is a part of those prepared at 
his request by the Nationa l Urba n League : 
"Resolved, Tha t Negr o organizers be appointed where necessary to organize Negr o 
workers under the banner of the America n 
Federatio n of Labor. " 
C The Atlant a Urba n League has a force 
of 4 workers: Lemue l Foster, Executiv e 
Secretary; Cyrus Campfield, Industrial 
Secretary; Hildonia Canady and Mae Maxwell, 
Assistant Industrial and Room Registry 
Secretaries. Mr. Camprield conducts for boys 
a club called the "Urba n League's Bankin g 
Scouts" , whic h requires an admission card 
for membership. The card is a bank book, 
and recruits are sought particularl y among 
underprivileged boys. A t the convention at 
Toronto of the Internationa l Bi g Brothe r 
and Bi g Siste r Association , Mr . Campfield 
wa s elected a member of the Executiv e 
Board . 
C The baby contest conducted by the 
Pittsburgh Urban League disclosed a hopeful 
health condition. Seven out of 40 babies 
registered 100 per cent, and 16 won prizes. 
Th e examinations were conducted by representatives from the Cit y Chil d Welfar e 
Bureau, the Public Health Nursing 
Association and the Irene Kaufman Settlement. 
G Th e St. Louis Urba n League uses two 
public schools as recreation centers. Its 
free dental clini c fo r school children has 
saved parents over $3,000 durin g the year— 
not to mention the benefits reaped by the 
childre n i n comfort and better health. 
C Th e Harle m Branc h of the Ne w Yor k 
Publi c Librar y has accepted several colored 
girls on fellowships whil e trainin g them 
for positions in the library . 
C The Kansa s Cit y Communit y Service 
Urba n League has been formed by mergin g 
the Urban League and the Community 
Service, Inc., of that city. An Executive 
Secretary and necessary assistants will be employed. 
EDUCATIO N 
FOU R Negroes have been awarded $1,200 
Rosenwal d fellowships offered by the 
Genera l Educatio n Boar d fo r graduat e 
study i n medicine,—-Dr. W . S. Quinland , 
Harvard ; Dr. Theodore K . Lawless, North ­
western; Doctors 
Carri e J. Sutton and 
George W . Adams, 
Howard . 
C John B. 
Beckham, the only Negro 
i n a class of 89 
graduates from the 
Redlands, Cal. , Hig h 
School, is graduated 
wit h honor. 
G Lorimer D. 
Milton, A. M. Brown 
DR . CARRIE J. SUTTO N University , was 
awarded second premium of the Luciu s Lyo n prize. This prize 
is given on a basis of a special examina ­
tion i n Lati n or Roma n literatur e or history. 
C J. Harmo n Wilson , B.S. , graduates from 
Ohio State Universit y as a member of the 
national fraternity of the Kappa Alpha Psi 
and of the biological, chemical and physiological research societies of the university. 
H e is the first Negr o at this institution to 
be elected a member of the Phi Beta Kappa. 
G Lillia n Jones, a graduate from the West 
Philadelphi a Hig h School, won a prize for 
fancy dancing, this being her second annual 
award. Miss Jones interpreted Nevin's 
"Narcissus" . 
C Helen E . Fairfa x of the Williamsport , 
Pa. , Hig h School, the only colored graduate 
among 200, won second honors. 
C H . H . Donald graduates from Yal e wit h 
the Maste r of Arts degree. 
G Eldridg e L . Goodwin graduates from 
Englewood Hig h School, Chicago, at the 
age of 15. A t Littl e Rock, Ark. , Dorothy 
Gilla m graduates from the M . W . Gibbs 
Hig h School at the age of 15. 
G The Y . M . C. A . College, Chicago, gradu ­
ates Gordon H . Simpson who was president 
of his class. Mr . Simpson was Distributio n 
Clerk, Canadia n Government Department of 
Mines, 1910-16, and Regimenta l SergeantMajor, 803rd Pioneer Infantry, U . S. Army , 
1918-19; he has been a worker at the 
Wabash Avenue Y. M. C. A. 
G Perc y L . Julian , honor graduate of De 
Pau w University , has accepted a position 
in the College of Liberal Arts at Fisk 
University. 
C Irvi n C. Mollison , A.B. , Universit y of 
Chicago, was elected to membership i n Beta 
Chapter, Phi Beta Kappa. 
C Berth a M . Blac k of the Fort Wayne , 194 TH E
Ind., Hig h School is the sixt h colored gradu ­
ate i n 56 years. 
C David N. Crosthwait, Jr., is the first 
Negro to be awarded the advanced degree in 
Mechanical Engineering from Purdue 
University. He has been promoted from draftsma n wit h the C. A . Dunham Company, 
Marshalltown , Iowa , to the position of research engineer. 
G Honorar y degrees of Doctor of Music 
and Doctor of Laws were conferred, respectively, upon H . T. Burleig h and Joh n 
Hop e by Howar d University . 
G William s College conferred upon Dr. R. 
R. Moto n the honorar y degree of Doctor 
of Laws. 
G Mrs. Viole t N . Anderson , a colored grad ­
uate of the Chicago La w School, has been 
admitted to the Illinois Bar. Fo r 15 years 
Mrs. Anderso n has been a successful court 
stenographer. 
G H . W . Mosely, Jr. , a colored sophomore 
i n the hig h school at Ne w Haven , Conn., 
won second priz e i n the annua l oratorica l 
contest. Mr . Mosel y is the first Negr o to 
enter this contest. 
C Atlant a Universit y has defeated Howar d 
Universit y i n an inter-collegiate debate. 
The subject was "Resolved : Tha t the Unite d 
States Should Own and Operate the 
Railroads of the Country." Atlanta defended 
the negative. Herbert A . Greenwood, '20, 
and Richar d D . Stinson, '21, represented 
Atlanta . Howar d also lost to Lincoln . W e 
regret to announce the recent death of Mr . 
Stinson. 
G Th e Genera l Educatio n Boar d of the 
Rockefelle r Foundatio n makes for colored 
schools the appropriatio n of $500,000 for 
genera l endowment and $443,500 for current 
expenses and equipment. 
G Colored schools i n Nort h Carolin a have 
held a field ?nd track meet whic h was attended by 10 000 people. Ther e were 3,000 
entrants. Danie l School won the championship wit h 29 points. Picture s of the meet, 
for screen use were taken by Path e and the 
Illustrated News. 
G Hampto n Institute has changed its curriculum. The 4 yea r agricultura l course is 
replaced by a 3 yea r collegiate course based 
on 4 years of secondary work ; the trade 
school is revised so as to distribut e time 
more satisfactorily between academic and 
vocationa l subjects; the academic norma l 
course is replaced by a 6 yea r course in ­
cludin g 4 years of secondary work, followed 
 CRISIS 
by 2 years of professiona l training ; the 
business course is strengthened by the requirement of 2 years of preliminar y work . 
G Nei l Scott, freshma n at Centra l Hig h 
School, Shreveport, La. , is photographe r fo r 
his school. 
C Raymon d Lama r is winne r of the silve r 
lovin g cup offered by the Atlant a Journal 
to the best spelle r i n the colored publi c 
schools. Sixt y boys an d girls competed i n 
a test whic h lasted one hour and twent y 
minutes. 
G Harr y S. Blackisto n a t the age of 23 
graduates from the University of 
Pennsylvania with the degree of Ph.D. He is the 
youngest graduat e Ph.D . i n the histor y of 
this institution . Mr . Blackisto n was award ­
ed: the Willia m P . Henze y and the Mayor's 
scholarships, 1913-17; George Schleiche r 
priz e i n German , 1916-17; Universit y 
scholarship i n German , 1917-18; Harriso n 
scholarship i n Germa n and the Universit y 
scholarship, 1919. 
C Atlanta University sent out 13 
Bachelors of Arts and 22 normal graduates. 
G Mar y E . Link , completing he r thir d 
year's work , has been elected to the Phi 
Beta Kappa at the Universit y of Chicag o 
where she won a n entrance scholarship and 
at the close of he r first yea r was awarded 
the Gertrude Selt z Scholarshi p for the high ­
est average among freshmen women. A t the 
end of her second year she received 
Honorable Mention for distinction in her work 
i n the Junio r College and wa s awarded an 
Hono r Scholarship. 
G Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity , a nationa l 
organization founded at Howard 
University, has celebrated its sixth anniversary. 
The fraternit y has 12 chapters and 650 
members. Th e annua l convention wil l be 
held at Richmond , Va. , December 26-28, 
1920. 
G Th e Financ e Committe e of the Boar d of 
Educatio n i n Atlanta , Ga. , has increased 
salarie s of colored school teachers, whic h 
places them on the same salar y basis as 
whit e teachers. 
G The Universit y of Pennsylvani a gradu ­
ates Esther L. Butler, Virginia M. 
Alexander and Julia M. Polk as Bachelors of 
Science with creditable records. Miss Polk 
has secured a position i n the Publi c Schools 
of Camden, N . J. Miss Alexande r wo n a 
scholarship to the Women's Medica l College 
of Philadelphia . TH E HORIZON 195 
(I Fou r teachers of Howar d Universit y have 
been granted sabbatica l leave durin g 1920­
21:—Professo r Charle s H . Wesley of the 
Department of Histor y has been awarded 
an Austi n Teacher's Scholarship i n Harvar d 
Universit y and wil l study for a Ph.D.; 
Professor Marth a MacLea r of the School 
of Education will study at Columbia 
University, being registered for the degree of 
Ph.D.; Professor Thomas W. Turner, 
Acting Dean of the School of Education and 
Professor of Applie d Biology, wil l continue 
research in Vegetable Physiology at 
Cornell University; Professor George W. Hines, 
Assistant Professor in the School of 
Commerce and Finance, will attend the 
University of Washington, at Seattle. 
(I Edwin a Krus e has resigned her position 
as principa l of the colored Howar d Hig h 
School, Wilmington , Del. , and wil l be succeeded by Ra y Wooten. Miss Krus e was 
made principa l emeritus of the school. 
C Congress appropriated for Howard 
University during 1919-1920, $121,937; for 
1920-21 the sum has been raised to $243,000. 
Wit h student fees added, the budget totals 
$366,000. 
C Mrs. Corali e Frankli n Cook has been reappointed to the Boar d of Educatio n at 
Washington , D . C. Mrs. Cook is colored 
and the only member to serve 3 consecutive 
terms. 
INDUSTRY 
THE People's Building and Loan 
Association, conducted by Negroes at Hampton, Va. , has declared a 7 per cent, dividend. 
C Beresford Gale , fiscal agent of the colored Hote l Dal e Compan y of Philadelphia , 
sold $100,000 of the company's stock in 100 
days. 
C A cooperative investment company has 
been formed by Negroes in Middlesex 
County, Va., to engage in real estate, farm buyin g and merchandising. Willia m M . Rich , 
cashier of the Brow n Savings and Bankin g 
Compan y at Norfolk , is the leader. 
C The 21st annua l statement of the colored 
North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance 
Company records: total income, $1,662,527; assets, $774 935, wit h $300,000 invested i n 
Libert y Bonds; it has $26,534,549 wort h of 
insuranc e i n force. 
(I Jame s Miller, a Negr o 31 years of age, 
has been elected over two whit e opponents 
as a member of the House of 
Representatives of the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company at Akron , Ohio, where 25,000 persons, 
mostly white, are employed, 
d A syndicate of 35 Negroes i n Atlanta , 
Ga. , has paid $120,000 and purchased the 
unsold stock of the Grea t Southern Fir e 
Insurance Company. Mr . W . C. Thoma s 
was elected president and the Rev. L . A . 
Townsley, secretary. 
(1 The Unite d Communit y Stores have been 
opened by Negroes i n Philadelphia , Pa. , as 
a chain grocery and meat business capitalized at $100,000. Connected wit h the concern are Dr. W . H . Moses, the Rev. J . M . 
Moses, E . T. Atwell , R. R. Wright , Jr. , 
Benjami n F . Ammons, Joh n W . Goiens and 
Miss L . M . Wright . 
C. A t Norfolk , Va. , 3,138 out of 4,938 pupils 
in 8 colored schools have deposited since 
last Februar y through the stamp saving 
system $7,827 and drawn out $1,367, leaving 
a balance of $6,459. Less than one-half of 
the white pupils are thrifters, i n comparison 
wit h three-fourths of the colored children. 
C A t Wilmington , Del., colored girl elevator 
operators have replaced men at the D u 
Pont Building , a 16-story structure covering a square, and at the For d Building ; 5 
theatres are employing colored girls as 
ushers. TH E GHETT O 
THE Boar d of Educatio n at Crisfield, 
Somerset County, Md. , has approved the 
followin g appropriation : $83,100 salaries for 
white teachers, $14,000 for colored; $1,500 
for white supervisor, $750 for colored; white 
school buildin g $7,000, colored $4,500. There 
are only 1,200 more whit e school children 
than colored. W . H . Dashie l is superintendent. CRIME 
THE followin g lynchings have taken 
place since our last record : 
Duluth , Minn. , June 15, Isaac McGhee , 
Elme r Jackson, Nat e Green ; accused of 
attack on white girl . 
Rincon , Ga. , June 21, Phili p Gaithers, 
shot; murder. 
Enterprise , Miss. , Jul y 5, J. F . Spencer; 
fighting. 
Paris, Tex., Jul y 6, Irvin g and Herma n 
Arthur, burned; murder. 
Durham, N . C , Jul y 10, Ed . Roach ; attack on a white girl . 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
AT the tenth annua l session of the South 
Carolin a Federation of Colored 
Women's Clubs, held i n Camden, S. C , $11,­
577 was raised for education, charit y and 
other purposes durin g the fiscal year. 196 TH E
G Mrs. Caseley Hayford , wif e of the Hon . 
Caseley Hayford , is expected to arriv e i n 
Ne w Yor k from Sierr a Leone durin g July . 
Mrs. Hayford is being sent by the 
Educational Committee of the Women of West 
Africa, to promote the interest of an 
Industrial Technical Training School for Girls— 
the first of its kin d to be established on the 
West Coast. She wil l be accompanied by 
her niece, Miss Katherin e Easmon , daughter 
of the late Dr . M . C. Farrel l Easmon , prin ­
cipa l medica l officer of the Gold Coast. Miss 
Easmo n is an associate of the Roya l College 
of Art , London . Mrs. Hayfor d and Miss 
Easmo n are well known on Londo n platforms. The y wil l appear i n native costume 
and ar e the first West Africa n women to lecture i n America . 
C Th e branc h of the N . A . A . C. P. at 
Columbus, Ohio, has secured in Judge 
Seidel's court a fine of $50 and costs for Mrs. 
Maym e Davis against the owner of a confectionery store on Russell Street for discrimination . 
G The Times, Trenton , N . J. , is publishin g 
a series of short historica l sketches of prominent Negroes by Edn a B . Henry . 
C Thre e colored nurses have been listed 
by the Visitin g Nurs e Service, Ne w Yor k 
City , i n co-operation wit h the Maternit y 
Centr e Association , for wor k among 
Negroes. 
CI Mr . J. Merchant, a Negr o employed at 
the United States Department of 
Agriculture, in the Bureau of Chemistry, has been 
appointed Federa l Prohibitio n Agen t and 
Analyst i n the Centra l District, comprising 
Illinois, Indiana , Michiga n and Wisconsin . 
G The second colored notary public for 
Lenoir County, N . C , has been appointed by 
Governo r Bickett in the person of Dr. W . A . 
Isler. 
G A complete venir e of colored jurors was 
selected recently in Judge W. H. 
McChesney's court, St. Louis, Mo. 
G I n Judge Myer's court, Los Angeles, Cal. , 
Edwi n M . Thompson and his wif e have received a verdic t of $100 against Walke r D . 
Hines, Directo r Genera l of Railroads, for 
discrimination in the dining car on a 
Southern Pacific train. E. Burton Ceruti, the 
colored attorney, found the followin g in the 
company's book of rules: "I n states where 
the law does not compel special compartments for white and colored passengers, 
conductors should endeavor to induce the 
 CRISIS 
latter, by one means or another, to eat at 
such time as whit e passengers are not being 
served. If, however, they decline to do so 
and there is room fo r them, they wil l have 
to be seated and served, but i f possible this 
should be done at a table, i f an y i n the car, 
whic h is enclosed wit h a curtain. " 
C Th e Atlant a Branc h of the N . A . A . C. P. , 
wit h more than 3,000 members, raised $1,958 
for the special expense fund of the Annua l 
Conference. 
G The Armstrong Association in 
Philadelphia employs 3 full-time home and school 
visitors i n Reynolds, Durha m and Loga n 
Schools where there are 5,000 colored pupils. Durin g last yea r the organizatio n secured wor k for Negroe s i n 31 different lines, 
estimated at $326,709. 
C The Pullma n Ca r Compan y has established a course i n first-aid trainin g for its 
colored maids. Th e first mai d nurse to be 
graduated is Mrs. Mabe l Fitts. 
G Th e Indianapolis Tennis Clu b wil l hold 
a nationa l tournament durin g the first week 
i n August . Tw o $100 loving-cups, and gold 
medals wil l be awarded. 
FOREIG N 
THE Gol d Cross Society has been formed 
at Geneva , Switzerland , fo r the purpose of exposing injustic e to oppressed 
peoples and defending their rights before 
the League of Nations. 
C Twenty-two Negr o martyrs for the fait h 
i n Uganda , unde r Kin g Mwanga , have been 
beatified i n the Basilic a of St. Peter's i n 
Rome. 
G Th e whit e Bisho p of Zululan d has presided over the Anglo-Catholi c Congress at 
Albert Hall , London . H e suggested a 72 
hours' effort to raise $250,000 fo r foreign 
missions. The response was most enthusiastic and has been estimated at severa l 
thousand pounds. 
G A t Accra , Gold Coast, West Africa , a 
fund of $500,000 has been authorized for 
delegations to the Englis h Parliamen t i n 
the interest of Africa n rights. Gol d Coast 
raised $35,000, to whic h it has added 
$15,000. 
G In London, George W . Lattimore , proprietor of the colored America n Southern 
Syncopated Orchestra , has been awarded 
£1733 and costs against A . P. de Courvill e 
for alleged breach of contract. Th e orchestr a after a successful tour i n Scotland has 
opened its Londo n season. TH E 197 CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Howard University School of Medicine 
Including Medical, Dental and Pharmaceutic Colleges 
1867 - 1920 Dr . J . Stanley Durkee , President Edwar d A . Bat loch, M.D. , Bea n 
Next Session Opens October 1, 1920 
MEDICA L COLLEG E 
ADMISSIO N 
Candidate s for admission must be graduates of approved Colleges or Scientific Schools 
wit h two year s of instruction, including laboratory work, in physics, chemistry and biology, 
English , mathematic s and Frenc h or German, or graduates of recognized high schools wit h 
two year s of instruction, including laboratory work, in physics, chemistr y and biology, English , 
mathematic s and Frenc h or German . 
INSTRUCTIO N 
Th e course of instruction occupies four years, and especial emphasis is laid upon prac ­
tica l work in the laboratories, in the wards of the Freedmen's Hospita l and in the Dispensary. 
Ful l Corps of Instructors, well equipped laboratories, unexcelled hospital facilities. 
Th e Medica l College is rated in Class A by the Council on Medica l Educatio n of the 
America n Medica l Association and is a membe r of the Association of America n Medica l Colleges. Eecognized b y the Conjoint Boar d of England , 
TH E DENTA L COLLEG E 
Require s for admission the completion of a recognized four-year high school course. Th e 
course of instruction occupies four years. Unexcelled facilitie s for practica l work. Th e advanced requirements wil l not go into effect until 1921. 
TH E PHARMACEUTICA L COLLEG E 
Require s for admission the completion of a recognized four-year high school course. 
Th e course of instruction occupies three years and leads to the degree of Pharmaceutica l 
Chemist. 
Th e annua l announcement, application blanks and additional information concerning 
eithe r course ma y be obtained by addressing WILLIA M C. McNEILL , Secretary 
Fift h and W Sts., N . W . "Washington, D . C . 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY HAMPTO N INSTITUT E 
HAMPTO
REVISED
N VIRGINI
 COURSES 
A MANUA L TRAINING &
NORMA L SCHOO L INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
Two-year course, based on fouryear secondary course. FOR COLORE D YOUT H 
AGRICULTURA L SCHOO L BORDENTOWN , N . J . Collegiate course of 3 years (36 
months), based on four-year sec­ A high institution for the training of 
ondary course. colored youth. Excellent equipment, 
thorough instruction, wholesome sur­ TRAD E SCHOO L roundings. Academic trrining for all Four-year course in 11 trades; students. short course in 3 trades. Courses in carpentry, agriculture and 
BUSINESS SCHOO L trades for boys, including auto reFour-year course, based on two- pairing. 
year secondary course. Courses in domestic science and domestic art for girls. HOME-ECONOMIC S SCHOO L A new trades building, thoroughly 
Two-year course, based on four- equipped. 
year secondary course. New girls' dormitory thoroughly and 
ACADEMI C modernly equipped. SCHOO L 
Four year secondary course; also Terms reasonable. 
preparatory course. Fall term opens September, 1920. 
For information address JAME S E . GREGG , D.D. , Principal 
W. R. VALENTINE, Principal 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS. 198 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
JUST TH E PLAC E FOR YOUR GIRL 
Dayton a Norma l an d Industria l Institut e for Negr o Girls, Daytona , Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine,-modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary , Grammar . High . Normal, Vocational. 
Nurse Training at McLeo d Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE ,
Atlanta University 
Studies of the Negro Problems 
20 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY t: ATLANT A GA. 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
i n th e cit y o f Ne w Yor k 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintenden t o f Nurse s 
Lincol n Hospita l and Hom e 
New York, N.Y . 
HAL E INFIRMAR Y AN D NURS E TRAININ G 
SCHOOL , 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala . 
Offers to Hig h School graduates and young 
women of higher education and good moral 
character, between the ages of 18 and 35, a 
three years' course in the profession of nursing. Fo r further information apply to the 
Superintendent enclosing a 6tamp. 
30-DAY SYSTE M 
DERRIC K BUSINES S SCHOO L 1435 CHESTNU T STREET . PHILADELPHIA . PA . 
Only School of Its Kind . 
ENROL L NO W FO R 
SUMME R COURS E ! 
Shorthand Bookkeeping Touch Typewriting Filing , Etc. 
M . J. DERRICK . Prin . and Mgr. 
- - Principal. 
WANTE D 
a thoroughly competent 
Tuto r 
for eight year old boy. College graduate preferred. 
References required 
Address: M . G . % THE CRISIS 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N Y. 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS, Dignified Work. 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
MOTHER S 
FIT YOU R DAUGHTER S FO R LIFE No w is the Tim e to "STUDY " the School to 
which you are going to send your daughter s 
next Fall . 
THIS INSTITUTION IS 
DEEPL Y CHRISTIA N 
It Permits No Shabby Wor k and Tolerate s 
No Loose Habits 
SIXT H GRAD E THROUG H TH E NORMA L 
Togethe r Wit h 
VOCATIONA L TRAININ G 
MUSIC ATHLETIC S 
Ou r AI M is to tur n ou t well -rounde d women , 
traine d i n intellec t 
an d 
Discipline d i n self-relianc e 
TH E TRAININ G SCHOO L GIR L GOE S 
BAC K T O HE R COMMUNIT Y PREPARE D 
T O HEL P LIF T TH E STANDARD S O F 
LIVING . 
REQUIREMENTS : 
Sound in Healt h and Mora l Characte r 
No t UNDE R FIFTEE N Year s of Ag e 
ABOV E the FIFT H GRAD E 
Good record in institution formerl y attended. 
SEN D FO R CATALO G 
NATIONAL TRAINING SCHOOL FOR 
WOMEN AND GIRLS Miss Nanni e H . Burroughs, President 
Lincol n Heights Washingto n D . C . 
1227 S. 17th ST. , TH E STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUT E PHILADELPHIA , PA . 
SHORTHAN D TYPEWRITIN G BOOKKEEPIN G 
U i 11- equip v. u t.. take it position in a Business Office In a short rime by taking our course In Bonn Pitma n Short­ hand. Touch Typewriting anil Practica l Bookkeeping. Instructions given on the Multigraph Mimeograph and Addin g Ma -Inn - Classes in Touch System of Typewriting organized every Monday. Closing Exercises of the summer school. ;,i Haven M E. Church. 23d and Oxford Sis., August 31st—Typewriters operated by blindfolded students. JO B WORK — W e typewrite social and business tetters, circulars, postal cards, funeral notices, sermons, essays, poems, addresses and duplicate handwriting, mus c and drawings. EDWAR D T. DUNCAN . President. 
Mentio n THE CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 199 
Cyri N e w t o n l a. Crichlow CRICHLO W & BRAITHWAIT E *• Braithwafte 
EXPER T SHORTHAND REPORTER S 
Verbati m Reports of CONVENTIONS , CONFERENCES , INVESTIGATIONS , HEARINGS , LEC ­
TURES , SERMONS , etc. 
Engagements accepted anywher e in the Unite d States 
Teacher s of Stenography and Typewritin g at Nort h Harle m Communit y House , 
800 West 139th Street, New York , N . Y . 
Correspondence Courses to all parts of the world. 
2297 Seventh Avenu e Telephones 1128 Morningside 6817 Audubon Ne w York , N . Y . 
Literary Leaders YOUNG WOMAN Wanted Intellectual, Social Uplift. HERE Pleasant, dignified work. Good IS YOUR CHANCE pay. Reference and small deposit required. Enroll NOW . GOOD NATIONAL LITERARY ASSOCIA­ POSITIONS-GOOD SALARIES TION, 1230 Yo u St., N. W. , 
Washington, D. C. Answe r the Cal l for Social Worker s and 
Ente r the World's Greatest Fiel d for Service 
Efficient, Earnest, Constructive Leader s are For a Selected List of Books bearing on 
the Negro Problem write The CRISIS . 
DEMAN D W e TTai n for Christia n Leadership—Th e 100 FINE CALLIN G CARD S 60 CTS . Only Kin d of Leadership Tha t Wil l Stand Neatly printed with your name and address. the Test in the Most fashionable styles and size's for ladies or NE W DAY . gentlemen. Your card represents you, therefore only the best quality should be used. Departmen t open to those who have had. at Business and Professional Cards least, one year of trainin g in a good Hig h furnished in several styles appropriate for School. any business or profession at the following 
prices: 100 for 85 cents, 250 for $1.50, 600 Ge t Read y Fo r Service for $2.35. 
Below are a few styles of our lettering: 
Th e Worl d Needs YOU Mrs. George K. Franklin 
SEN D FO R CATALO G 
NATIONA L TRAININ G SCHOO L 
Mrs. John W. Andrew FO R WOME N AN D GIRL S 
Mr. Clifford Roy Langford Miss Nanni e H . Burroughs, President 
Lincol n Miss Christina Mae VanDyke Heights, Washington, D. C. 
MR. FREDERICK A. HARRINGTON 
AGENT S WANTE D Good pay can be earned taking orders for 
Tel . 6487 For t Hil l Cable Address, Epben our cards. Pleasant, dignified and profitable 
spare time work. Ther e is a big demand EDGA R P. BENJAMI N everywhere for Calling and Business Cards 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW and you will have no trouble in getting or34 School Street Boston, Mass. ders.- No experience necessary as we furnish 
instructions with outfit. Al l orders filled Telephone Connection promptly and sent prepaid. Writ e now for 
samples and agents' terms. 
The HOUSE OF CHOWNING, Indianapolis, Ind. 
TWO GREA T BOOKS for $2.50 
N O LIBRAR Y COMPLET E WITHOU T THE M 
(1) Th e Histor y of the Negr o Rac e and Negr o Soldiers in the 
Spanish-American War , Dating Back to Egyp t and the 
Fharoas—400 pages, 60 illustrations. (Retails alone for 
$1.25.) Was adopted as a textbook by North Carolina 
State Board of Education. 
(2) Th e Pictoria l Histor y of the Negro in the Grea t Worl d 
War , giving a brilliant historical sketch, a description of 
battle scenes by Colonel Haywood, of the Fighting Fifteenth New York , Capt. Marshall, Sergeant Steptoe, Ralph 
Tyle r and others, with 150 excellent pictures of officers 
and men and war views. (Sells alone for $2.00.) 
Just Think , only $2.50 for these two great books. 
Agent s wante d everywhere, large commission s pai d 
ADDRESS * E . A . JOHNSON , 17 West 132nd Street, New York , N.Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 200 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Neithe r the maile d fist no r resolution s wil l cur e the presen t state o f unrest . Bu t the everyda y 
practic e o f the Business Golde n Rule—'"T o liv e an d let live"—b y al l individuals, association s an d 
corporation s engage d i n business wil l do muc h towar d restorin g confidenc e an d contentmen t to 
the public . 
Th e Souther n Ai d Societ y o f Va. , Inc., di d no t rais e its rate s o f premium s durin g the wa r 
period—no r since . It di d no t reduc e the benefits to its members b y an y for m o f evasion . It di d 
not withdra w its Unmatche d Polic y o f Ful l Coverag e an d Lif e Tim e Protectio n to its members — 
an d as a resul t o f this libera l treatmen t to its members, th e Souther n Ai d Society has no w the 
goo d wil l o f al l its members an d enjoy s a large r patronag e i n its field o f operatio n tha n eve r before . 
Thousand s o f contente d members are constantl y expressin g themselve s lik e the following: — 
A n Eminen t Physician and Surgeon Writes , 
267 W. Mai n St. . Charlottesville , Va. , 
Ma y 6th , 1920. 
T O WHO M I T MA Y CONCERN: — 
It is m y pleasur e to state that I hav e bee n engage d i n the practic e o f medicin e i n this cit y 
fo r about sixtee n years. Havin g ha d ampl e opportuni t y to observ e the grea t Southern Ai d Society 
i n action , notin g their promp t payments an d excellen t business procedure . I take prid e i n recommendin g them as Abov e The m All . 
(Signed l Geo . R. Ferguson . M.D . 
Paid Clai m After 3 Days Membership 
Anderso n Ave. , Danville , Va. . 
Ma y 10th , 3 920. 
T O WHO M I T MA Y CONCERN: — 
This is to certif y tha t m y husband , Sa m Watkins , wa s a membe r o f the Southern Ai d Society, 
receivin g his polic y o n Monday , die d o n Wednesday , an d I receive d his Deat h Clai m o n the follow ­
in g Monday . H e ha d pai d the Societ y onl y 50 cents dues, an d I receive d $2S.75 . 
I wis h to say tha t the Southern Ai d Society is the best compan y I kno w fo r the promp t pay ­
men t o f bot h sic k an d deat h claims. 
Wishin g yo u continue d success, I am , 
Ver y trul y yours, 
(Signed ) (Mrs. ) Lizzi e Watkin s 
Weekly Benefits Eac h Week for 4 Years 
Prominent Physician Certifies to Fact 
1607 Taylo r St. , Lvnchburg , Va. , 
Apri l 3, 1920. 
T O WHO M I T MA Y CONCERN: — 
I. Laur a Jackson , o f 1607 Taylo r St. . Lynchburg , Va. , carr y a policy , No . 62573 , Premiu m 
35 cents a week , wit h the Southern Ai d Society of Va. , wa s take n sic k Marc h 1, 1916 , an d hav e 
receive d m y weekl y benefits ever y wee k up to an d includin g Apri l 3, 1920. 
I recommen d the Southern Ai d Society to be promp t i n their payments, an d can say truth ­
full y tha t the y carr y a perpetua l payin g policy . 
I hav e receive d durin g m y illness the amoun t o f $710.93. 
( Signe d ) Laur a Jackson , 
(Witness) Iren e Jackson . 
Thi s is to certif y tha t th abov e statemen t is correc t an d tha t I hav e filed certificate s eac h e
wee k durin g M rs. Laur a Jackson 's illness. 
(Signed ) J . A . Brown , M.D . 
No insurabl e perso n i n Virgini a shoul d be withou t the Superio r Polic y 
issue d b y the—­
Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc. Home Office: 527 N . Second Street 
Richmond, Va. 
District Offices and Agencies thruout the State. Policy provides protection 
against Sickness, Accidents and Death—Al l for One Premium. 
A . D. PRICE—Pres. B. L . JORDAN—Sec . W . A . JORDAN—Ass't Sec. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 201 
Cleota J. Collins 
Lyric Soprano 
"Judging from the appearance of a large number of 
music lovers, her sweet lyric 
voice held them spellbound. 
She was applauded again and 
again after each number."— 
Boston Chronicle. 
Address: 
156 HAMILTON AVENUE, 
COLUMBUS, OHIO 
JOSEPHINE A. JUNIUS 
CONTRALTO 
"Miss Junius is the possessor of a Contralto 
voice, lovely in quality, which she uses artistically."—Oscar Saenger. 
Address 
74 W. 142d ST . NEW YORK, N. Y. 
LULA ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
Available for Concerts 
Telephone 6393 Morningside 
174 W . 136t h Stree t Ne w York , N . Y . 
E. ALDAM A JACKSO N Graduate of Institute of Musical Art 
Organist-Director of Music of St. Marks M . E . 
Church; Concert Accompanist; Piano, Voice, 
Theory, Instruction, Conducting, Coaching. 
Harmony taught from beginning to completion. Private or correspondence. 
Geolhius system. 
Studio: 185 W. 136th St., New York, N. Y. 
Telephone Morningside 1708. 
They Played For The Crowned Heads of Europe— 
They Are Now Playing For You! HEL L FIGHTER S 360TII BAND , INC. 
IIKM i FIGHTER S 3C0TH ORCHESTR A 
Composed of the same musicians that maOo tliis band the 
sensation of Europe during the "WORL D WAR, " 
ENGAGEMENT S SOLICITE D 
Lieut, F . Eugene Mlkell , Conductor 
Jos. W. Grey, Mgr. W. Woodruff Chisum, Secretary 
17(1 West 135th Street, New York N . Y . 
Clarence Cameron White 
Violinis t 
Recitals, Concerts, Instruction 
Studio: 616 Columbu s Avenu e Boston , Mass . 
SONG S That the Whole Country Is Whistling! 
"I'V E COM E BAC K TO YOU. " wonderful ballad. 
"CA N YO U FORGET, " being featured by leading stage 
artists, 
"SHEL L SHOC K SHAKE, " on U . S. piano records 
"I N A GARDEN, " sentimental ballad, 
"YO U SH O KNO W HOW TO STRU T YOU R STUF F " jazz 
melody. 
25 cents per copy, or wil l mail the five numbers to you for 
only $1. Address 
Hell Fighters 369th Band, 176 W. 135th St.. New York N Y 
AskyourDealerfor thefollowing:NEW PHONOGRAPH RECORDS FRO M TH E CATALO G OF 
PAC E & HAND Y MUSI C CO. , Inc. C T LOUIS BLUE S Sung _
THA T THIN G CALLE D LOVE ,
JHA T THIN G CALLE D LOV E Sung
YO U CAN' T KEE P A GOOD MA N DOWN
IT'S , YOU R MOV E NOW
O DEAT H WHER E IS TH Y STING
PICKANINN Y Rose
MAK E THA T TROMBON E LAUG H
Y EL LOW DOG BLUE S to issue
THIN K O F M E LITTL E DADD Y
p££ GE E BLUE S Jazz Band
DANCIN G DEACO N
CAMPMEETIN G BLUE S
Saxophone Blues /iiiACHklr 1
 TU C D l IIC C (sHASIIMv i Itl L DLUL 9
NOTICE.—W e CANNO T fill order for Phonograph Records.
 by HARRI S on Columbia Record 
 released Aug . 20. Every owner of a Phonograph 
 knows Marion Harris. 
by SMIT H on Okeh Record. The M A M I E
0 r s o n g m r m a J e b y a ' . Pl "ffi. ' """ a 
Sun b y ,n e
° '"im'tail o BCR T WILLIAM S on 
Columbia Record. Al l of Bert Williams' records 
 are good, hut these are great. 
Sung by MARGARE T FREE R on Edison Ricord. 
A wonderful lullaby with a beautiful melody 
whioh is irresistible. 
 We are the first Music Publishers in the world 
a Laughing Trombone number. 
 Played by WILBE R C SWEATMAN' S Original 
on Columbia Record. 
 Played by FOR D T. DABNEY' S Orchestra on 
 Acolia n R 'cord
- Recorded on Emerson. Pathe, Paramount, Vic ­ ,„ and the r records. r 0 
 By At Piantadosi. Recorded on most phono­ ap h records and player rolls. 
 Pleaso order from YOU R nearest dealer. 
gr 
PAC E & HAND Y MUSI C CO. , Inc., WoT^ ' (Gaiety Theatre Building) 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS. 202 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
HERE IS YOUR OPPORTUNITY 
TO SECURE A WOODVILLE COUNTRY ESTATE 
CONSISTING OF 10 OR 20 ACRES OR MORE 
FO R $32 5 0 
ONL Y PER ACR E 
VER Y EAS Y TERM S 
Special advertising discounts to those who act quicklyFree Lot With Each 10-Acre Tract! 
We have only a limited number of Woodville estates for sale, making 
quick action necessary. People from all over the country will want 
these estates, which means that they will all be sold within a short time. 
Get yours before it's too late. Send for booklet containing full details. 
IT'S FREE . Address 
THE SWAN-ARENSON REALTY & DEVELOPMENT CO. 
19 SOUTH LA SALLE STREET CHICAGO, ILL. 
TH E SWAN-ARENSON REALT Y & DEVELOPMEN T CO., 
CHICAGO, ILL. Date 192 
GENTLEMEN:—Pleas e send me full particulars about your "Woodville offer without any 
obligation to me. 
Name Address. ., 
Town State 
C-8-20 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 203 
MADE to MEASURE 
$15.00 
EXPRESS OR POSTAGE PREPAID 
This offer is one of the biggest, most gener­ ous ever made by any tailoring house. It's 
your one big opportunity to get a finely tail- ored-to-measure 2-piece suit with box back, superbly trimmed and cut in the latest city 
style for only $15.00. 
WE'RE OUT TO BEAT 
HIGH TAILORING PRICES 
Your own local tailor couldn't and wouldn't 
mak e you a suit for $15.00, let alone supply the cloth, linings and trimmings. Why not 
sav e 50 % on your next suit? We have such 
a tremendous business, buy all our materials 
in such large quantities and have such a perfect organization that we can make these wonderful prices—and 
remember we guarantee style, fit and workmanship or 
your money back. 
You Save$9 to $15 
This suit for $15.00 clearly proves our supremacy in the tailoring field. We offer 
dozens of equally good values. Let's tell Q I A lf' l 
you about them. We would rather you did |J|g OdlHPIG UUlTIT rllt b not send us any money until we send our 5 C 
Write us today and we will mail you absolutely FRE E our beautifully illustrated 
pattern book showing dozens of the latest city styles and designs, also many large 
size cloth samples to choose from. You will be simply thunderstruck at the exceptional values we are offering this year. Don't delay; we urge you to act quick; today! 
TH E PROGRES S TAILORIN G CO . 
Dept. 60 1 CHICAG O 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS. 204 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Plant of The E. A. WELTERS ' TOOT H POWDE R CO. , Inc. 
T o B e Erecte d I n Baltimore , Md . 
The Largest and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation Owned and 
Controlled by Negroes in the United States 
TH E E. A. WELTERS ' TOOTH POWDER COMPANY, which incorporated five years ago with 
a capitalization of $5,000.00 , with stock sold at $10.0 0 per share, is now a Corporation capitalized 
at $100,000.0 0 with "no shares for sale at any price," yet—it is understood that a small number 
of shares have been donated by some of the larger stockholders for certain Dentists and Druggists, 
whose names have already been listed ,and will be called on personally in the near future by the 
President of the Company. 
The Dentists and Druggists who will be solicited, were selected by the Directors of the Company because of their progressiveness and the great advertising value that their connection will 
mean in the distribution of this exceptional Dentrifice to the Race throughout the United States. 
Th e E. A . WELTERS ' TOOT H POWDE R CO. , Inc . 410 Broad St., Jacksonville, Fla. 
Beautify The Skin—Glorif y The Hair 
[ng and Soothing 
to the Tenderest 
Skin . 
Amro n 
Ski n AMRO N SKI N 
SOA P is the most Soa p satisfactory of al l 
rs Nature's Best SHAMPO O Soaps, 
Ai d In. Promoting and because of its 
Bright, Clear Ski n instant LATHER ­
and i n bringing re­ IN G and CLEANS ­
newed Vigor and IN G qualities one 
routhfulness to the cake of AMBO N 
ITair. SKI N SOA P wil l 
last quite as long 
AMRO N is two . cakes of SKI N Jttaer kinds. SOA P is composed 
99 per cent. of Fo r your SKIN' S Vegetable Oils , sake—buy a cake principally of OIL S of AMRO N SKI N of th e COCOA ­ SOA P — today. NUT . It provides Twenty-five cents an instant thick, the cake, 1 dozen rich, cream y cakes for $2.25. lather in either Amron hard or warm Send for our water. It is ador- Profusely a b 1 y Cleansing, Skin Soap Illustrated Catalog con­ Exquisitely Fri * taining a full and grant and of Guar­ complete line of anteed Purity. It Humania Hair every Useful Toil- Is Intensely Heal­ lette Requisite. 
HUMANI And SPECIALTY MFG, CO A HAI R & SPECIALT Y MFG . CO . 
23 DUAN E STREE T
New York, U.S.A. NE W YORK , N . Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 205 
Patti's Brazilian Toilette Luxuries Compounde d wit h th e sam e car e as use d i n fillin g a doctor's 
prescription . Don' t b e ashame d an d hid e you r face . Ge t Patti' s 
Brazilia n Secre t Bookle t an d lear n ho w t o car e fo r you r skin . 
Eac h da y you r ski n grow s smoothe r an d you r complexio n clearer . 
Patti' s Beaut y Secre t Book , ho w t o car e fo r you r skin , an d 
si x Toilett e Preparation s fo r $5.00. 1,000 agents wanted . 
Patti' s Fou r Toilett e Preparation s withou t th e "Beaut y Book, " 
$2,50 . p |co List Brazil's Sweetest Odors r 
Pattl Beauty Cream C8o Anit a Lllao Porfumo ...$1.23 oz. bottle 
Patti Night Cream 680 Anit a Lotus Perfume .. . 1.25 oz. bottle 
Patti Day Cream 680 Anit a Rose Porfumo .. . 1.25 oz. bottlo 
Pattl "L a Travlata " Powder.. . .680 Anit a Trcflo Perfume . . 1.25 oz. bottle 
Agents Wanted—No Samples or C. O. D. Orders. 
Sen d postag e fo r mailin g 
Addres s al l orders t o A . A . Brown , Manage r 
PATTI'S BEAUTY EMPORIUM 
4723 St. Lawrence Ave., Apt. 3, CHICAGO, ILL. 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS. L. JONES, Pro.. 
N. E. Cor. 8th and Plum Sts., Cincinnati, Ohio 
Telephone, Baring 7794 
ISADOR E MARTIN 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgages I 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. ' 
TH E ADVOCAT E ROBER T J. NELSON , Editor and Publisher 
800 French Street Wilmington. Delaware 
TH E ONL Y RAC E PAPE R IN DELAWAR E 10 Pages 
We cover Delaware, the Eastern Shore of Marylan d and 
Southeastern Pennsylvania Lik e a Blanket. . . . A n 
Intensive Circulation. . . 22.500 People, read TH E 
ADVOCAT E EAC H WEEK . 
If you have any proposition that appeals to the Race and 
you want it to reach virgin territory, advertise in The Advocate. 
Send for a sample copy and see the high grade class of 
advertisers who use our advertising columns. 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau Wil l Hel p Yo u Ge t a Bette r Payin g Position . 
REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TERM S 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau Bo x 22, Wilherforoe , O . 
LUC DORSINVILLE & CO. 
MANUFACTURERS' AGENTS 
IMPORTERS AND EXPORTERS 
POR T A U PRINCE , HAIT I 
EXPORT : IMPORT : 
COFFE E FLOU R COCOA SOAP CASTOR BEAN S HARDWAR E LIGNUM VITA E DRY GOODS MAHOGAN Y 
LOG WOOD COTTO N FABRICS 
COTTO N FURNITUR E 
COCOANU T PAINTS 
Colored American business men desiring to transact business between Haiti and the United States 
of America, are cordially invited to communicate with us. 
WANTE D WANTE D Liv e Agent s A t Onc e T o Sel l 
DUDLEY'S FAMOUS AUTO POLISH 
fo r furniture , pianos, churc h pews, hard ­
woo d floors an d hundred s o f othe r thing s 
tha t hav e a varnishe d surface . Make s the m 
loo k lik e new . Agent s ca n mak e $50.00 t o 
$75.0 0 pe r Wee k sellin g Dudley' s Polis h t o 
furnitur e dealers, dru g stores, hardwar e 
stores, churches, housekeepers, automobil e 
stores, pain t store s an d grocer y stores. 
Specia l Offer : Fo r 90 day s w e wil l shi p t o 
al l ne w agents $10.00 wort h o f Dudley' s 
Polis h fo r $5.00 . Tak e advantag e o f this 
specia l offe r a t once . 
Dudle y & Porte r Manufacturin g Co . 
116 South Main St., Muskogee, Okla. 
A Noteworthy Book 
Two Colored Women With the 
American Expeditionary Forces B Y 
Addie W. Hunton and Kathryn M . Johnson 
The only book on the market by persons of color who were in France during the period of the war. 
A thrilling, human-interest story; a 
combination of history and reminiscence ; by two women who served the 
soldiers in the camps of France for a 
period of nearly fifteen months. 
Read of the lights and shadows that 
came into the lives of the colored soldiers on duty overseas. 
Composed of fourteen chapters in addition to the Foreword and Afterthought. Illustrated with thirty pages 
of pictures brought from France. 
Price $2.50 Remit by Post Office Money Order 
AGENT S WANTE D 
Address all orders and communications to 
Addie W. Hunton or Kathryn M. Johnson 
P. 0. Box 387, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 206 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
FATHER TIME'S GIFT 
TO THE WORLD BIBLICAL women sought the enhancement 
of her natural beauty in her selection of 
myrrh and frankincense, which history tells us she used to the admiration of her husbandman. 
Queen Sheba in her ancient kingdom of Abyssinia demanded the best of the importation 
of oils and perfumes. 
Cleopatra in her oriental splendor believed 
and practiced the teachings of Homer laid 
down some 3,00 0 years before, that 
certain oils and lotions were conducive to entrancing beauty. 
Doubtless it was an irksome task 
to ancient woman—the preparation 
of her favorite toilette. And down 
through the ages has come some 
crude manner of mixing certain oils 
and essences to satisfy the demands of Dame 
Fashion in her quest of beauty. 
But not until fifteen years ago did "Father 
Time" give to women of the modern world 
a group of scientifically compounded preparations that meet her most exacting demands. 
Known at Home and Abroad 
Madam C. J. Walker's 
Wonderful Hair Grower Tetter Salve Vegetable Shampoo Soap Glossine Temple Grower Vanishing Cream Cleansing Cream Cold Cream Vegetable Hand Soap Complexion Soap Witch Hazel Jelly Compact Rouge Superfine Face Powder 
TH E MADA M C. J. WALKER 
MFG . CO. 640 NORT H WES T STREET . 
INDIANAPOLIS . IND . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 207 
FASHION BOOK MAILE D FRE E UPON REQUEST 
Real Human Hair Al l ou r wig s are 
han d mad e and 
• tried ; t o order, 
fro m maker to 
wearer . 
WIGS, Trans 
formations, switches, and Braids and 
all other articles of 
hair goods. 
No. 604— Price JIG.50 
We carry the largest selection of Hair Dressers' Tools. 
The celebrated Mme. Baum's Preparations 
whic h make s th e ski n velvetlike , th e hai r 
• ilklike . 
Mme . Baum' s Mai l Orde r Hous e P. O. BOX 146, 
Penn. Terminal Station, New York, N. Y. 
When writing, mention this paper. 
Learn Our System - Use Our Goods 
AN D 
See Yourself Not as You Are—But 
as You Would Like to Be 
Hawiian Products Company 
Manufacturers and 
Importers 
of 
HAWAIIAN BEAUTY 
PREPARATIONS 
for 
Men and Women 
Vanishino Cream.. .$0.50 
Dressing Oil 50 Face Powder 75 
Shampoo 50 Rouqe 50 
Hair Tonic 1.00 
Hair Beautifler $1.00 
Toilet Water 1.00 
Face Cream 50 Tetter and Eczema Ointment 50 
For Sale at all Drue; Stores 
and first class Beauty Parlors. 
By mail—postage extra. ) 
Agents Wanted. 
HAWAIIAN PRODUCTS CO., Dept. B., 3147 Calumet Ave,, Chicago, 111. 
HOTE L DAL E 
CAPE MAY , N. J . 
Comfort and Elegance Without Extravagance 
This Magnificent Hotel, Located in the 
Heart of the Most Beautiful Seashore 
Resort in the World, is replete with every modern improvement, superlative in construction, appointments, service and refined patronage. Orchestra daily, garage, hath 
houses, tennis, etc., on premises. Special attention 
given to ladies and children. 
Send for booklet. With Sanitarium added and 
Dr. C. A. Lewis of the University of Penn in attendance. 
A MONEY GETTER because it Is A CROWD GETTER. Churches and Clubs looking for a play that wil l afford an 
evening of Side-Splitting Fun, should have 
The Slabtown Convention AD entertainment In one act; full of wit and good humor. Scores of churches have cleared from 
One to Two Hundred Dollars in One Night PRICE, 60c. 
MISS NANNIE H. BURROUGHS, Author Lincoln Heights, Washington. D. C 
SPEND YOUR VACATION AT 
Beautiful Idlewild The must wonderfully Ideal spot where young and 
old cast aside for the time all the cares and worries 
of their strenuous, nerve-racking routine lives and 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature in all her wondrous glory. The waters of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly 
teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
D o you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting ! 
D o you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wil d flowers and wil d berries! 
Do you want a place to go where you can buil d up 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency! 
Do you enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, 
progressive people of the day—people who do things! 
Do you believe In progress and do you want to / 
have a part i n one of the most progressive movements of the time ! Surely I 
Then you wi n be interested In. and want to ** 
own a lot of your own In Beautiful Idlewild, f 
Michigan. If you act at once you can se- * 
cure a beautiful lot for only $35.M each; 
$0.00 cash; $1.00 per week. When your 
payments are completed the lot wil l be 
transferred to you by an absolute * 
warranty deed with abstract show- / 
log clear title, ' 
Good live energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 
1110 Hartford Bldg 
So. Dearborn St. 
Chicago, Ill. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 208 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Kelly Miller's Authentic History of Negro in World War 
A new and greatly 
improved history 
JUST OFF THE PRESS 
200 Pictures 
Price only $2.75 
750 Pages 
16 Color Plates 
Size 6'/2 x 8>/s inches, 750 Pages 
As we have fought for the rights 
of mankind and for the future 
peace and security of the world, 
the people want to be correctly 
and fully informed of the facts 
concerning OUR heroes—and this 
is TH E BOOK they are looking 
for. 
The 
Only 
History 
That 
Will 
Fully 
Satisfy 
The 
American 
Colored 
People 
This Boo k appeals to the Colore d People . The y are 
eager to buy it. Why ? Because it is the onl y Wa r 
Book published that thrillingly , graphically, yet faithfully describes the wonderful part the Colored Soldier 
has taken in the World Wa r and is absolutely fair to 
the Negro. 
It relates to the worl d how 300,000 Negroe s crossed 
the Nort h Atlantic , bravin g the terrors of the Submarine Peril, to battle for Democrac y against the blood ­
thirsty hordes of a wa r mad Lor d of the Hous e of 
Hohenzollern . 
Mor e than fifty pages of the Boo k devoted to the 
ACHIEVEMENT S O F TH E NEGR O I N TH E 
AMERICA N NAVY — Guardin g the Trans-Atlanti c 
Route to France—Battlin g the Submarine Peril—Th e 
Best Sailors in any Nav y in the World—Makin g a 
Nav y in Thre e Month s from Negr o Stevedores and 
Laborers—Wonderfu l Accomplishments of Ou r Negr o 
Yeome n and Yeowomen . 
AGENTS WANTED—Millions of these books will be sold, BIG 
MONE Y is being made by our sales people. Wil l you join us in the distribution of good helpful race books? Then send 25 cents for agents canvassing outfit. Write to 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO. No. 523 9th Street Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. Let us Send 
You a Suit Made to your measure, payable 
after received, with the clear 
understanding that if the fit is not 
perfect, or if you are not satisfied in 
every way; if you are not convinced 
that you have received afine, highgrade, stylish, splendid-fitting tailored suit made to your measure 
and have saved at least $15.00 
to $20.00, you are not under the 
slightest obligation to keep it. 
Don't hesitate or feel timid, 
simply send the suit back, no 
cost to you. You are not out 
one penny. Any money you may 
have paid us is refunded at once. 
SEND NO MONEY-just your 
name and address for FREE 
samples and latest styles, 
beautiful NEW samplebook all sent FREE — if you answer now. 
SAMPLES FREE 
Any man young or old, interested in saving money, who wants 
to dress well and not feel extravagant, is invited to answer at 
once and get our free book of cloth samples and latest fashions, with everything explained. Simply write letter or postal today, just say "Send me your 
samples" and get our whole proposition by return mail. Agents write too, we have 
a special deal for you. Try it, costs you nothing—just a stamp, get the FREE 
SAMPLES and low prices anyway. Learn something important about dressing 
well and saving money. Send at once. 
KNICKERBOCKER TAILORING COMPANY 
Department 847, CHICAGO. ILL. NIL E QUEE N 
FOR HAIR AND SKIN 
The preparations used by Cleopatra, The NIL E 
QUEEN , were of the same fine quality as those your 
druggist or beauty shop offers you today. Send for 
free descriptive Beauty Book. 
KASHMI R CHEMICA L CO . NEW KASHMIR BLDG . 
3423 Indiana Ave. CHICAGO, ILL. 