The CRISIS 
THE 
AMERICANNEGRO'S RECORD IN THE GREAT 
WORLD WAR 
LOYALTY 
VALOR 
ACHIEVEMENT 
ONE DOLLAR A YEAR MAY 1919 TEN CENTS A COPY The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
is a militant, viril e organization fighting consistently and persistently 
against Lynching , Peonage, "Jim-Crowism, " Disfranchisement and 
Prejudic e of every sort. 
O n Apri l 1st we numbered 190 Branche s wit h over 50,000 Members. 
B y June 22-29, the date of our Tent h Anniversar y Conference i n 
Cleveland, Ohio , we want On e Hundre d Thousan d Members. Th e 
campaign is no w on under the slogan : 
"We Are Coming, Father Abraham, One Hundred 
Thousand Strong!" 
Whateve r you r race, age or sex, if yo u believe i n genuine democracy yo u should be a membe r of the Nationa l Association . 
One Dolla r a Yea r Make s Yo u a Member. 
Tw o Dollars a Yea r Make s Yo u a Membe r and Bring s Yo u TH E 
CRISIS . 
Large r Contributions Ar e Earnestl y Requested i n Proportio n to 
You r Mean s and Interest i n the Work . 
If the colored ma n is to receive his share of democracy, we need 
you r help now ! 
Fill out and send in the coupon today I 
Dat e 1919. 
The Crisis is sent without furthe r charge to member s paying two dollars or more 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , Treasurer , 
70 Fift h Avenue , New York . 
SIR : 
I enclose $ in payment of membership dues for one year in the Nationa l 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People , with the stipulation that one 
dollar of any amount remitted herewith in excess of one dollar is for one year's subscription to TH E CRISIS . 
Name 
Street 
Cit y and State 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK 
NATIONA L OFFICER S 
President 
MOORFIELD STORE Y ' 
Vice-Presidents 
ARCHIBALD H. GRIMKE 
RE V JOH N HAYNES HOLMES 
BISHO P JOHN HURST 
CAP T ARTHU R B. SPINGAR N 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD 
EXECUTIV E OFFICER S 
Chairma n of the Boar d 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
O. G. VILLARD , Treasure r 
DR . W E. B. Du BOIS . Director of Publicacations and Research 
JOHN R. SHILLADY . Secretary 
JAMES WELDON J OHNSON , Field Secretary 
WALTER F. WHITE Assistant Secretary FIRST WAR HISTORY NUMBE R - EDITION 100,000 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY AND COPYRIGHTED BY TH E NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY. CONDUCTED BY W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS; AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, BUSINESS 
MANAGER 
Vol. 18—No. 1 MAY , 1919 Whole No. 103 
PICTURES 
Page 
COVER . Drawing. By Lorenzo Harris. 
NEEDHA M ROBERTS 15 
RE D CROSS NURSES, CAM P GRAN T 22 
A SESSION O F TH E PAN-AFRICA N CONGRESS 32 
ARTICLES 
PREJUDICE. A Poem. Georgia Douglas Johnson 14 
DOCUMENTS OF TH E WAR . Collected by W . E. Burghardt Du Bois 16 
TH E NATIONA L URBA N LEAGUE . Lillian A. Turner 25 
DEPARTMENT S 
OPINION 7 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D 
PEOPLE 23 
TH E LOOKIN G GLASS 27 
TH E HORIZON 33 
TH E JUN E ISSUE 
Th e June CRISI S will contain a supplement with a complete history of the Negro Soldier 
in the Worl d War . It will be a revelation. Orde r your copies early. 
Th e Jul y CRISI S will be Education Number. 
Th e August CRISI S will be Labo r Number . 
TE N CENTS A COPY ; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Th e date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS ; Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned 
Entered as second class matter November 2. 1910, at the post office at New York, New York, 
under the Act of March 3, 1879. 4 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already tilling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Science! The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
In Equipment and Teaching Force it is Not Surpassed by Any School for the 
Training of Colored Youth in the South. 
THE FALL TERM OPENED OCTOBER 1, 1918. 
For further information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce , Ohi o 
SUMMER SCHOOL 
Sixth Annual Session 
June 16 to July 26,1919 
Special arrangements have been made to 
maintain the same high excellence i n instruction force and work done. 
Al l of the equipment, buildings and grounds 
wil l be at the disposal of the, Summer 
School. 
Fees and al l expenses low. Ful l credit 
toward certificates, diplomas and degrees 
wil l be given for Summer School work. 
The Faculty for the Summer Session wil l 
be members of the University Faculty augmented by specialists along various lines. 
Courses wil l be offered i n Education, Psychology, English, Mathematics. History, 
Geography, Drawing, Business, Physica l 
Education, Music ; also i n Physics, Chemistry, Ethics, Sociology, French, German and 
Latin . 
Furthe r there wil l be courses in Vocational Study, Domestic Science, Domestic 
Ar t and Millinery . Additiona l courses wil l 
be offered as there may arise demands. 
W . S. SCARBOROUGH , 
President of the University. 
GILBER T H . JONES . 
Director of the Summer Session 
For full particulars writ e the Director. 
The Cheyney Training School for 
Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNA. 
A normal school of high grade for 
young colored men and women of good 
abilities, who desire to prepare themselves to be teachers. Courses include 
the regular academic and professional 
subjects, and special departments in domestic art, domestic science, manual 
training and agriculture. Board and 
tuition $125. Next regular term begins 
Thursday, September 18,1919. Summer 
school for teachers in active service, 
four weeks beginning July I. Board and 
tuition for the month $20.00. Fo r further particulars and catalog write 
Leslie Pinckney Hill , Principal, Cheyney, Penna. 
Mention THE CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 5 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located i n the City of Atlanta , Ga. 
The courses of study include Hig h School, Norma l 
School and College, wit h Manua l training and domestic science. Among the teachers are graduates 
of Yale , Harvard, Dartmouth and Wellesley. Fortynine years of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from al l parts of the south, Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
Presiden t EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA. 
THE FLORIDA A. & M . COLLEGE 
Tallahassee, Florida 
Offers long and short courses in 
Mechanic Arts, in Home Economics 
in Agriculture, in Education and in 
Science. 
For Catalog Address 
NATHA N B. YOUNG , President 
P . O . DRAWE R 524 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1917 
SOUT H ATLANT A GEORGI A 
Most beautiful campus of 70 acres, commodious buildings with modern conveniences. 
High Scholarship — Talented Faculty — Well 
equipped library and laboratories—Literary 
societies—Athletics—-Co-educational— Expenses 
very low. - $100 per year of eight months 
will pay tuition, board, room, etc. 
Comfortable dormitories with steam heat 
and gas light. 
COURSES OF STUD Y 
Domestic Science for girls, cooking, sewing, 
dressmaking and embroidery. 
Pre-Academy—7th and 8th grades. 
Academy—Four years with diploma. 
Pre-Medical—Two years above academy. 
College—Four years leading to A. B. degree. 
Normal—Five years above grades with diploma. 
First Semester opened October 2, 1918. 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING , President. 
BEREAN MANUAL TRAINING 
AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
South College Ave. and N. 19th Street 
Phila., Pa. 
Fall Term and Twentieth Year opened 
Tuesday, October 1, 1918. Domestic 
Art, Industrial Art, Mechanical Art, 
Commercial and English. 
Sessions both day and evening. 
Age, sex or previous training no bar 
if applicant has good character. 
Years of honorable records and 
worthy traditions our trade-mark. 
Helpfulness our object. 
Efficiency ou r aim . 
Write or visit the School now. 
MATTHEW ANDERSON, Principal 
1926 S. College Ave. Phila., Pa. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA . 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A. , 
athletics, all live features. 
Fo r information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. Fo r literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE, President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE , N . C . 
Blddle University, operated under the auspices of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Departments—High School, Arts and Sciences Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course is the requirement for entrance to the first rear 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the 
scientific, German is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely English. 
Greek and Hebrew are taught in the others. 
All students in the High School Dept. are required 
to take trades in the Industrial Dept. 
For further Information, address 
President H. L. McCrorey, 
Charlotte. N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga . 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College Preparatory, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training, Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began October 1, 1918. 
For further information address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN, President 
BISHO P J. S. FLIPPER , Chairman Trustee Board. 
Mention THE CRISIS. 6 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Knoxville College 
Beautifu l Situation. Healthfu l Location . Th e 
Best Mora l and Spiritua l Environment. A Splendid 
Intellectua l Atmosphere . Note d for Honest and 
Thoroug h Work . 
Offers ful l courses in the following departments: 
College , Normal , Hig h School, Gramma r School and 
Industrial . 
Good water , steam heat, electri c lights, good 
drainage . Expense s ver y reasonable. 
Fal l Ter m Bega n Septembe r 18, 1918. 
Fo r informatio n address 
President R . W . M c GRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
WILE Y UNIVERSIT Y 
MARSHALL , TEXA S 
Recognized as a college of the First Class by Texas 
and Louisiana State Boards of Education. Harvard , 
Yal e and Columbia represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M . W . DOGAN , President 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND , LA . 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A . B . H . Society of Ne w York . Students 
fro m six different states. Graduate s exempted on first grade by Louisiana , Arkansa s 
and Oklahoma . 
O. L . COLEMAN , President 
THE A. & T. COLLEGE 
SUMMER SCHOOL 
TH E TWENTIET H ANNUA L SESSIO N wil l 
begin June 16th, and continue for six 
weeks. In addition to the courses for teachers of academi c subjects, strong courses 
wil l be given for teachers of Agriculture , 
Manua l Training , Domesti c Art , Ram a and 
Basketry . 
Th e following noted institutions are represented on the faculty : 
Harvard Columbia 
Cornell Chicago 
Howard Union 
Atlanta Fisk 
Drexel Ins. Hampton Ins. 
Myrtilla Minor Normal School 
Armour Institute of Technology 
Ithaca Conservatory of Music 
Pratt Institute A. & T. College 
Summe r School Bulletins are sent on request 
Ever y modern sanitar y convenience can be 
found in the commodious dormitories. Bat h 
rooms wit h showers and tubs are situated 
on every floor. 
Fo r furthe r information address 
PREST. DUDLEY 
A. and T . Summe r School 
GREENSBORO , N. C . 
The Slater Industrial and 
State Normal School 
For Colored Yout h of Both Sexes 
WINSTON-SALEM , N . C . 
I. Offering Standard Courses 
I n Academi c Subjects 
In Industrial and Vocational Subjects, 
In Education. 
II. Graduates receive the Teachers' Certificate. 
III. Located amid the foothills of the mountain section of Western Nort h Carolina 
and the health conditions are ideal. 
IV . Accommodations excellent and expenses 
moderate. 
Fo r furthe r informatio n communicat e wit h 
S. G . ATKINS , Principal 
SLATE R STAT E NORMA L SCHOOL , 
Winston-Salem , N . C . 
Lincoln University 
Beginning September 22, 1919, the requirement for admission to the Theological Department will be graduation from _ a College of 
Libera l Arts. Youn g Me n wishing to prepare 
for the Ministr y in a Seminary, all whose resources will henceforth be devoted to the education of the adequately trained alone, are 
invited to write to 
President, John B. Rendall 
Lincol n Universit y P. 0., Pennsylvania . 
Summer School 
at the 
West Virginia Collegiate Institute 
June 16 to Jul y 25 
Fo r furthe r informatio n address 
BYR D PRILLERMAN , President 
Institute , West Virginia . 
Bell Phone Spruce 1924 30-Day System Position 
Derrick 
Shorthand School 
Chads' Building 
1435 Chestnut Street 
PHILADELPHIA 
Enroll Immediately to Hold Place 
in Class 
Send for Enrollment Blank and full information 
Day and Evening Classes 
NOTE—W e ar e already enrollin g Summe r 
Students and would advis e al l who desire 
to take Specia l Summe r Cours e to send i n 
applicatio n A T ONC E as place s wil l be a t 
a premium . 
Educational Institutions 
Continued on page 38? 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS 
Vol. 18-No. 1 MAY , 1919 Whole No. 103 
Opinion 
of W. E. B. DuBois 
M Y MISSION 
I WEN T to Paris because today 
the destinies of mankind center there. Make no mistake as 
to this, my readers. 
Podunk may easily persuade itself 
that only Podunk matters and that 
nothing is going on i n New York . 
The South Sea Islander may live ignorant and careless of London. Some 
Americans may think that Europe 
does not count, and a few Negroes 
may argue vociferously that the 
Negro problem is a domestic matter, to 
be settled in Richmond and New 
Orleans. 
Bu t all these careless thinkers are 
wrong. The destinies of mankind for 
a hundred years to come are being 
settled today i n a small room of the 
Hotel Crillon by four unobtrusive 
gentlemen who glance out speculatively now and then to Cleopatra's 
Needle on the Place de l a Concorde. 
Yo u need not believe this if you 
do not want to. They do not care 
what you believe. They have the 
POWER . They are settling the 
world's problems and you can believe 
what you choose as long as they control the ARMIE S and NAVIES , the 
world supply of CAPITA L and the 
PRESS . 
Other folks of the world who think, 
believe and act;—THIRTY-TW ONATIONS, PEOPLE S and RACES , ha
permanent headquarters in Paris. 
Not simply England, Italy and the 
Great Powers are there, but all the 
little nations; not simply little nations, but little groups who want to 
be nations, like the Letts and Finns, 
the Armenians and Jugo-Slavs, Irish 
and Ukrainians. Not only groups, 
but races have come—Jews, Indians, 
Arabs and All-Asia . Great churches, 
like the Greek Orthodox and the 
Roman Catholic, are watching on the 
ground. Great organizations, like the 
American Peace Society, the League 
to Enforce Peace, the American Federation of Labor, the Woman's Suffrage Association and a hundred 
others are represented in Paris today. 
In fine, not a single great, serious 
movement or idea i n Government, 
Politics, Philanthropy or Industry i n 
the civilized world has omitted to 
send and keep in Paris its Eyes and 
Ears and Fingers! An d yet some 
American Negroes actually asked 
WH Y I went to help represent the 
Negro world in Afric a and Americ a 
and the Islands of the Sea. 
Bu t why did I not explain my reasons and mission before going? 
Because I am not a fool. Because I 
knew perfectly well that any movement to bring the attention of the 
world to the Negro problem at this 
crisis would be stopped the moment 
the Great Powers heard of it. When, 
therefore, I was suddenly informed 
of a chance to go to France as a newspaper correspondent, I did not talk 
—I went. 
What did I do when I got there? 
First, there were certain things that 
I did NO T do. I did not hold an 
anti-lynching meeting on the Boulevard des Italiens. I would to God I 
7 8 TH E
could have, but I knew that France 
is still under martial law,—that no 
meeting can be held today in France, 
anywhere or at any time, without the 
consent of the Government; no newspaper can publish a line without the 
consent of the Censor and no individual can stay in France unless the 
French consent. 
Bu t it did not follow that because 
I could not do everything I could do 
nothing. I first went to the 
American Peace Commission and said 
frankly and openly: " I want to call 
a Pan-African Congress in Paris. " 
The Captain to whom I spoke smiled 
and shook his head. "Impossible," 
he said, and added: "The French 
Government would not permit it." 
"Then, " said I innocently: "It's up 
to me to get French consent!" "It 
is! " he answered, and he looked relieved. 
Wit h the American Secret Service 
at my heels I then turned to the 
French Government. There are six 
colored deputies in the French 
Parliament and one is an under-secretary 
in the Wa r Department. "O f course, 
we can have a Pan-African 
Congress," he said — "I'll see 
Clemenceau." He saw Clemenceau, and there 
was a week's pause. Clemenceau saw 
Pichon, and there was another pause. 
Meantime, our State Department 
chuckled and announced that there 
would be no Congress and refused 
Negroes passports. England followed suit and refused to allow the 
Secretary of the Aborigines 
Protection Society even to visit Paris, while 
the South Africa n natives were not 
allowed to sail. 
Bu t there are si x Negroes in the 
French House and Clemenceau needs 
their votes. There were 280,000 
black Africa n troops in the wa r before whom France stands with uncovered head. The net result was 
that Clemenceau, Prime Ministe r of 
France, gave us permission to hold 
the Pan-African Congress in Paris. 
 CRISIS 
What could a Pan-African 
Congress do? It could not agitate the 
Negro problem i n any particular 
country, except i n so fa r as that problem could be plausibly shown to be 
part of the problem of the future of 
Africa . The problem of the future 
of Afric a was a difficult and delicate 
question before the Peace Conference 
—so difficult and so delicate that the 
Conference was disposed to welcome 
advice and co-operation. 
If the Negroes of the world could 
have maintained i n Paris during the 
entire sitting of the Peace 
Conference a central headquarters with experts, clerks and helpers, they could 
have settled the future of Afric a at a 
cost of less than $10,000. 
A s it was the Congress cost $750. 
Yet wit h this meagre sum a Congress 
of fifty-eight delegates, representing 
sixteen different Negro groups, was 
assembled. This Congress passed 
resolutions which the entire press of 
the world has approved, despite the 
fact that these resolutions had two 
paragraphs of tremendous significance to us: 
Wherever persons of African descent are civilized and able to meet 
the tests of surrounding culture, they 
shall be accorded the same rights as 
their fellow citizens; they shall not 
be denied on account of race or color 
a voice in their own Government, justice before the courts and economic 
and social equality according to ability and desert. 
Whenever it is proven that African 
natives are not receiving just treatment at the hands of any State or 
that any State deliberately excludes 
its civilized citizens or subjects of 
Negro descent from its body politic and 
cultural, it shall be the duty of the 
League of Nations to bring the matter to the attention of the civilized 
world. 
Precisely the same principles are 
being demanded today by the Jews OPINION 9 
and the Japanese. An d despite the 
enormous significance of these demands, Colonel House of the 
American Peace Commission received me 
and assured me that he wished these 
resolutions presented to the Peace 
Conference. Lloy d George wrote me 
that he would give our demands "his 
careful consideration." The French 
Premie r offered to arrange an audience for the President and Secretary 
of the Conference. Portugal and 
Belgium, great colonial powers, offered 
complete co-operation. 
The League for the Rights of Man, 
which freed Dreyfus, appointed a 
special commission to hear not only 
of the African , but the facts as to the 
American Negro problem. 
We got, i n fact, the ear of the civilized world and if it had been possible 
to stay longer and organize more 
thoroughly and spread the truth,— 
what might not have been accomplished ? 
A s it was, we have organized the 
"Pan-Africa n Congress" as a permanent body, with M . Diagne as president and myself as secretary, and we 
plan an international quarterly 
BLAC K REVIE W to be issued in 
English, French and possibly in 
Spanish and Portuguese. 
The world-fight for black rights is 
on! 
ROBER T R. MOTO N 
NEITHE R R. R. Moton nor W. 
E . B. DuBois had the slightest idea that the other was 
planning to sail for France, 
December 1, until they met in 
Washington on a quest for passports, November 30. They sailed together on 
the Orizaba and frankly discussed 
their agreements and disagreements. 
When they reached France, each went 
about his own business. 
Dr. Moton was sent by the 
President of the United States and the 
Secretary of Wa r to see and talk to 
Negro troops. Dr. DuBois was sent 
by the N . A . A . C. P. and TH E CRISI S 
to gather the historical facts concerning Negro troops and to call a PanAfrica n Congress. 
On the night before Dr. Moton 
started out a colored man of national 
reputation and unquestioned integrity who had been in France six 
months took him aside and told him 
frankly the situation: the rampant 
American prejudice against black 
troops and officers and the bitter resentment of the victims. Dr. 
Moton's letters gave him every opportunity. A special Arm y Order preceded him, which read: 
Dr. R. R. Moton, President of 
Tuskegee University, will be present in 
the Divisional area for the next few 
days. The Division Commander directs that commanding officers render all possible assistance in any visit 
or inspection Dr. Moton desires to 
make. They will also see that he is 
accorded every opportunity to make 
any observation he may wish to make. 
What did Dr. Moton do? He rushed 
around as fast as possible. He took 
with him and had at his elbow every 
moment that evil genius of the Negro 
race, Thomas Jesse Jones, a white 
man. Dr. Moton took no time to investigate or inquire. He made a few 
speeches, of which one is reported by 
a hearer as follows: 
The address delivered by Dr. 
Moton to the men consisted of one or 
two jokes by a colored preacher, the 
assurance that the people at home 
were proud of them and the manner 
in which they should act upon their 
return to the United States, dwelling 
almost entirely upon the phrase "Not 
to be arrogant." After he had spoken 
to the men the Major informed the 
officers that Dr. Moton desired to 
hold secret conference with them. 
All officers congregated in the office. 
After being presented to the officers 
Dr. Moton stated that he had been 
sent to France by President Wilson 10 TH E
and Mr. Baker for the purpose of 
speaking to the colored troops. He 
also stated that he had just left Paris 
where he had been in conference with 
President Wilson and had asked the 
President his views as to the practical application of democracy toward 
the colored man in the United States, 
but ending by saying: "I was very 
much pleased with his reply; but, gentlemen, I cannot quote the President." 
After Dr. Moton finished his talk 
no opportunity was given to the officers to inform him of the conditions 
that had existed in France, and he 
did not seek any information relative 
to same from any of the officers after 
the conference ended. 
Dr. Moton then returned to Paris 
and met Colonel House, General 
Pershing and others. Colonel House 
told the writer that he urged Dr. 
Moton to remain in Paris and that if he 
would, Colonel House would give him 
an opportunity to appear i n person 
before the Peace Conference to speak 
for the black world. Dr. Moton refused to stay, but promised to return. 
He then went to England and seA cured an audience with Lloy d George, LEAGU E O F NATION S is 
Prime Ministe r of England. The 
destiny of the black race today is in 
the hands of England and the destiny 
national power to curb the anti- of England is in the hands of Lloy d 
George. Yet, Dr. Moton did not keep Negro policy of the his appointment; but rushed to catch 
his boat in order to be present at the 
Tuskegee Conference. He sailed, with 
Thomas Jesse Jones still watching 
him, and did not return to Paris or 
to the Pan-African Congress, which 
he said he favored and promised to 
support. 
No one questions the personal integrity of Robert Russa Moton or his 
kindly disposition, but no one, friend 
or foe, can look these facts in the face 
and not feel bitter disappointment. 
 CRISIS 
T O MR . EMMET T SCOT T 
THE Negro world and you wil l 
bear us witness that TH E 
CRISI S and its Edito r has 
given you loyal and unselfish 
co-operation, even at the cost of suspicion and criticism. We have done 
this, FIRST , because the wa r demanded, and had a right to demand, 
unswerving loyalty and unity on the 
part of the Nation and its constituent groups; and, SECONDLY , because we believed that you were doing all that was possible under very 
difficult circumstances. A visit to 
Europe has, however, revealed to the 
Editor a state of affairs in regard 
to Negro troops which is simply 
astounding! Some of these facts we 
are publishing this month and others 
we shall reveal later. Meantime, we 
are withholding judgment i n your 
case and simply asking you publicly 
three questions: 
1. Did you know the treatment 
which black troops were receiving in 
France? 
2. If you did NOT know, why did 
you not find out? 
3. If you DID know, what did you 
do about it? 
TH E LEAGU E O F NATIONS 
absolutely necessary to the 
salvation of the Negro race. 
Unless we have some superUnited States and 
South Africa , we are doomed eventually to fight for our rights. The proposed internation wil l have overwhelming influences around it which 
wil l oppose the doctrines of "race" 
antagonism and inferiority. It wil l 
from the beginning recognize Negro 
nations. It wil l be open to the larger 
influences of civilization and culture 
which are ineffective i n the United 
States because of the prevailing barbarism of the rulin g classes in the 
South and their overwhelming polit­OPINION 11 
ical power. Wha t we cannot accomplish before the choked conscience of 
America , we have an infinitely better 
chance to accomplish before the organized Public Opinion of the World. 
Peace for us is not simply Peace from 
Wars like the past, but relief from 
the spectre of the Great Wa r of Races 
which wil l be absolutely inevitable 
unless the selfish nations of white 
civilization are curbed by a Great 
Worl d Congress i n which black and 
white and yellow sit and speak and 
act. The refusal to adopt the Japanese race equality amendment is deplorable, but it is an argument for 
and not against a Nation of Nations. 
It is the Beginning of a mighty End . 
HISTOR Y 
MOS T American Negroes do 
not realize that the imperative duty of the moment is 
to fix in history the status 
of our Negro troops. Already subtle influences are preparing a fatal 
attack. It is repeated openly among 
influential persons: "The black laborers did well—the black privates 
can fight—but the Negro officer is a 
failure." This is not true and the 
facts exist to disprove it, but they 
must be marshalled with historical 
vision and scientific accuracy. 
Sensing this some months ago, the 
National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People commissioned Dr. DuBois to prepare a 
history and appropriated $2,000 toward the expense. Dr. DuBois immediately sought to associate with 
him — not as subordinates, but on 
terms of full equality — a board of 
three or four editors and a large consulting board of colored men. It immediately developed that co-operation was impossible. 
A white man, Mr. F. P. 
Stockbridge of New York, had already 
planned and was preparing a popular 
history and had secured the co-operation of Mr. Emmett Scott and 
others. Neither he nor Mr . Scott 
wished to change their plans and 
neither would accept co-operation, 
except upon terms which we deemed 
impossible. Mr. C. G. Woodson, 
Editor of The Journal of Negro History, 
refused to co-operate except as Editor-in-Ch
Unit y being thus plainly impossible, Dr. DuBois disposed to drop the 
project as far as he was personally 
concerned and leave the work to 
others. 
The Executive Officers of the N . A . 
A . C. P., however, thought it best for 
Dr. DuBois to proceed to France and 
look over the field especially with regard to a Pan-African Congress and 
the facts obtainable there concerning 
Negro troops. 
The result of this trip is that we 
are convinced: 
1. That the truth concerning 
Negroes in this war must be told impartially and entirely. 
2. That no person in official position dare tell the whole truth. 
3. That notwithstanding the unfortunate duplication of effort and 
multiplying of histories, it is the plain 
duty of the N . A . A . C. P. and TH E 
CRISI S to compile and publish a complete history of "The Negro in the 
Revolution of the Twentieth 
Century." 
Such a history is, therefore, projected in three volumes, preceded by 
a brief forecast. The forecast wil l be 
issued as a supplement to the June 
CRISIS . It wil l be a short but complete history of the Negro in the war. 
It will be followed this year by 
Volume I of the full history; Volumes II 
and III wil l appear in 1920 and 1921. 
Ever y reader of TH E CRISI S is 
asked to help in the compilation of 
this history. Please write us immediately and let us know what co-operation we may expect. 12 TH E CRISIS 
RAP E 
THE charge of rape against 
colored Americans was invented by the white South 
after Reconstruction to excuse mob violence. No such wholesale charge was dreamed of in slavery days and during the wa r black 
men were often the sole protection 
of white women. 
Afte r the war, when murder and 
mob violence was the recognized 
method of re-enslaving blacks, it was 
discovered that it was only necessary 
to add a charge of rape to justify 
before the North and Europe any 
treatment of Negroes. The custom 
became widespread. In vain have 
Negroes and their friends protested 
that in less than one-quarter of the 
cases of lynching Negroes has rape 
been even alleged as an excuse. An d 
in the alleged cases guilt has not been 
even probable in the vast majority of 
cases. 
We do not for a moment deny or 
seek to deny that Negroes are guilty 
of rape and of other horrible crimes. 
What we do deny and what the facts 
overwhelmingly prove is that as a 
race they are less guilty of such 
crimes of violence than any other 
group similarly oppressed by poverty 
and compulsory ignorance. 
Today the nasty and absolutely 
false charge returns to justify the 
outrageous treatment of Negroes by 
Americans in France. 
What is the truth ? 
I have written to twenty-one 
Mayors of towns and cities in all 
parts of France where Negro troops 
have been quartered asking them as 
to the conduct of black troops. These 
are some of their replies: 
Montmorillon (Vienne) 
"They have earned our high regard by their discipline and 
their faultless behavior." 
Le Mans (Sarthe) 
"They have been accused of no 
crimes or misdemeanors." 
St. Die (Vosges) 
"Very excellent conduct." 
Bourbonne les Bains (Haute-Marne) 
"Pleasant remembrances and irreproachable conduct." 
Liverdun (Meurthe-et-Moselle) 
"Excellent conduct — no complaints." 
Rayon l'Etape (Vosges) 
"Fine character and exquisite 
courtesy." 
Fresne (Haute-Marne) 
"No complaints concerning their 
conduct." 
Domfront (Orne) 
"Won the esteem and sympathy 
of all the population." 
Marbache (Meurthe et Moselle) 
"No complaint — well disciplined." 
Bordeaux (Gironde) 
"No unfavorable comments." 
Serqueux (Haute-Marne) 
"Well-conducted-—no crimes." 
Chamberey (Savoie) 
"Proud to welcome them." 
Brest (Finistere) 
"Not qualified to give information." 
St. Nazaire (Loir e Inferieure) 
"Cannot give any information." 
Docelles (Vosges) 
"Good conduct, good discipline 
and fine spirit." 
Couptrain (Mayenne) 
"Perfect propriety without complaint." 
Gezoncourt (Meurthe-et-Moselle) 
"No complaint as to conduct or 
morals." 
Frouard (Meurthe-et-Moselle) 
"Well-regulated conduct." 
We have, too, official figures covering the Ninety-second Division, consisting of Negro troops, wit h largely 
Negro company officers. 
Only ONE soldier of the Ninetysecond Division in France was convicted of rape, while TWO others 
were convicted of intent to rape. 
It is doubtful if another Divisio n OPINION 13 
of the U . S. Arm y in France has a 
better record. 
What was the real animus back of 
this wholesale accusation? It was 
the fact that many Americans would 
rather have lost the war than to see 
a black soldier talking to a white woman. Fo r instance, the Mayor of 
Bar-sur-Aube issued this Order, on 
June 26, 1918: 
According to orders given by 
American Military authorities, it is 
strongly recommended that no French 
women receive visits from colored 
soldiers or talk tvith them on the 
streets. 
On the other hand, what is the official American opinion of Negro 
troops ? 
General Pershing in his address to 
the Ninety-second Division at Le 
Mans, France, January 29, 1919, 
said: 
"The Ninety-second Division has, 
without a doubt, been a success in its 
work at the front, and I desire to 
compliment the officers and men upon 
the discipline and morale which has 
existed in this command during its 
stay in France." 
Brigadier-General Hay, 184th Brigade, Ninety-second Division, said: 
"I have been with colored troops 
for twenty-five years, and I have 
never seen a better soldier." 
Captain Willis, Supply Officer, 
365th Infantry, said: 
"The troops of the Ninety-second 
Division are the best disciplined and 
best saluting soldiers I have seen in 
France." 
Brigadier-General Sherburne said: 
"The Brigade Commander wishes 
to record in General Orders the entire 
satisfaction it has given him to have 
commanded the first brigade of 
Negro Artillery ever organized. This 
satisfaction is due to the excellent record the men have made." 
Allen J . Greer, Colonel, General 
Staff, signs this order of General 
Ballou: 
"Five months ago today the Ninety 
-second Division landed in France. 
"After seven weeks of training it 
took over a Sector in the Front Line 
and since that time some portion of 
the Division has been practically continuously under fire. 
"It participated in the last battle of 
the War with creditable success, continually pressing the attack against 
highly organized defensive works. It 
advanced successfully on the first day 
of the battle, attaining its objectives 
and capturing poisoners. This in the 
face of determined opposition by an 
alert enemy and against rifle, machine guns and artillery fire. The 
issue of the second day's battle, was 
rendered indecisive by the order to 
cease firing at eleven a. m., ivhen the 
Armistice became effective." 
A report from the officer in charge 
of Leave Area, November 6, 1918, 
says: 
"Nothing but the highest praise can 
be given the colored soldier for the 
manner in which he conducted himself while in France. He conducted 
himself in a gentlemanly manner in 
every sector in which the Division 
operated, and won for himself the 
love and commendation of the French 
people." 
RETURNIN G SOLDIERS 
are returning from war! 
TH E CRISIS and tens of 
thousands of black men 
were drafted into a great 
struggle. Fo r bleeding France and 
what she means and has meant and 
will mean to us and humanity and 
against the threat of German race arrogance, we fought gladly and to the 
last drop of blood; for America and 
her highest ideals, we fought in faroff hope; for the dominant southern 
oligarchy entrenched in Washington, 
we fought in bitter resignation. Fo r 
the America that represents and 
gloats in lynching, disfranchisement, 
caste, brutality and devilish insult— 14 TH E CRISIS 
for this, in the hateful upturning and 
mixing of things, we were forced by 
vindictive fate to fight, also. 
But today we return! We return 
from the slavery of uniform which 
the world's madness demanded us to 
don to the freedom of civil garb. We 
stand again to look America squarely 
in the face and call a spade a spade. 
We sing: This country of ours, despite all its better souls have done 
and dreamed, is yet a shameful land. 
It lynches. 
An d lynching is barbarism of a degree of contemptible nastiness unparalleled in human history. Yet. for 
fifty years we have lynched two 
Negroes a week, and we have kept this 
up right through the war. 
It disfranchises its own citizens. 
Disfranchisement is the deliberate 
theft and robbery of the only protection of poor against rich and black 
against white. The land that disfranchises its citizens and calls itself a 
democracy lies and knows it lies. 
It encourages ignorance. 
It has never really tried to educate 
the Negro. A dominant minority 
does not want Negroes educated. It 
wants servants, dogs, whores and 
monkeys. An d when this land allows 
a reactionary group by its stolen political power to force as many black 
folk into these categories as it possibly can, it cries in contemptible hypocrisy : "They threaten us with degeneracy ; they cannot be educated." 
It steals from us. 
It organizes industry to cheat us. 
It cheats us out of our land; it cheats 
us out of our labor. It confiscates 
our savings. It reduces our wages. 
It raises our rent. It steals our 
profit. It taxes us without representation. It keeps us consistently and 
universally poor, and then feeds us 
on charity and derides our poverty. 
It insults us. 
It has organized a nation-wide and 
latterly a world-wide propaganda of 
deliberate and continuous insult and 
defamation of black blood wherever 
found. It decrees that it shall not be 
possible in travel nor residence, work 
nor play, education nor instruction 
for a black man to exist without tacit 
or open acknowledgment of his inferiority to the dirtiest white dog. 
An d it looks upon any attempt to 
question or even discuss this dogma 
as arrogance, unwarranted assumption and treason. 
This is the country to which we 
Soldiers of Democracy return. This 
is the fatherland for which we 
fought! But it is our fatherland. It 
was right for us to fight. The faults 
of our country are our faults. Unde r 
similar circumstances, we would fight 
again. But by the God of Heaven, we 
are cowards and jackasses if now that 
that war is over, we do not marshal 
every ounce of our brain and brawn to 
fight a sterner, longer, more unbending battle against the forces of hell in 
our own land. 
We return. 
We return from fighting. 
We return fighting. 
Make way for Democracy! We 
saved it in France, and by the Great 
Jehovah, we will save it in the United 
States of America, or know the reason why. 
PREJUDICE 
GEORGIA DOUGLA S JOHNSO N 
THES E fell miasmi c rings of mist, wit h 
ghoulish menace bound, 
Their noose-horizons tightenin g my littl e 
worl d around, 
The y stil l the throbbing wil l to sing, to 
dance, to speed away, 
An d fling the soul insurgen t back into its 
shell of clay : 
Beneath these crusted silences a seething 
Etn a lies, 
Th e fire of whose furnaces ma y sleep but 
never dies! NEEDHA M ROBERTS , 369th U . S. INFANTRY , FORMERL Y 15T H N . Y . N , G. , DECORATE D WIT H 
TH E CROI X D E GUERRE , WIT H PALM , AN D WEARIN G TW O SERVIC E STRIPE S AN D TW O 
WOUN D STRIPES . 
15 DOCUMENTS OF TH E WA R 
CoLLECTE D B Y W . E . BURGHARD T DUBOIS 
T
H E following documents have come into the hands of the Editor. He has absolute 
proof of their authenticity. The first document was sent out last August at the 
request of the American Army by the French Committee which is the official means of 
communication between the American forces and the French. It represents American 
and not French opinion and we have been informed that when the French Ministry 
heard of the distribution of this document among the Prefects and Sous-Prefects of 
France, they ordered such copies to be collected and burned. 
MISSION MILITAIR E FRANÇAISE 
près l'Armée Américaine. 
Le 7 août 1918. 
CONFIDENTIEL 
A U SUJET DES TROUPES NOIRES AMERICAINES 
1°. Il importe que les Officiers Français 
appelés à exercer un commandement sur les 
troupes noires américaines, ou à vivre à leur 
contact, aient une notion exacte de la situation des nègres aux ETATS-UNIS. Les 
considérations exposées dans la note suivante 
devraient donc leur être communiquées, et 
il y a un intérêt considérable, à ce qu'elles 
soient connues et largement diffuses. Il appartiendra mémo aux Autorités Militaires 
Françaises, de renseigner à ce sujet par 
l'intermédiaire des Autorités civiles, les populations françaises des cantonncmonts de 
troupes américaines de couleur. 
2°. Le point de vue américain sur la 
"question nègre" peut paraître discutable à 
bien des esprits français. Mais il ne nous 
appartient pas, à nous Français, de discuter 
ce que certains appellent un "préjudice." 
L'opinion Américaine est unanime sur la 
"question noire," et n'admettrait pas la discussion. 
Le nombre élevé de nègres aux ETATSUNIS (15 millions environ) créérait pour 
la race blanche de la République un danger 
de dégénérescence si une séparation inexorable n'était faite entre noirs et blancs. 
Comme ce danger n'existe pas pour la 
race française, le public français s'est 
habitué à traiter familièrement le "noir" et 
à être très indulgent à son égard. 
Cette indulgence et cette familiarité blessent profendément les Américains. Ils les 
considèrent comme une atteinte à leurs 
dogmes nationaux. Ils craignent que le 
contact des Français n'inspirent aux noirs 
américains des prétentions qu'ils considèrent 
comme intolérables. Il est indispensable que 
tous les efforts soient faits pour éviter 
FRENC H MILITAR Y MISSIO N 
Stationed with the American Army 
August 7, 1918. 
SECRET INFORMATION CONCERNING 
BLACK AMERICAN TROOPS 
1. It is important for French officers who 
have been called upon to exercise command 
over black American troops, or to live in 
close contact with them, to have an exact 
idea of the position occupied by Negroes 
in the United States. The information set 
forth in the following communication ought 
to be given to these officers and it is to 
their interest to have these matters known 
and widely disseminated. It will devolve 
likewise on the French Military Authorities, 
through the medium of the Civil Authorities, to give information on this subject to 
the French population residing in the cantonments occupied by American colored 
troops. 
2. The American attitude upon the Negro question may seem a matter for discussion to many French minds. But we 
French are not in our province if we undertake to discuss what some call "prejudice." 
American opinion is unanimous on the 
"color question" and does not admit of any 
discussion. 
The increasing number of Negroes in the 
United States (about 15,000,000) would 
create for the white race in the Republic a 
menace of degeneracy were it not that an 
impassable gulf has been made between 
them. 
As this danger does not exist for the 
French race, the French public has become 
accustomed to treating the Negro with familiarity and indulgence. 
This indulgence and this familiarity are 
matters of grievous concern to the Americans. They consider them an affront to 
their national policy. They are afraid that 
contact with the French will inspire in 
black Americans aspirations which to them 
16 DOCUMENTS O F TH E WA R 17 
d'indisposer profondément l'opinion américaine. 
Bien que citoyen des ETATS UNIS, 
l'homme de couleur est considéré par 
l'Américain Blanc comme un être inférieur 
avec lequel on ne peut avoir que des relations d'affaires ou de service. On lui reproche une certaine inintelligence, son indiscrétion, son manque de conscience civique 
ou professionnelle, sa familiarité. 
Les vices du nègre sont un danger constant pour l'Américain, qui doit les réprimer sévèrement. Par exemple, les troupes 
noires Américaines en France ont donné 
lieu, à elles seules, à autant de plaintes pour 
tentatives de viol, que tout le reste de 
l'Armée, et cependant, on ne nous a envoyé 
comme soldats qu'une élite au point de vue 
physique et moral, car le déchet, à l'incorporation a été énorme. 
CONCLUSION 
1°. Il faut éviter toute intimité trop 
grande d'officiers français avec des officiers noirs, avec lesquels, on peut être correct et aimable, mais qu'on ne peut traiter 
sur le même pied que des officiers blancs 
Américains sans blesser profondément ces 
derniers. Il ne faut pas partager leur table 
et éviter le serrement de mains et les conversations ou fréquentations en dehors du 
service. 
2° . Il ne faut pas vanter d'une manière 
exagérée les troupes noires américains, surtout devant des Américains. Reconnaître 
leurs qualités et leurs services, mais en 
termes modérés conformes à la stricte réalité. 
3°. Tâcher d'obtenir des populations des 
cantonnements qu'elle ne gâtent pas les 
nègres. Les Américains sont indignés de 
toute intimité PUBLIQUE de femme blanche 
avec des noirs. Ils ont élevé récemment des 
véhémentes protestations contre une gravure de la "Vie Parisienne" intitulée 
"l'Enfant du Dessert" représentant une femme en cabinet particulier avec un nègre. Les 
familiarités des blanches avec les noirs sont, 
du reste, profondément regrettées de nos 
coloniaux expérimentés qui y voient une 
perte considérable du prestige de la race 
blanche. 
L'autorité militaire ne peut intervenir 
directement dans cette question, mais elle 
peut influer sur les populations par les 
Autorités civiles. 
(Signé) LINARD. 
[the whites] appear intolerable. It is of 
the utmost importance that every effort be 
made to avoid profoundly estranging American opinion. 
Although a citizen of the United States, 
the black man is regarded by the white 
American as an inferior being with whom 
relations of business or service only arc 
possible. The black is constantly being censured for his want of intelligence and discretion, his lack of civic and professional 
conscience and for his tendency toward undue familiarity. 
The vices of the Negro are a constant 
menace to the American who has to repress 
them sternly. For instance, the black American troops in France have, by themselves, 
given rise to as many complaints for attempted rape as all the rest of the army. 
And yet the [black American] soldiers sent 
us have been the choicest with respect to 
physique and morals, for the number disqualified at the time of mobilization was 
enormous. 
CONCLUSION 
1. We must prevent the rise of any pronounced degree of intimacy between French 
officers and black officers. We may be 
courteous and amiable with these last, but 
we cannot deal with them on the same plane 
as with the white American officers without deeply wounding the latter. We must 
not eat with them, must not shake hands or 
seek to talk or meet with them outside of the 
requirements of military service. 
2. We must not commend too highly the 
black American troops, particularly in the 
presence of [white] Americans. It is all 
right to recognize their good qualities and 
their services, but only in moderate terms, 
strictly in keeping with the truth. 
3. Make a point of keeping the native 
cantonment population from "spoiling" the 
Negroes. [White] Americans become greatly incensed at any public expression of intimacy between white women with black 
men. They have recently uttered violent 
protestsi against a picture in the "Vie 
Parisienne" entitled "The Child of the 
Desert" which shows a [white] woman in 
a "cabinet particulier" with a Negro. Fa 
miliarity on the part of white women with 
black men is furthermore a source of profound regret to our experienced colonials 
who see in it an over-weening menace to 
the prestige of the white race. 
Military authority cannot intervene di-18 TH E CRISIS 
rectly in this question, but it can through 
the civil authorities exercise some influence 
on the population. 
(Signed) LINARD. 
The following document is a specimen 
of the numerous and continuous requests made by white commanders of colored regiments to get rid of colored officers. 
It will be noted that at the date this document was sent Colored officers had had very 
little chance to prove their efficiency. 
G . H . G. , A . E . F . 
8/25/1918 
11440-A124 
Headquarters 372nd Infantr y 
S. P. 179, Franc e 
August 24, 1918. 
From: The Commanding Officer, 372nd 
Infantry. 
To : The Commandin g General, America n 
E . F . 
Subject: Replacement of Colored Officers by 
Whit e Officers. 
1. Request that colored officers of this 
regiment be replaced by whit e officers fo r 
the followin g reasons: 
First : The racia l distinctions whic h are 
recognized i n civilia n lif e naturall y continue to be recognized i n the militar y lif e 
and present a formidabl e barrie r to the existence of tha t feeling of comradeship whic h 
is essential to mutua l confidence and esprit 
de corp. 
Second: Wit h a few exceptions there is 
a characteristi c tendency among the colored 
officers to neglect the welfar e of their men 
and to perform their duties i n a perfunctory manner. The y are lackin g i n initiative . 
These defects entail a constant supervision 
and attention to petty details by battalion 
commanders and other senior officers which 
distrac t their attention from their wide r 
duties; wit h harmfu l results. 
2. To facilitat e the desired readjustment 
of officer personnel it is recommended, 
A . Tha t no colored officers be forwarded 
to this regiment as replacements, or otherwise. 
B. Tha t officers removed upon recommendation of efficiency boards be promptl y 
replaced by whit e officers of like grade. But, 
if whit e officers are not availabl e as replacements; whit e officers of lowe r grades 
be forwarded instead. 
C. Tha t the opportunit y be afforded to 
transfe r the remainin g colored combat officer personnel to labor organization s or to 
replacement units fo r other colored comba t 
organizations accordin g to their suitability . 
3. Reference letter No . 616-3s writte n by 
Commandin g General, 157th D . I. on the 
subject August 21, 1918, an d forwarde d to 
you r office throug h militar y channels. 
(Signed) Hersche l Tupes, 
Colonel, 372nd Infantry . 
Received A . G. O. 
26th Aug. , 1918, 
G. H . Q., A . E . F . 
1st Ind. [Endorsement.] 
G. H . Q., A . E . F. , France , August 28, 1918 
—T o Commandin g Officer, 372nd Infantry , 
A . E . F . 
1. Returned. 
2. Paragrap h two is approved. 
3. Yo u wil l submit by specia l courie r 
requisition for whit e officers to replace officers relieved upon the recommendation of 
efficiency board. 
4. Yo u wil l submit list of names of officers tha t you recommend to be transferre d 
to labor organizatio n or to replacement 
units for other colored combat organiza ­
tions; statin g i n each case the qualifications 
of the officers recommended. 
B y command of Genera l Pershing : 
(Signed) W . P . Bennett, 
Adjutan t General. 
2nd Ind. [Endorsement.] 
Hg . 372nd Infantry , S. P., 179, France , 
September 4, 1918—To Commanding 
General, A. E. F„ France. 
1. Requisitio n i n complianc e wit h par. 
3, 1st. Ind. is enclosed herewith . Specia l 
attention is invite d to the filling of two origina l vacancies by app. 
* * * 
THE following letter was sent contrary 
to military regulations to a U. S. 
Senator by the man who was Chief of Staff 
of the colored Ninety-second Division; in 
other words, by the man who more than any DOCUMENTS O F TH E WA R 19 
other single person was responsible for the 
morale and efficiency of this Division. We 
shall prove later that every essential statement made in this letter against Negro 
troops is either false or misleading. 
Headquarters V I Arm y Corps 
America n Expeditionar y Force s 
Dec. 6, 1918. 
M y Dea r Senator: 
No w tha t a reorganizatio n of the army 
is i n prospect, and as al l officers of the temporar y forces have been asked i f they desire 
to remai n i n the regula r army , I thin k I 
ought to brin g a matte r to you r attention 
tha t is of vita l importanc e not only from a 
militar y point of view but from tha t whic h 
al l Southerners have. I refe r to the questio n of Negr o officers and Negr o troops. 
I have been Chie f of Staff of the 92nd 
(Colored) Divisio n since its organization , 
and shall remai n on such dut y unti l it starts 
its movement i n a few days back to the 
Unite d States, whe n I go to the 6th Corps 
as the Chie f of the Operatio n Section of that 
unit. M y position has been such tha t I 
ca n speak from intimat e knowledge and 
wha t I have to say is based on facts which 
I know full y and not from secondhand in ­
formation . 
To start with : al l company officers of in ­
fantry , machine guns and engineers were 
Negroes; as wer e also most of the artiller y 
lieutenants and many of the doctors. 
Gradually as their incompetence became perfectl y evident to all , the engineers and artillery ­
men, wer e replaced by whit e officers. The y 
remaine d wit h the infantr y unti l the end, 
and also wit h a few exceptions wit h the 
machine guns. 
Th e record of the divisio n is one whic h 
wil l probably never be given ful l publicity, 
but the bare facts are about as follows. 
W e came to Franc e i n June , were given 
seven weeks i n trainin g are a instead of the 
fou r weeks i n trainin g are a usuall y allotted, 
then went to a quiet sector of the front. 
Fro m there we went to the Argonn e and i n 
the offensive startin g there on September 
26, ha d one regimen t i n the line, attached 
to the 38th Frenc h Corps. The y failed there 
i n al l their missions, lai d down and sneaked 
to the rear, unti l they were withdrawn . 
Thirt y of the officers of this regiment alone 
were reported either for cowardic e or failur e to prevent their men from retreating— 
and this against ver y littl e opposition. The 
Frenc h and our whit e field officers did' all 
that could possibly have been done; but the 
troops were impossible. One of our majors 
commandin g a battalion said "Th e men are 
ran k cowards there is no other word for 
it. " 
Nex t we were withdraw n to another defensive sector where we remained until the 
armistice ; havin g some mino r engagements 
against any enemy who had no offensive 
intentions. 
Durin g our career, countin g the time i n 
America , we have had about thirt y cases 
of rape, among whic h was one where twenty-two men at Camp Gran t raped one woman , and we have had eight (I believe) reported i n Franc e wit h about fifteen attempts besides. Ther e have been any number of self-inflicted wounds, among others 
one captain. 
Ther e have been numerous accidental 
shootings, several murders, and also several 
cases of patrols or sentinels shooting at 
each other. An d at the same time, so strict 
had been the supervision and trainin g tha t 
man y officers passing through our areas 
would remar k tha t our men actuall y had the 
outer mark s of better discipline than the 
other divisions. The y were punctillious 
about saluting, their appearance was excellent. The y kept their animals and equipment i n good condition. Genera l Bullard , 
commandin g our Second Army , asked me my 
estimate and I said they could do anythin g 
but fight. The y have i n fact been dangerous to no one except themselves and women. 
In these organizations where we have 
whit e company officers, namely the artiller y 
and engineers, we have had only one case 
of rape. Th e undoubted trut h is tha t the 
Colored officers neither control nor care 
to control the men. The y themselves have 
been engaged very largel y i n the pursuit 
of Frenc h women, it being their first opportunit y to meet whit e women who did not 
trea t them as servants. 
Durin g the entire time we have been operatin g there has never been a single operation conducted by a colored officer, where 
his report did not have to be investigated 
by some field officer to find out wha t the 
rea l facts were. Accurac y and abilit y to 
describe facts is lackin g i n all , and most 
of them are just plai n liars i n addition. 
Th e foregoing is just to give you an in ­
sight into the facts. Should any effort be 
made to have Negr o officers, or fo r that 20 TH E CRISIS 
matte r Negr o troops, the career of this division should be asked for; and every officer who has been a field officer of the 92nd 
Divisio n should be summoned before the 
Committe e to give his experience and opinions. Their statements, based on a year's 
experience should certainl y carr y a grea t 
deal of weight, and all of them state the 
same thing , only varyin g i n extremes. 
Wit h best wishes, I am 
Sincerely yours, 
(Signed) Alle n J. Greer, 
Colonel, Genera l Staff, U . S. A . 
Hon . Kennet h D . McKellar , 
Unite d States Senate, 
Washington , D . C. 
* * * 
THE following letter written by a Negro 
officer to an American friend illustrates the temper and difficulties of the situation in France. 
19 Feb., 1919. 
I have been hopin g tha t you woul d be able 
to drop i n on us here before our departure. 
W e are slated to leave here at 4 A . M . on 
the 21st supposedly aboard the Aquitania. 
It was m y desire to tal k wit h you about 
the offer to officers and men i n the A . E . F . 
to attend a school i n Franc e or England . I 
made applicatio n and wa s shown the endorsement by the Regt. Commander, tha t 
the offer did not appl y to transient officers. 
The knowledge was obtained from a telegram received from Hdq . One of our officers went to the Commandin g Genera l of 
this Camp to obtain a copy of the telegram 
whic h could not be or wa s not produced. 
Capt. went i n person to the 
Genera l and requested permission to attend statin g tha t he volunteered fo r service, left his practis e and famil y at a sacrifice and tha t he thought the Govt, owed it 
to him to give him a chance and attend 
school here. The Genera l took his name and 
the Organizatio n to whic h he belongs promisin g to let him hea r from him, but as yet 
nothin g has been done. This Camp is prac ­
ticall y a pena l institutio n and prejudice 
against us is ver y strong. Some day there 
is likel y to be some grave disturbanc e here. 
Th e conditions are simpl y awful : mu d everywhere, leak y tents and barrack s and lack of 
sufficient and prope r toilets. Th e men are 
worked quite hard , some at nigh t and others 
i n the day, rai n or shine. A s a consequence there are quite a numbe r of sick 
men i n our organization . Since our arriva l 
here, the roads have been improve d quit e 
a bit (due to the wor k of the 92nd div.) and 
yo u do not have to wade i n ankl e deep 
mud . Boar d walk s here to nearl y al l the 
tents and barracks. Ther e is so muc h tal k 
about the rotten conditions tha t the Cam p 
Officials ar e makin g feveris h efforts to be 
read y fo r the proposed inquiry . 
Th e wor k of each organizatio n is grade d 
by the Cam p Officer i n Charg e of details, 
and i f not satisfactory, the organizatio n 
ma y be placed a t the bottom of the sailin g 
list or removed temporarily . Commandin g 
Officers of separate units or regiments ar e 
practicall y helpless and i f they complai n too 
muc h against the treatment accorded them, 
are kept here unti l the Commandin g Genera l 
sees fit to let them go. 
I am beginnin g to wonde r whethe r it wil l 
ever be possible for me to see an 
American (white) without wishing that he were 
i n his Satani c Majesty's privat e domain . I 
must pra y lon g and earnestly tha t hatre d 
of m y fellow ma n be removed fro m m y heart 
and tha t I ca n truthfull y la y claim to bein g a Christian . 
NOTES 
THE following instances of color discrimination are taken at random 
from, among numbers of similar cases. 
This memorandum was sent to the 
Commanding Officer, 367th Infantry: 
1. Compan y "D " of you r organizatio n has 
been designated by the Centra l Embarkatio n 
Office as a coaling detail for U. S. S. 
Virginia. 
2. This detail wit h all officers an d me n 
wil l report at Nava l Surgeon's Office, foot 
of Rue de Siam, Brest, at 8:30 a. m., 
February 9, 1919. Detail will march from 
camp not late r tha n 7 a. m. 
3. Al l equipment and officers' han d bag ­
gage wil l be taken. Yo u wil l arrang e for 
truc k wit h Cam p Transportatio n Officer 
Buildin g No . 2, Cam p Headquarters. Truc k 
wil l be furnishe d at 5 a. m. 
4. Al l embarkatio n regulatio n wil l be followed. Th e detail wil l be checked aboar d 
the vessel b y a n officer from the Centra l 
Embarkatio n Office. The detail will not return to camp. 
B y Comman d of Brig . Genera l Butler, 
L . S. SCHMIDT , 
Major A. G., Adjutant. DOCUMENTS O F TH E WA R 21 
There was an order issued from the 
Central Embarkation Office to the effect that 
whe n troops wer e designated as a coalin g 
detail, they woul d go on board wit h al l regulations fo r embarkatio n completed and 
woul d not retur n to camp, bu t woul d proceed 
to the Unite d States on board the ship tha t 
they had coaled. When the Executive 
Officer of the Virginia discovered that these 
troops wer e Colored, he requested Admira l 
Halstea d to have these Colored troops taken 
off board, afte r havin g coaled the vessel, as 
it was a precedent in the navy that no 
Colored troops had ever traveled on board of 
a Unite d States battleship. This request 
was then sent b y Admira l Halstea d to the 
Centra l Embarkatio n Office, and the Colored 
Troops wer e placed on board a tu g and sent 
back to Brest. Whe n they arrive d i n Brest, 
it wa s late at night, they ha d no orders 
as to wher e to proceed, were withou t a place 
to stay and anythin g to eat. 
Befor e leavin g the ship the Colored commandin g officer of the troops received the 
followin g lette r from the officer under whom 
the men worked : 
U . S. S. Virginia, 
Brest, France , 
11 February , 1919. 
1. I take pleasure i n commending you 
and the officers and men unde r your comman d i n connection wit h the coalin g of this 
ship, and at the same time wis h to express 
m y appreciatio n of the good conduct and the 
hig h state of discipline of you r command. 
H . J . ZIEGMINE, 
Captain V. S. Navy, 
Commanding. 
* * * 
Durin g November, 1918, Colored Artiller y 
officers wer e i n school at Vannes; a numbe r 
of dances wa s given by the Frenc h ladies 
whic h wer e called the Franco-America n 
dances. These dances were given for charit y and a fee was charged fo r admission. 
The Colored Officers, who composed wha t 
was known as the 167th Brigade 
Detachment, attended several of these dances, and 
were entertained b y and danced wit h the 
Frenc h ladies of the town . Th e matte r wa s 
then brough t to the attention of Genera l 
Horn , who was i n command of the school, 
whereupon he issued an order that no officer 
of the 167th Brigad e Detachment would be 
permitted to attend a dance where a fee 
was charged. The 167th Brigade 
Detachment was composed entirely of Colored officers, so tha t the orde r referred only to 
them, but had no effect upon the whit e officers who were i n attendance at the school. 
* * * 
Headquarters, Are a "D, " 
Januar y 25, 1919. 
MEMORANDU M 
To C. O. 367th Infantry : 
White officers desiring: meals i n their 
quarters wil l have their orderlies report to 
Lieutenant William s at the Tent adjoinin g 
Are a Headquarters for cards to present at 
Officers' Mess. 
Al l colored officers wil l mess at Officers' 
Mess i n D-17. 
F . M . CRAWFORD, 
First Lieutenant Infantry, 
Area "D." =i= * * 
HEADQUARTER S FORWARDING CAM P 
AMERICA N EMBARKATIO N CENTE R 
A. P. O. 766, A. E. F. 
Januar y 21, 1919. 
Memorandum: No . 229, E . O. 
To Al l Organizations: 
1. Fo r you r informatio n and guidance. 
Program Reference Visit of General 
Pershing, 9:30 A. M. Arrive Forwarding 
Camp . Al l troops possible, except Colored, 
to be unde r arms. 
Formation to be as designated by 
General Longan. Only necessary supply work 
and police wor k to be performed up to time 
troops are dismissed i n order that they ma y 
prepar e fo r reception of Genera l Pershing . 
A s soon as dismissed men to get into workin g clothes and to go to their respective 
tasks i n order tha t Commander-in-Chie f 
ma y see construction goin g on. (Wor k of 
altering' dr y delousing plant not to be in ­
terrupted). Colored troops who are not at 
wor k to be i n their quarters or at their 
tents 
B y command of 
BRIGADIER-GENERA L LONGAN . 
RICHAR D I. LEVY , 
Major, C.A.C., U.S.A. Camp, 
Adjutant. 
WIL Levery Negro officer and soldier who reads these documents make himself 
a committee of one to see that the Editor of TH E CRISIS receives documents, 
diaries and information such as will enable TH E CRISIS history of the war to be complete, true and unanswerable? RE D CROSS NURSES , BAS E HOSPITAL. CAM P GRANT . ILLINOIS . 
22 National Associatio n for the 
Advancemen t of Colored-People. 
ANTI-LYNCHIN G CONFERENC E MA Y 5-6 
A T the meetin g of the Anti-Lynchin g 
Committee, held in Boston, last 
November, at Mr. Moorfield Storey's office, it 
was voted tha t the committee arrang e for a 
conference to be held i n the sprin g to protest to the countr y at large against the 
crime of lynchin g and to consider wha t 
means migh t be take n to put a stop to it. 
Th e committee wa s unanimous i n its opinion 
tha t something must be done to awaken the 
people of Americ a to the nation's lawlessness and to its acquiescence i n this lawlessness. Fo r equall y importan t wit h a knowledge of the gri m barbarit y of lynchin g is 
the knowledge tha t this crime is never punished. Th e committee accordingly made 
arrangements fo r a nationa l conference 
to attack lync h law and to decide upon 
such measures as should be taken to brin g 
it to a n end. Th e Conference wil l be held 
i n Ne w York , on Ma y fifth and sixth. It 
wil l open wit h a mass meeting i n Carnegie Hal l on the evening of Ma y fifth, 
to be addressed by no less distinguished 
a person than Charle s Evan s Hughes. 
The followin g day, mornin g and afternoon sessions will be held at the 
Association of the Bar of the City of New 
York . Durin g these two meetings practica l 
plans wil l be discussed and committees appointed to deal wit h the suppression of 
lynching . O n the evening of the sixt h a 
second mass meeting wil l be held at Ethica l 
Cultur e Hall . 
W e prin t i n ful l the call and the names 
of the signers. The response from statesmen, legislators, lawyers, judges, educators, 
and religious leaders, has been ver y gratify ­
ing . It shows conclusively that something 
tangibl e wil l be done. Amon g those who 
have issued this cal l are eight governors and 
ex-governors, including the present 
Governor of Georgia, and the Hon. Emmet 
O'Neal , ex-Governor of Alabama , but here 
is the call wit h its signers: 
NATIONA L CONFERENC E ON LYNCHIN G 
THE prevalence i n man y states of the spirit whic h tolerates lynching , accompanied 
too often wit h inhuma n cruelty, and the inabilit y or unwillingness of the publi c 
authoritie s to punis h the persons who are guilt y of this crime , threaten ver y seriously 
the futur e peace of the nation. No t only is lynchin g a denia l of the righ t secured by law 
to every ma n of a fair tria l before an established court i n case he is charged wit h 
crime , not only does it brutaliz e the communities whic h suffer it by breeding a spirit 
of lawlessness and cruelt y i n the youn g people who see barbaritie s unpunished and un ­
condemned, not only does it terroriz e importan t bodies of our citizens, but it inevitabl y 
leads the people whose rights ar e thus trample d upon to leave the regions wher e their 
lives, their familie s and their property are i n danger, and move to others wher e they 
can find peace and protection, thus disturbin g the labor situation all over the country. 
It also blots our fai r fame as a nation, fo r we cannot claim to be civilize d unti l our 
laws are respected and enforced and our citizens secured against the hideous cruelties 
of whic h we ar e constantly furnishin g fresh examples. 
It is time tha t we should wak e to the need of action, and tha t publi c opinion, 
irresistibl e whe n aroused, should be enlisted against this barbarism i n ou r midst. 
To this end we invit e our fellow-citizens to attend or send delegates to a conventio n whic h wil l be held i n Ne w Yor k City , on the Fift h and Sixt h of May , Nineteen 
Hundre d and Nineteen, i n order to take concerted action against lynchin g and lawlessness whereve r found, and to consider wha t measures should be adopted to abate them. 
It is hoped tha t the whole country will I be represented and tha t the action take n ma y be 
backed b y a powerfu l public opinion of law-abidin g men and women. 
23 24 TH E CRISIS 
HENR Y J , ALLE N 
S IMEO N E . BALDWI N 
L EV I L . B ARBOU R 
GEORG E GORDON BATTLE 
J . R . BINGHA M 
CHARLE S J . B ONAPART E 
EMME T D . BOYL E 
DESH A BRECKENRIDG E 
HORAC E J . BRIDGE S 
EDWAR D O SGOO D BROW N 
N . MURRA Y B UTLE R 
GEORG E L . CAD Y 
ARTHU R CAPPE R 
MRS . SHEAR S CARNOVALL E 
O RRI N N. C ARTE R 
MOSE S EDWI N CLAP P 
WILLIA M F . C OCHRA N 
S TOUGHTO N C OOLE Y 
WILLIA M T . CROSS 
D. W . DAVI S 
JOSEP H H . DEFREE S 
WILLIA M H. DELAC Y 
JAME S H . DILLAR D 
HUG H M . DORSE Y 
EDWAR D F . DUNN E 
LEONIDA S C . D YE R 
CHARLE S W . ELIO T 
QUINC Y EWIN G 
SAMUE L S . FEL S 
WILLIA M H . FLEMIN G 
LE E K . FRANKE L 
T HOMA S F . GAILO R 
L . F . C . GARVI N 
J . CARDINA L GIBBON S 
JAME S P . GOODRIC H 
G EORG E GRA Y 
D AVI D II . GREE R 
PERC Y S TICKNE Y GRAN T 
ARCHIBAL D II . GRIMK E 
JOH N D . H AMMON D 
L IL Y H ARD Y HAMMON D 
JUDSO N HARMO N 
J . R . HAWKIN S 
W . ASHB I E HAWKIN S 
CHARLE S EVAN S HUGHE S 
W ILLIA M II . H UNLE Y 
J . B . H UTTO N 
E MERSO N C . H ARRINGTO N 
EDMUN D J , TAME S 
JAM S WELDO N JOHNSO N 
D AVI D STAR R JORDA N 
HENR Y CHURCHIL L KIN G 
JAME S H. K IRKLAN D 
JULI A C . LATHRO P 
WILLIA M H . LEWI S 
ADOLP H L EWISOH N 
M EN.B . L INDSE Y 
MARTI N W . LI TTLETO N 
OWEN R . L OVEJO Y 
JAME S R . MACC OL L 
C HARLE S S . M A CF ARLAN D 
J . MEDIL L MCCORMIC K 
WILLIA M F. MCDOWEL L 
FAYETT E A . MCKENZI E 
ROBER T MCMURD Y 
J ULIA N W . M AC K 
MARTI N B . MADDE N 
LOUI S MARSHAL L 
JOH N G . MILBUR N 
JOHN MITCHEL L 
ADELBER T MOO T 
WM . FELLOWE S MORGA N 
CHARLE S NAGE L 
EMME T O'NEA L 
THOMA S MOT T OSBORN E 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
G EORG E T . PAG E 
A . MITCHEL L PALME R 
PHILI P G . PEABOD Y 
GEORG E WHARTO N PEPPE R 
ALBER T E . P ILLSBUR Y 
LOU I S F . POS T 
JACKSO N H . RALSTO N 
FREDERIC K F . REES E 
LESSIN G ROSENTHA L 
ELIHU ROO T 
JOH N A . RYA N 
W M . JA Y SCHIEFF E LI N 
JACO B H . SCHIF F 
ANN A HOWAR D SHA W 
ALBIO N W . SMAL L 
BOLTO N SMIT H 
WENDEL L P . STAFFOR D 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y 
A . T . STOVAL L 
CHARLE S H . STRON G 
CHARLE S H . STUDI N 
MAR Y B TALBER T 
BOOT H TARKINGTO N 
G RAHA M T AYLO R 
R OBER T H. TERREL L 
CHARLE S F . THWIN G 
WORT H M . T IPP Y 
H. ST . GEORG E TUCKE R 
HENR Y VA N DYKE 
WILLIA M II . WADHA M 
M ADAM E C . J . W ALKE R 
W M . ENGLIS H WALLI N G 
F RAN K P . WALS H 
W . D . WEATHERFOR D 
BENJAMI N ID E WHEELE R 
BUT LE R R . WILSO N 
J AC K C . WILSO N 
MAR Y E . WILSO N 
JOH N BRADLE Y WINSLO W 
J OH N H. W INTERBOTHA M 
STEPHE N S . WIS E 
L . H OULINGSWORT H WOOD 
CHARLE S ZUEBLI N 
CLEVELAND CONFERENCE JUNE 21-29 
THE year 1919 marks the Tenth 
Anniversary of the N. A. A. C. P. This 
importan t event wil l be celebrated at a conference i n Cleveland, to be held Jun e 21­
20. Th e Associatio n and the Cleveland 
Branc h are working- upon the program, 
whic h should appea r i n ful l i n the Jun e 
CRISIS . It wil l unquestionably be muc h the 
most important conference that the 
Association has ever held and one of the most 
importan t conferences of the year. Th e 
opening day, Saturday , wil l be fo r the assignin g of delegates and visitors to their 
respective homes. The conference wil l open 
formall y wit h a mass meeting Sunda y afternoon. However, a numbe r of the churches 
have arranged to have speakers i n their 
pulpits on Sunda y mornin g and evening. 
Th e whit e churche s ar e deeply interested 
i n learnin g of our cause. O n Monda y we 
shall get to work , and mornin g an d afternoon wil l be give n up to reports an d discussions. Ther e ar e so man y thing s we 
need to thres h out amon g ourselves, and 
so man y importan t matters tha t we need to 
put before the delegates and visitors. 
Evenings will be given up to great mass meetings. Th e Industria l phas e of the Negr o 
question, Education , Anti-Lynching , Th e 
Negr o Soldier, wil l be amon g the matters 
considered. W e hope tha t all interested i n 
the proposed conference wil l plan , i f possible, to attend. Branche s wil l send delegates, 
but we also wan t man y visitors. This wil l 
end the MEMBERSHI P DRIV E fo r ON E 
HUNDRE D THOUSAN D MEMBERS . W e 
pla n to have a splendid rall y whe n the 
branches come i n wit h their quotas. Tha t 
should be the crownin g poin t of ou r gathering. Ful l particulars of the driv e ar e printed i n the Branch Bulletin fo r March . Wil l 
not all CRISI S readers, i f they are not already Branc h members, a t once get i n touch 
wit h the Branc h nearest to them and joi n i n 
this movement fo r democracy i n America ? 
TH E SHUBUT A LYNCHING S 
On Friday night, December 20, four 
Negroes—Andrew Clark, age 15; Major 
Clark , age 20; Maggi e Howze , age 20 ; an d 
Alm a Howze , age 16, wer e take n fro m the 
littl e jai l a t Shubuta , Mississippi , an d 
lynched on a bridge which spans the 
Chickasawha River near the town. They were 
suspected of havin g murdere d a Dr . E . L . 
Johnston, whom the papers stated wa s " a 
wealth y retire d dentist. " These wer e the 
meagre facts as give n i n the press dispatches. Th e rea l facts i n the case are 
as follows: 
Instead of bein g a n old ma n Dr . Johnso n 
wa s thirty-five years of age, a failur e a t 
his profession and livin g a t the time of the 
lynching s on his father's far m wher e he 
had wit h hi m Maggi e Howz e who m he ha d 
seduced and wh o wa s about to bea r hi m 
a child . O n the same far m wer e Maggie's 
sister Alma , also a victi m of Johnson , and 
two colored boys, Majo r an d Andre w Clar k 
who were workin g out a debt of their 
father's to the Johnsons. Majo r Clar k bega n goin g wit h Maggi e and they planne d 
to marry . Dr . Johnson , hearin g of this 
quarreled violentl y wit h Majo r Clar k tell­TH E NATIONA L URBAN LEAGU E 25 
in g hi m to leave his woman alone. Matters 
were a t this point when the doctor was 
kille d earl y one mornin g near his barn. 
It is common gossip about Shubut a that 
the murde r wa s committed by a whit e ma n 
wh o ha d his grudge against Johnson and 
who felt he could safely kil l the dentist and 
have the blame fal l on the Negro . A t any 
rate, afte r subjecting the boy to extreme 
torture , a confession wa s secured from 
Majo r tha t he had committed the murder. 
A t this preparations fo r the lynchin g began. 
Majo r and Andre w Clark , Maggi e and 
Alm a Howz e had al l been arrested. Afte r 
Major's "confession" they were taken to 
Shubut a fo r tria l and placed i n a little 
jai l there. Th e mob secured the keys of 
the jai l from the deputy sheriff i n charge 
of the place withou t trouble, took out the 
prisoners, and drove them to the place 
chosen fo r their execution, a littl e covered 
bridge over the Chickasawh a River. Fou r 
ropes were produced and fou r ends wer e 
tied to a girde r on the under side of the 
bridge, whil e the other fou r ends were made 
into nooses and fastened securely around 
the necks of the fou r Negroes, who were 
standin g on the bridge. U p to the last 
moment the Negroe s protested their in ­
nocence and begged the mob not to lync h 
them. Just as they were about to be killed , 
Maggi e Howz e screamed and fought, cryin g 
out, " I ain't guilt y of killin g the doctor 
and you ought'nt to kil l me. " I n order to 
silence he r cries one of the members of the 
mob seized a monke y wrench and struck 
he r i n the mouth wit h it, knockin g he r teeth 
out. She wa s also hi t across the head wit h 
the same instrument, cuttin g a long gash. 
Th e fou r Negroes, when the ropes had been 
securely fastened about their necks, were 
taken bodily by the mob and thrown over 
the side of the bridge. Th e younge r gir l 
and the two boys wer e kille d instantly. 
Maggi e Howze , however, who wa s a strong 
and vigorous young woman, twice caught 
herself on the side of the bridge, thus necessitatin g her being thrown over the bridge 
three times. The thir d time this was done, 
she died. In the town the next clay, members of the mob told laughingl y of how 
har d it had been to kil l "tha t bi g black 
Jersey woman. " 
The older girl of twenty was to have become a mother i n four months, whil e the 
younge r was to have given birt h to a child 
i n two weeks. This sixteen-year-old prospective mother was killed on Frida y night 
and at the time of her buria l on Sunda y 
afternoon her unborn baby had not died— 
one could detect its movements withi n he r 
womb. 
A press despatch from Shubut a the day 
after the lynchin g took place reads as follows : 
"Th e theory is advanced tha t the lynchers 
acted because of the fact that the next term 
of the court was not due to be convened 
unti l next March . It is hinted that the 
idea of the county being forced to care for 
and feed four self-confessed assassins of a 
leading citizen migh t have aroused the passion of the mob. " 
W e add to this account of an America n 
lynching in 1919 an extract from 
Ambassador Sharp's account of German lynchings in 
1917: 
"A t Ha m I was told by the mother of six 
children tha t her husband and two daughters, one of the age of fifteen and the other 
eighteen, had been carried awa y by the 
Germans at the time of their evacuation of 
the town, and upon remonstratin g she had 
been told tha t as an alternative she migh t 
find their bodies i n the cana l i n the rea r of 
he r home. Th e same woma n informed that 
out of that town's population several hun ­
dred people had been compelled to accompany the Germans, nearl y half of whom 
were women and girls above fifteen years 
of age." 
TH E NATIONA L URBAN LEAGU E 
LILLIA N A . TURNE R 
AMERIC A is ver y much engaged now 
wit h the discussion of the contributio n to Democrac y made b y its various 
groups and agencies durin g the Grea t War . 
Th e Negro's contribution holds undisputed 
place i n the country's record of achievement. 
In that record of effort and energy expended 
towar d the successful terminatio n of the 
wa r there can be enumerated several socia l agencies—in peace times devoting their 26 TH E CRISIS 
forces to race betterment. The Nationa l 
Urba n Leagu e is one of these agencies and 
has worke d principall y for development of 
opportunit y fo r the urba n Negr o i n the 
thirt y cities where it has branc h organizations. 
Th e Leagu e was organized eight years 
ago fo r the purpose of encouragin g co-operatio n among welfar e agencies, securin g and 
trainin g social . workers and investigatin g 
cit y lif e as a basis for practica l work . 
Durin g the wa r this organizatio n has devoted much time to placin g welfar e workers i n industria l plants to help stabilize 
labor, to gai n fo r the workers faire r consideration both by employers and whit e 
fellow-employees and to speed up production by securing greate r efficiency 
amon g the workers; to holdin g conferences 
of whit e and colored people interested i n 
the welfar e of the Negr o so as to brin g 
about a better understandin g between the 
representatives of the two races. 
Eighty-on e executive secretaries and other 
workers are now employed by the League 
i n conducting its various activities, exclusive 
of the twenty-two welfar e workers placed 
by the Leagu e durin g the past yea r i n in ­
dustria l plants Nort h and South. 
A s a result of the League's activitie s 
durin g 1918, day nurserie s were established i n Whit e Plains, Ne w Yor k Cit y 
and Chicago ; an emergency hospita l was 
furnished wit h fourteen colored nurses at 
Duquesne, Pa. , durin g the influenza epidemic ; settlement houses were established 
i n Newark , N . J. , and Youngstown , Ohio ; 
Travelers' Aid Work was instituted in 
Columbus, Pittsburgh, Chicago and New York, 
as well as continued at Norfolk , Va. ; Wa r 
Camp Communit y Clu b House s fo r soldiers 
were opened in Detroit, Rockford, 111., 
Chicago and Brooklyn; and room registries 
were located i n several cities. Co-operation 
has been developed i n Red Cross wor k fo r 
colored people and draft boards have been 
assisted i n Detroit and East St. Louis. 
State or Federa l Employmen t Service has 
been aided in Chicago, New York, 
Cleveland, Columbus, East St. Louis, Detroit and 
Pittsburgh ; and wit h the aid of co-operatin g organizations, the Secretar y of Labo r 
wa s induced to establish the Burea u of 
Negro Economics with Dr. George E. 
Haynes as Director, who subsequently appointed 
nine state supervisors of Negr o economics. 
In one city durin g the Wa r Saving s Stamp 
Campaign , $25,000 i n stamps wa s sold 
amon g the colored people. Unde r the 
League's auspices, in Detroit, a Fourth 
Liberty Loan mass meeting with 15,000 persons i n attendance was held. Th e success 
of this meetin g led to the request from 
the Mayo r of Windsor, Canada , fo r a simila r meetin g whic h wa s held i n the interest 
of the Canadia n Victor y Loan . Th e Fourt h 
Libert y Loa n Driv e i n Clevelan d netted 
$221,200 wort h of Bonds, sold throug h the 
activitie s of the Clevelan d affiliated organ ­
ization , and $10,000 has just been grante d 
the organizatio n b y the Mayor's Advisor y 
Wa r Boar d of Clevelan d fo r the purpos e 
of opening a recreation center fo r returnin g 
colored soldiers i n tha t city. 
A n Urba n Leagu e wa s established i n East 
St. Louis shortl y afte r the rio t and has 
been made a part of the Ordnanc e Bureau's 
Communit y Progra m whic h is costin g $350,­
000 fo r a period of thre e years. 
Throug h the League's employmen t service in Chicago, New York, Brooklyn, 
Cleveland, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Detroit and 
Nashville , 27,952 positions have been foun d 
fo r colored people, man y of whic h wer e jobs 
not before held by colored persons. I n 
Pittsburg h 234 colored girls wer e placed 
i n clerica l positions i n fou r departmen t 
stores, a new and successful experimen t i n 
the use of colored workers i n these stores. 
The Philadelphia Association for the 
Protection of Colored Women organized a Red 
Cross Unit ; the Philadelphi a Armstron g 
Associatio n employed school visitors to in ­
terpre t the home lif e of the childre n fo r 
the teachers and to remove the causes of 
poor school records i n proficiency, attendance and deportment. 
The cost of the League's wor k durin g the 
past yea r exceeded $102,000 and a considerably large r sum tha n this wil l be needed 
fo r the yea r 1919 to carr y out its plans, 
whic h include the organizatio n of additiona l 
cities, especially i n the South ; the placin g 
of additiona l welfar e workers as wel l as 
additiona l employees i n industria l plants, 
and the trainin g of socia l workers throug h 
the schools of Civic s and Philanthrop y b y 
means of fellowships provided i n part b y 
the League . 
The offices of the Leagu e ar e a t No . 200 
Fift h Avenue , Ne w Yor k City , and the officers are L. Hollingsworth Wood, 
President and Eugene Kinckle Jones, 
Executive Secretary. The Looking Glass 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HIL L in Life: 
The y said they were too slow, too dull , too 
this and tha t to do it, 
The y couldn't match the method of the 
Hun , 
An d then to arm a million—why , the lan d 
would surely rue it 
If a millio n blacks were taught to use a 
gun. 
Bu t righ t won out, and they went i n at al l 
detractors smiling ; 
The y learned as quick as any how to 
shoot, 
The y took the priz e at loadin g ships, and 
rivetin g and piling . 
An d traine d a thousand officers to boot. 
An d whe n they went they took a boon no 
others ha d been bringing , 
Fo r whethe r wit h a pick or wit h a gun, 
The y lightened every labor wit h a wondrous 
sort of singing , 
An d turned the pal l of battle into fun. 
0 the Frenchma n wa s a marvel, and the 
Yanke e wa s a wonder, 
An d the Britis h line wa s lik e a granit e 
wall , 
Bu t fo r singin g as they leaped awa y to 
draw the Kaiser's thunder, 
Th e swarth y sons of Dixi e beat them all . 
An d now tha t they have helped to break 
the rattlin g Hunnis h sabre, 
They'l l trai l the Suwane e Rive r back 
agai n 
To Dixi e home, and native song, and school 
and honest labor, 
To be as men among their fellow-men. 
No special thanks or prais e they'll ask, no 
clappin g on the shoulder— 
The y did their bit, and won, and al l men 
know it— 
An d Dixi e wil l be proud of them, and, 
grow n a littl e older, 
An d wiser, too, wil l welcome them and 
show it. 
* * * 
"Wome n of Achievement " is the name of 
a little volume written by Benjamin 
Brawley, Dean of Morehouse College, and issued 
under the auspices of the Woman's 
American Baptist Home Mission Society. It has 
a brie f introduction on the "Negr o Woma n 
i n America n Life, " and then proceeds to a 
specific discussion of Harrie t Tubman , Nor a 
Cordon , Met a Warric k Fuller, Mar y Mc -
Leo d Bethun e and Mar y Churc h Terrell . 
Th e significance of this book lies i n the 
fact tha t it presents to the Negro , characters for emulation withi n the race. Such 
a volume should be in the hands of every 
colored child . We hope tha t this is the 
beginning of a long series of such volumes, 
all as well written , as well bound and as 
interestingly illustrated. 
We have received Freeman H. M. 
Murray's "Emancipation and the Freed in 
America n Sculpture"—a n excellent book 
whic h we shall soon review. 
* * * 
Recent treatment of the Negr o in periodicals: 
Negr o Musi c at Birth , N . C. Burlin , Music 
Quarterly, January '19; same article 
Current Opinion, March, '19. 
Negr o Patriotism and Negr o Music , F . R. 
Grant, Outlook, Februar y 26, '19. 
Teachers' Estimate s of Negroes and 
Whites, E . L . Gatewood, School and Society, 
Januar y 18, '19. 
Th e Negr o and Nationa l Reconstruction, 
G. E . Haynes, Public, Februar y 8, '19. 
Ne w Colo r Line , Public, Februar y 8, '19. 
Negroes Moves North, G. E. Haynes, 
Survey, January 4, '19. 
Croi x de Guerr e and Rar e Prais e fo r 
America n Negr o Troops, Literary Digest, 
Januar y 18, '19. 
Wit h the Buffaloes i n France , O. E . Mc -
Kaine , Independent, Januar y 11, '19. 
"Playe d Leap-Fro g wi d Shell Al l Ova h 
France, " Literary Digest, Januar y 18, '19. 
Lynching Record for 1918, Outlook, 
January 22, '19. 
Africa n Reconstruction Afte r the War , 
J. H . Harris, Missionary Review, February , 
'19. 
"THESE TRULY ARE THE 
BRAVE" 
THE histor y of the black America n soldier i n the Grea t Wa r is simpl y a 
replic a of his action i n forme r wars. The 
Wheeling , W . Va. , Intelligencer says: 
N o America n army would be complete 
without the Negr o soldier. This is a broad 
statement, but histor y of past as well as 
the present wa r proves this assertion. In 
the Revolutionar y War , the Wa r of 1812, 
i n the Mexica n and Civi l Wars and i n the 
Wa r wit h Spain , the America n Negr o distinguished himself by bravery , fortitude and 
27 28 TH E CRISIS 
loyalty, and properl y led proved himself a 
match for the whit e soldier. The story of 
more than 4,000 Negr o soldiers returnin g 
from Franc e where they covered themselves wit h glor y for their gallantr y i n 
Flanders and i n the Champagn e as well as 
i n the Argonn e Forest, wa s an old story 
retold. 
The y returned wit h a grea t man y decorations, Frenc h as wel l as American , to prove 
their titl e to the designation of first-class 
fighting men. Th e First Battalio n of the 
367th infantry , mostly from Buffalo, N . Y. , 
distinguished itself by winnin g the Croix de 
Guerre for heroism i n the drive on Metz . 
According to their opportunities, the 
American Negro troops in France never failed 
to share the glor y of battle wit h the 
Frenc h or wit h their whit e America n comrades. 
In al l that makes the soldier—bravery, 
intelligence, endurance, and particularl y 
good natur e unde r hardshi p and privation , 
the Negr o soldier excels. 
* * * 
The Providence , R. I., Tribune summarizes: 
O f 3,918 Distinguishe d Servic e Crosses 
for gallantr y i n action 21, or a littl e more 
than half of one per cent, went to the 92nd 
Division , consisting of colored men largely , 
officered by whit e men. It would be interesting to lear n how man y of the 21 D . S. 
C.'s went to colored men especially as 
Franc e decorated one Negr o regiment in 
this divisio n twice, and gave hundreds of 
Croix de Guerre to gallan t Negr o fighters, 
whom this "democratic " Government has 
not yet recognized, officially. 
* * * 
Elizabet h Powel l Bon d write s apprecia ­
tively in the Philadelphia Pa., Public 
Ledger: 
It is on record tha t the most critica l time 
of America's fighting wa s last fall , when 
the exhausted Frenc h had to have re-enforcements or yield. It was at this crisis 
that colored soldiers went into battle, wit h 
the result that the colored LieutenantColonel of the 370th, a colored Major, eight 
colored Captains, seventeen colored 
Lieutenants, eight colored under-officers and twenty-six colored private s received the Croix 
de Guerre i n November. 
Ther e has been but one voice concernin g the loyalt y and the braver y of the 
colored troops. It is a pleasur e to give 
them heart y assurance of our appreciation 
of their unselfish service. It would be unpardonable i n us to come short of the spirit 
they have shown throughout the war. 
* * * 
J. M . Washington , writin g i n the Jersey 
Cit y Journal, suggests a memoria l day as 
a fitting tribute : 
In realizatio n of the fact that because 
of man y valian t wa r victorie s achieved by 
some of its capable citizens, the Unite d 
States has set apart certai n days of the 
yea r on whic h the natio n ma y pa y prope r 
honor to the memor y of those citizens. No w 
that once agai n the colored America n has 
convinced the worl d tha t not onl y the recent war, but i n ever y wa r i n whic h colored citizens have been called to keep "Ol d 
Glory " from trailin g i n the dust, they have 
proved themselves to be soldiers of indispensable worth , woul d it not be a fittin g 
tribut e fo r the Unite d States, by govern ­
menta l authority , to set apart Februar y 17 
each yea r as a n annua l and nationa l day, i n 
whic h the citizens wil l remembe r the "Blac k 
Heroes of America? " 
Whe n they were called upo n b y their 
country to "shoulde r arms, " they willingl y 
gave their blood and lives, not wit h the 
idea tha t a parade throug h the streets of 
Ne w Yor k Cit y woul d be their goal, but 
tha t their countr y an d flag, i f needs be, 
should rise to heights of gloriou s supremacy, over al l other countries. The n let 
this countr y officially recognize the value d 
qualitie s of the colored soldiers. 
THE SAVING GRACE 
NEGR O soldiers supplied, mor e o r less unco
laughter. The Birmingham, Ala., AgeHerald gives a few samples: 
Ther e wa s the story of the Negr o troops 
comin g across the Atlanti c i n a transport. 
A submarine wa s sighted. Th e si x sharp 
blasts from the whistl e shrille d out and 
the order wa s given to the colored troops to 
fal l i n on the deck. Th e Negroe s stood i n 
line at attention, whil e the passengers gathered i n the salon. The n the silence wa s 
broken b y one bi g black ma n i n the rea r 
ran k who asked, "Doe s anybod y here wan t 
to buy a gold watc h and chain? " 
The n there wa s the stor y of the Negr o 
in the artiller y regiment, whose job it wa s 
to feed the shells to the bi g gun . Eac h 
time he drove the shell into the breech and 
the gun boomed, he jumpe d hig h i n the air 
and, wit h a characteristi c crac k of the 
fingers, shouted, "Coun t you r men, M r 
Kaiser, count you r men. " The n as anothe r 
shell wa s drive n home and the gu n fired 
another jump , anothe r shout of "Coun t 'era 
again, Mr . Kaiser, count 'em again. " 
Ther e is the stor y also o f the Mississipp i 
draft of cotton plantatio n Negroes, brough t 
up from camp by rai l to Newport New s and 
loaded on hoard the transport afte r dar k 
Nex t morning, whe n the troops woke up 
the ship was wel l out to sea and there wa s 
not a sign of lan d to be seen. One Negr o 
soldier who had neve r seen or hear d of 
the ocean, leaned against the rai l and 
looked at the vast stretch of water, "oh 
Lawd, " he ejaculated, "de levee is bust " ' TH E 29 LOOKING GLASS 
A few days out when the boat began to 
toss and the waves became mountainous 
and menacing , a seasick Negr o soldier 
looked up to the sky from where he lay on 
the we t deck, miserable and terrified, and 
groaned : "Oh , Lawd , please make that 
ocean come to attention. " 
A Negr o soldie r i n the trenches showed 
up wit h a new pair of shoes. 
"Wher e di d yo u get dem shoes?" asked 
his mate. " I gotten dese shoes from a 
boche." Soon after this the first Negr o 
disappeared. H e wa s gone about four hours, 
but when he reappeared he, too, had a new 
pair of shoes. 
" I ha d to kil l twenty of dem boches befo' 
I got a pair to fit, " he answered. 
A captain said to his company of 
Negroes, "Now I want you fellows to learn 
this game thoroughly. Suppose our company is holdin g the line here and the boche 
makes a charge at us across the field, wha t 
would yo u boys do? " 
"Well , captain, " came from one member 
of the company, "we sho would spread the 
news over France. " 
O n one transport goin g over, one Negr o 
troope r said to another, a very seasick boy, 
"Loo k out dere and see dat sail boat." 
"Don' t yo u cal l me fo r no sail boat," 
came from the sick fellow lyin g wit h his 
head on his arms, "don't you call me at all 
unless you see a tree. " 
REACTIONS 
DISCRIMINATIO N against returned 
Negr o soldiers is creatin g a change i n 
attitude o n the part of thoughtful whit e 
Americans. Jame s M . Boy d write s i n a 
letter to the editor of the New York 
Evening Post: 
I n explainin g the result of the primar y 
election i n his home town, "Chicago, " i n 
his lette r appearin g i n you r paper today, 
classes the Negroe s wit h the Germans. 
This, as things stand today, puts the 
Negro in the undesirable class. If he is undesirable, wh o is to blame ? 
The other da y I stopped at a small restauran t fo r lunch . I sat at a table where 
a youn g Negr o wa s seated, apparently waitin g to be served. Th e waite r took my order and served me promptly, shortly after 
whic h the Negr o quietly got up and left 
Without a word . I asked the waite r i f he 
had ignored the ma n to be ri d of him. and 
he admitted tha t to be the policy of the 
management, as some customers migh t object to sittin g at table wit h a Negro , and 
the place i n question is one frequented by 
the well-known proletariat. 
Th e Negroe s ar e good enough to cook, 
nurse , fight, and die fo r us, but cannot sit 
at table and eat wit h whit e people. 
I wonde r i f this Negr o had been i n uniform, if that would have made a difference. 
Pau l Filton , a soldier back from "over 
there," tells of simila r injustice meted out 
to himself. H e continues i n the Brooklyn , 
N . Y. , Eagle: 
Is tha t a straw showin g whic h wa y the 
win d is going to blow hereafter for the 
Negro ? It has also been brought to my 
attention tha t the "K u Klu x Klan " are 
havin g new robes made, are polishin g up 
their rifles and getting ready to resume 
"nigh t riding. " Why ? Is it because these 
returnin g black soldiers, newly enfranchised by the war, may claim to be part 
and parce l of tha t "Democrac y for whic h 
they fought and for whic h man y have 
died? " 
We are not askin g favors. We are demandin g our rights. If the bigots are 
counting upon stil l relegating us to the back 
door of public hostelries, ha t i n hand, they 
are reckonin g withou t their host. If that 
modem "K u Klu x Klan " thinks tha t these 
har d fighting, straight-shooting veterans of 
the Worl d Wa r are the same timi d fieldhands, crouchin g i n terror, they have another "think " coming. We are going to 
demand, not social equality — no Negr o 
wants that, but an equal chance i n this fair 
land tha t they have helped to make safe. 
An equal chance with the Chinaman, 
Indian, Italian, Jew, Irishman, Yankee, or 
any one of the numerous races that go to 
make up this nation. W e are ful l fledged 
citizens and we have cut our "wisdom" 
teeth. We are not the "wards " of this na ­
tion, as are the Indians. We are component parts of this body politic . We have 
helped to gai n the Victor y for Democracy 
and we must share i n the fruits. 
* * * 
The Brookly n Standard-Union reports the 
views of Rev. W . S. Carpenter: 
W e helped carr y "Democracy " to France . 
On the retur n tri p home Negr o officers were 
not allowed to eat i n the same places wit h 
the other officers i n their regiment. Eve n 
in Camp Upto n recently Genera l Nicholson 
issued a "keep-off-the-grass" order to our 
soldiers wher e the whit e hostess houses 
were concerned. 
In different parts of the South the K u 
Klu x Kla n is reorganizing . Al l right.
predict tha t when they have a roll call 
after some of their contemplated rides, 
some of their riders wil l be enjoyin g the 
sleep whic h has no earthl y waking . 
I do not believe tha t m y men returnin g 
home from Franc e are seeking to make 
trouble anywhere . Bu t I do believe that 
neve r again wil l they withou t a struggle, 
submit to the indignitie s unde r whic h they 
have suffered since birth . W e have a countr y and we have a flag. W e seek unde r the 
flag we have carrie d to liv e i n peace. An d 
we are goin g to get justic e under this flag 
—o r pa y the price whic h justice demands. 
 I TH E CRISIS 3 0 
Unde r God lync h law must cease. If the 
Unite d States can prepar e to enforce the 
Eighteent h Amendment, it can as well enforce the Fourteenth and Fifteenth 
Amendments. While meeting in peace conferences i n France , let us remembe r some of 
the problems whic h wil l brin g peace to the 
citizens at home. An d such a peace wil l 
never be unti l rea l democracy is meant to 
embrace al l men, black as well as white . 
FEDERAL LAW FOR LYNCHING 
STAT E law has proved so worthless wit h 
regar d to lynchin g tha t it seems a 
truism to state tha t the only cure lies wit h 
the Federa l Government. Th e thoughtfu l 
element i n the South is beginnin g to see 
this. Th e Providence , R. I., Tribune comments: 
A rathe r remarkabl e editoria l articl e appeared the other day i n one of the ablest 
southern newspapers, the Houston Post, the 
subject bein g lync h law and the occasion 
the burnin g of a Negro . Th e Post dismissed as of sligh t consideration all proposals eithe r to punish the lynchers or to 
mulc t the communit y i n damages, as is 
proposed i n a bil l now pendin g i n the Texa s 
Legislature . It said : 
"Th e Post believes, however, tha t the halfcentury-old lynchin g problem is about to 
pass from the jurisdictio n of State authorit y into the domain of Federa l action. 
Surely, i n the ligh t of a half century of 
lynching , i n whic h the victims have numbered thousands, the failur e of the States 
must be confessed. * * * The failur e 
has been shamefully complete, and when 
the Federa l Government shall essay this 
task of suppressing anarch y and dealin g 
wit h those who set at naugh t the laws of 
the country and set themselves up as judge, 
jur y and executioner, no State whic h has 
a bloody record of mob law stainin g its 
escutcheon wil l have any righ t to protest." 
Comin g from a Southern newspaper, this 
is noteworthy. A s to the premises, there 
can be no dispute. Th e States have in 
trut h failed to suppress lynching , and this 
applies to Norther n as well as Southern 
States. I n some instances it is true, law 
officers i n Norther n States have shown more 
vigo r i n followin g up the crime than i n 
Southern States, but i n most cases littl e 
difference has been observable. No w and 
then some unusuall y determined official has 
been able to prevent a lynchin g by a displa y 
of grea t energy and persona l courage. Bu t 
such cases can be counted on one's fingers, 
whil e the unprecedented and unpunished 
lynchings are uncounted and uncountable. 
* * * 
Th e Ne w Yor k Tribune adds: 
Th e petition of the Internationa l Uplift 
League , an organizatio n whose members are 
Negroes, addressed to Presiden t Wilson , 
says: . 
Th e Unite d States governmen t cannot 
command abroad the ful l respect i t deserves if it continues to stan d aloof silently , 
unde r pretence of state rights, an d allo w 
its citizens to be saturate d wit h kerosene 
oil and burn t to death, butchered, torture d 
and lynched by bruta l mobs withou t reprov ­
in g and callin g the state t o account fo r vio ­
lating the Fifth Constitutional 
Amendment, which says, "No person shall be deprive d of life , libert y or propert y withou t 
due process of law. " 
Whil e this petition wa s on its wa y to the 
President, a compan y of blac k soldiers wa s 
returnin g to the Unio n Leagu e Clu b of 
Ne w Yor k the colors whic h the me n of 
the 367th Infantr y ten days less tha n a 
yea r before pledged themselves to "bea r 
bravel y and ultimatel y to restore " to the 
club. Th e deeds of this regimen t i n fulfillment of its pledge are now a part of the 
nation's wa r history . Recapitulatin g these 
deeds, Judg e Charle s E . Hughes, i n acceptin g the returne d colors fo r the club, said : 
"Thes e colors come to us as a memoria " 
of the loyalty , bravery , sacrifice an d splen 
did patriotism of the men of the colored 
race. The y have come forwar d i n this battle side by side wit h their whit e brethre n 
and tha t devotion to ou r countr y ca n neve r 
be forgotten. This is not onl y a memorial , 
as I have said, but it is a pledge—a pledge 
whic h we mak e to yo u as ou r colored 
brethren, and we shall not forge t the service whic h yo u have performed. " 
Whil e Judg e Hughe s wa s payin g this 
tribut e to the Negr o soldiers, a Florid a 
mob wa s burnin g a membe r of the rac e at 
the stake. 
* * * 
Th e Houston , Texas, Post give s a case 
i n point, whic h shows the inadequac y of 
State procedure : 
Th e most unique anti-lynchin g proceedin g i n the histor y of Texa s is bein g staged 
i n Austin , as a result of the recent lynch ­
in g of Brag g William s a t Hillsboro . 
Williams, it wil l be recalled, ha d been 
convicted and given the death penalt y and 
his case ha d been appealed. Pendin g the 
appeal, the mob took the prisone r fro m the 
custody of the sheriff and lynche d him . 
As a result of the probe ordered by 
Governor Hobby, information has been filed in 
the court of appeals against twelv e persons, and a rul e asked requirin g them to 
show cause wh y they should not be pun ­
ished fo r contempt of tha t court, before 
whic h Williams' appea l wa s pending . 
If the twelve persons be foun d guilt y o f 
contempt of court, they ma y be punishe d 
by fine and imprisonment. 
Bu t wha t kin d of wa y wil l this be of disposing of an offense tha t wa s cold-blooded 
murder ? 
If those twelve men wer e guilt y of par­TH E LOOKING GLASS 31 
ticipatin g i n the Hillsbor o mob, they have 
no business responding to a contempt proceeding i n Austin . The y ought to be i n 
jai l somewhere awaitin g a tria l fo r their 
lives. 
If there be evidence enough to warran t 
the state i n bringin g them to Austi n i n a 
contempt proceeding, whic h could not possibly hold except i n case of guilt, wh y have 
they not been arrested by the sheriff of 
Hil l County ? An d wh y has not a gran d 
jur y indicted them fo r murde r i n the first 
degree? 
If these men be punished for contempt, 
and i f no subsequent proceedings be in ­
stituted against them for murder, it wil l 
be a shameful confession of the failur e of 
our government and our courts. 
Th e Post feels tha t prosecution for lynch ­
in g fails because the officers are unwillin g 
to identif y the lynchers fo r fea r of unsatisfactor y results at the ballot box. The y are 
afrai d tha t a genuine effort a t defense 
would result i n the death of man y men 
whom influentia l relative s would avenge by 
means of the ballot. Th e articl e concludes : 
These are among the reasons wh y the 
Post has believed it migh t be possible for 
the Federa l Governmen t to make better 
progress tha n the states i n dealing wit h 
the curse of lynching. The Federal 
Government could handle these cases with a 
judicia l and constabulary personnel that 
would not be subject to vengeance at the 
ballot box. 
Th e Federa l Government migh t arrang e 
jurisdictio n i n such a wa y tha t it would be 
difficult fo r the friends and relatives of 
lynchers to intimidat e juries, and the jurie s 
being selected from points distant from the 
actua l seat of the crime , would be less susceptible to imprope r influences. 
Whil e the contempt proceedings i n Austi n 
are pending, i t is noted tha t representative 
citizens have appeared before the Hous e 
and Senate Committee s on Constitutiona l 
Amendments i n behalf of a change i n the 
Constitutio n tha t wil l enable the Legisla ­
tur e to pass more drasti c measures for the 
suppression of lynchin g and the punishment of those who engage i n it. 
Th e people of the State should rall y behin d any State action whic h promises results, but they should not be fooled. The 
probabilitie s are against favorabl e action 
upo n an amendment of a drasti c natur e or 
the effectiveness of drasti c legislation, even 
i f a n amendment were ratified. 
PENNSYLVANIA CAPITALISTS 
A LITTL E town i n Pennsylvani a gave 
a bi g impetus to Bolshevism recently. 
I n Coatesville , the dwellin g place of a number of "coa l barons, " action was taken by 
the employin g class whic h resulted i n the 
summar y ejection from the town of a number of people, whit e and black, whose one 
crime was lack of work . The Ne w Yor k 
Call comments: 
O f the grea t Negr o migratio n from the 
South the past few years, Coatesvill e received a supply for its labor market. Wit h 
the decline of employment there was no 
longer any need of these and man y whit e 
workers. Throw n out of work, they congregated about the streets, i n saloons and 
poolrooms. Th e noble soldiers of the barons 
made a raid, which we will permit the 
Evening Post to describe: 
"Mor e than fifty men were rounded up. 
Those who were unable to show that they 
were residents of Coatesvill e fo r at least a 
year, or cards from the steel or other plants 
showin g tha t they were employed, were 
then marched to the southern limits of the 
town and ordered to "head South." 
Virtually all of these men were penniless. No 
effort was made by the police to find out 
whether they could raise funds to leave the 
town by railroad . Al l were forced to walk. " 
This is "efficiency" wit h a vengeance. We 
are informed, also, tha t there has been no 
organized protests i n Coatesvill e "b y any of 
the civi c or other organizations " against this 
exile of unemployed whites and blacks. 
These civi c bodies are generally made up of 
the agents and parasites wh o get their liv ­
in g by their fealty to the controllin g dynasty of such cities. 
It wil l be noted that no color line is 
draw n i n this class struggl e by the rulin g 
powers. Blac k and whit e are undesirable 
when they no longer can serve the profitproducin g fraternity . Ther e is no vote 
taken, no mush y talk about "democracy" 
and such abstract things. Th e mounted 
bullies are called up, orders are given, and 
the victims are told to "beat it! " Scoot 
vamoose, 'raus mi t 'em! Whil e they are on 
their wa y through Pennsylvani a hills they 
ma y get some consolation by remembering 
that the President was speakin g i n Boston 
about the same time they were drive n out. 
and that, among other things, he said that 
we not only "thin k idealism, " but "act 
idealism." Here it is. How does the 
Pennsylvania brand strike you? 
* * * 
The Ne w Yor k Evening Post deplores 
the situation rathe r mildl y and advises 
Coatesvill e to consult wit h Boliva r County, 
Miss. : 
Th e recent maltreatment of unemployed 
Negroes i n one Pennsylvani a locality, described i n the Evening Post, happil y seems 
an isolated incident. Deportation from 
crude western communities of workers accused of disorderliness has at various times 
roused nationa l indignation ; arbitrar y deportation of men whose only crime was in ­
abilit y to find wor k would be wholl y inexcusable, 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
12 3 4 5 6 A SESSIO N O F TH E PAN-AFRICA N CONGRESS , PARIS , FEBRUAR Y 19-22, 1919. 
1. Candace, French Deputy from Guadaloupe; 2, Diagne, French Deputy from Senegal; 3, King, Peace Delegate from Liberia; 4, W. E. B. DuBois; 5, Ida Gibbs Hunt; 
6. Grossilliere, Deputy from Martinque; 7, Boisneur, Deputy Guadaloupe; 8, R. C. Simmons; 9, Mrs. Curtis; 10, Captain Boutte; 11, Mrs. Hunton; 12. B. F. 
Seldon; 13, Mme. Chapoteau; 14, John Hope 
 7 The Horizon 
VINCEN T 
SAUNDER S 
TH E WA R 
ON Marc h 15, 1919, the colors of the 
"Buffaloes, " 367th Infantry , were returne d to the Unio n Leagu e Club , Ne w 
York City , and afte r fitting ceremony placed 
at the head of the mai n stairwa y of the 
building . Th e club served a luncheon to 
the officers. 
C On April 3, the Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts, City of Boston and Citizens, arranged a publi c demonstration i n honor of 
the colored soldiers of Massachusetts. 
Following a military parade and banquet, exercises wer e held a t Mechanics' Buildin g 
before a n audience whic h numbered man y 
thousands. Addresse s were made b y the 
Governor, Calvin Coolfdge; the Mayor, 
Andrew J. Peters; Hon. David I. Walsh, U. S. 
Senator; Hon . Willia m H . Lewis and Hon . 
C. J . J . Flamand , Frenc h Consu l at Boston. 
Dr. Alice W. McKane, Miss Maria L. 
Baldwin, President of the Soldiers' Comfort 
Unit , and Mrs. B . R. Wilso n spoke as representatives of the women i n wa r activities. 
Specia l musi c features were sun g b y the 
Columbia Glee Club, Mr. William H. 
Richardson, baritone, with Mrs. Maud Cuney 
Har e and Mr . Frederi c P . Whit e a t the 
piano. Teels' Ban d gave patrioti c selections. 
C. Th e Mayo r of Pittsburgh , Pa. , issued a 
proclamation, which said in part: "On 
Friday morning of this week Pittsburgh will 
have the privileg e of welcomin g home from 
overseas a part of the 351st Fiel d Artiller y 
Regiment, composed of colored troops ... . 
Whe n President Wilso n issued his appeal, 
callin g upon the people i n these Unite d 
States to rall y to the support of 'Ol d Glory, ' 
there wa s a noble response. Non e wa s more 
spontaneous than tha t from the colored people of this nation. B y their deeds they 
have writte n their names i n golden letters 
in histor y ... . Those who bore arms fo r 
us were first i n war. I n peace let us show 
them tha t they are stil l first i n the hearts 
of their fellow-citizens. " 
C B y a vote of 72-49 the Hous e has passed 
the bil l authorizin g a Negr o battalio n i n 
connection wit h the Minnesot a Nationa l 
Guard . 
MUSIC AN D AR T 
IN a recent competition for the Freshma n 
Class Song at Radcliffe College, 
Cambridge, Mass., the honors were won by Miss 
Mariett a Bonner, of Boston, the only colored gir l i n he r class. The song wa s given 
at the performances of the Freshma n pla y 
and is the accepted Class Son g for 1922. 
C A t the Orpheus Clu b concert, given at 
Philadelphia , Pa. , on Marc h 12, Coleridge -
Taylors' "Candle-Lightin ' Time " and the 
Negr o Spiritua l "Th e Ark's a Moverin " 
were sun g by Mrs. Edit h C. Goold. 
C Th e Thir d Book of Negr o Folk-Song s 
of the "Hampton Series," recorded by 
Natalie Curtis Burlin, has been published and 
is commented upon at length i n the musi c 
journals. 
C Charle s A . Marshall , dramati c baritone 
of Philadelphia , Pa. , gave a recita l i n the 
Paris h Hous e of St. Paul's Episcopa l 
Church, white, of which the Syracuse 
Journal says: "It has been a long time since 
such a splendid voice came to Syracuse . Mr . 
Marshal l has a voice of splendid range and 
cultivation. H e sang songs rangin g from 
grand opera to Negr o melodies, and i n all 
scored a grea t success." Lyndo n Hoffman 
Caldwel l was the accompanist. 
( I The Apri l CRISI S made a mistake i n announcing the date of Mr . Wilso n Lamb's 
recita l at Aeolia n Hall , Ne w Yor k City . 
The correct date is Ma y 1. 
C Miss A . Louis e Kin g a colored musician , 
is a member of the Musi c Staff of the Musi c 
Settlement, Philadelphia , Pa . 
(I Pieces of sculpture by May Howard 
Jackson were exhibited during March and April 
at the Nationa l Academy of Desig n and at 
' the showin g of The Society of Independent 
Artists, at the Waldorf-Astoria . A bust of 
Kell y Mille r and the group "Brotherhood, " 
shown on the Easte r CRISI S cover, were 
among the pieces accepted. A pictur e of 
the latte r appears i n the catalogue of the 
Society. 
C The 369th U. S. Infantry Band, 
Lieutenant James Reese Europe, conductor, is now 
on tour i n this country. On Marc h 28 and 29, 
they were heard by large audiences at the 
33 34 TH E
Oper a House, Boston, Mass., and a retur n 
engagement has been demanded. 
This band was ranke d i n Paris wit h the 
Britis h Grenadiers, the Garde Republicain e 
and the Roya l Italian , as one of the fou r 
best bands i n the world . 
MEETING S 
AT the sixth annual meeting of the 
Association of Colleges for Negro Youth, 
held at Morehouse College and Atlanta 
University, March 14-15, Benjamin Brawley, 
Dean of Morehous e College, was elected 
President. Dea n M . W . Adams, of Atlant a 
University , and Professor G. M . Lightfoot, 
of Howar d University , were elected members of the executive committee. The organizatio n now consists of the followin g in ­
stitutions: Wilberforce , Howard , Fisk , 
Knoxville , Virgini a Union , Shaw, Benedict. 
Atlanta , Morehouse , Talladeg a and Bishop . 
C At a meeting of the Rotary Club, 
Newport News, Va., a committee of five 
Rotarians was appointed to put into practice the 
suggestions of Bisho p W . T. Thirkiel d fo r 
co-operation between white s and Negroe s of 
the better class to the end of understandin g and helpfulness. 
C A t a meeting held at the home of Mrs. 
Albert T. Erdman , Ne w Yor k City , to discuss plans for pre-vocationa l and vocationa l 
trainin g fo r colored children, the followin g 
resolution, proposed by Mrs. A . M . Palme r 
an d favorabl y spoken of by Mme . Mari e 
Cross Newhouse , was adopted : 
Whereas, the America n people have protested loudly and effectively against the 
wrongs of people and races of people on the 
the other side of the Atlantic , ignorin g the 
fact tha t over ten millio n native American s 
are deprived of their rights and protections 
they are entitled to under the Constitutio n 
and' laws of the Unite d States because they 
belong to the Negr o race, and 
Wherea s these America n citizens are the 
victims of mob violence and brutal 
lynchings, which are not only a disgrace to our 
nation, a menace to internationa l relations, 
but implan t in the minds of all foreigners 
a distrust and contempt for our laws and 
institutions, and 
Whereas, the Negr o soldiers displayed 
durin g the late wa r a courage and patriotism not surpassed by any other America n 
soldier, therefore be it 
Resolved, that the New York City 
Federation of Women's Clubs express its appreciation of the devotion and unswervin g loyalt y 
of the colored citizens of the Unite d States 
and appeal to the women of the country to 
uphold the equality of rights guaranteed by 
our laws and Constitution. 
 CRISIS 
C The annua l session of the Sunda y School 
Congress of whic h the Rev. Henr y Alle n 
Boy d is correspondin g secretary, wil l be held 
Jun e 11-16, at Bessemer, Ala . 
C The Nationa l Baptist Educationa l Boar d 
wil l convene a t Mt . Olive t Baptist Church , 
Atlanta , Ga. , Ma y 12-16. 
INDUSTR Y 
NEGR O ca r builders of the Pennsylvani a 
Railroa d Company , Wellsville , Ohi o 
have organized under the American 
Federation of Labor. Mr. S. Austin was elected 
president. Th e Round-Hous e Laborers and 
Statio n Firemen , consistin g of whit e an d 
colored workers, have organize d unde r the 
Internationa l Brotherhoo d of Stationar y 
Firemen and Oilers, and elected W. W. 
Lambert, a Negro, to the presidency, 
d Negroe s i n the Harle m section of Ne w 
Yor k Cit y have begun a Negr o Boar d of 
Trade , wit h George W . Harris, Chairman . 
G Negroe s at Huntsvill e Ala. , have organ ­
ized a Boar d of Trade , wit h Mr . A . C. 
Donegan as president. 
C The Sta r Buildin g and Loa n Associatio n 
Toledo, Ohio, at its annua l meetin g declared 
a two and one-half pe r cent dividend . This 
institutio n wa s incorporate d i n 1913 and 
Mario n E . Authe r is president. It lends 
money on first mortgage securities. 
(L Last sprin g Mr . W . M . Hubbard , who 
conducts a school for Negro children at 
Forsyth, Ga., allotted thirty four boys from one 
to three acres of land , wit h the understandin g tha t they wer e to be give n the net proceeds from the crops grown . Th e receipts 
fo r far m products wer e $4,882; hogs, $483; 
campus, $217; a tota l of $5,582. 
C Th e U . S. Departmen t of Labo r reports 
the migratio n of a t least 200,000 an d possibly 300,000 Negroe s from the South to 
the Nort h durin g wa r times. Amon g the 
causes reported are dissatisfactio n wit h conditions, the boll-weevil floods, changes of 
crop system, low wages, poor housin g and 
schools, unfairness i n court proceedings 
lynchings, desire to trave l and the influence 
of the Negr o press. 
POLITIC S 
MAYO R MOLLMA N wa s beaten by a 
10,148 to 1,611 vote i n the first election East St. Louis. 111., has had unde r the 
commission form of government, whic h wa s TH E 35 HORIZON 
adopted afte r the race riots of July , 1917. 
([ B y a margi n of one vote equal suffrage 
met its fourth defeat in the Senate. 
Advocates announce, however, that the now 
nearl y half a century old campaig n for submission of the Susa n B . Anthon y constitutiona l amendment wil l be renewed when 
the Sixty-sixt h Congress convenes. 
EDUCATIO N 
THE Independent School of Wilson , N . C , 
is a result of the slappin g of Miss 
Mar y Ewell , a Negr o teacher, by Professor 
Charle s L . Coon, durin g the session of 1918. 
Tw o thousand and fort y dollars wa s raised 
among Negroe s fo r the establishment of this 
institution . Fiv e hundred dollars per month 
is needed fo r its maintenance . Ther e is a n 
enrollment of six hundred children, wit h 
eight teachers. Mr . R. N . Perr y is principa l 
of the school. 
C Th e Ohi o Valle y Colored Industria l 
Home , Wheeling , W . Va. , has been given 
$1,000 from the Wa r Chest Fund . 
C McDougal l Trad e Shop at the Okolona , 
Miss. , Industria l School wit h its contents 
has been destroyed b y fire of an unknown 
origin . Th e damage above insuranc e has 
been estimated at $16,000. 
C Th e bil l permittin g second-class cities i n 
Kansas to provide separate schools for 
Negroes has met defeat in the House. 
C Negroes of Burton Settlement, 
Natchitoches, La., have deposited in a local bank 
$1,051 fo r the establishment of a Negr o 
Paris h Trainin g School i n tha t settlement. 
The school wil l be a publi c institution, owned 
and controlled by the Paris h School Board . 
C The 1918 fall semester honor roll at 
Butler College, which is composed of the ten 
students i n the entir e school makin g the 
highest grades, includes Miss Merl e Stokes, 
a Negr o student. 
C Dr. William P. Hayes, pastor of Mt. 
Olivet Baptist Church, New York City, has 
been elected a member of the Board of 
Trustees of Virginia Union University, succeedin g the late Dr . Binga . 
C Professor Alain Leroy Locke, of the 
Department of Education, Howard University 
wil l delive r fou r lectures to the Summe r 
School of the A. & T. College, at 
Greensboro, N. C. Professor Locke is the only 
America n Negr o wh o has won the Rhodes' 
Scholarship to Oxfor d University . H e holds 
the degrees of A.B. , A.M. , Ph.D. , from Har ­
var d University , Cambridge , Mass., and the 
degree of Litt.B . from Oxfor d University , 
England . 
(I Th e Joh n F . Slate r Fun d has issued its 
Proceedings and Reports for the year endin g September 30, 1918. 
SOCIAL PROGRES S 
RICHAR D A . COOPER , a Negr o common Councilma n from the Seventh 
Ward , Philadelphia , Pa. , has been appointed 
a membe r of the Financ e Committee, the 
most importan t sub-division of the city's 
legislative system. 
G February , 1919, marke d the thir d anniversary of the Carnegie Negro Public 
Library in Nashville, Tenn. The library held 
durin g the past yea r 148 meetings of civi c 
clubs; served 18,745 persons; used 98,000 
books fo r research work, and circulated 3,­
600 books i n homes. 
(I On Februar y 12, Lincol n Hous e at Glen 
Cove, L . I., celebrated its first anniversary . 
During last summer the Women's 
Department canned five hundred jars of vegetables; there are a circulatin g librar y of over 
three hundred volumes, a communit y chorus, 
dramati c and athletic clubs, a kindergarte n 
and the Kiddi e Club , whic h numbers forty 
children. Th e settlement is a result of the 
interest of Mrs. George D . Pratt. The wor k 
has been i n charge of Alic e War d Smith . 
d The Ushers' Unio n i n Wilmington , Del. , 
composed of ushers i n the colored churches, 
has raised funds and purchased an ambulance fo r Edgewood Sanitarium, a tuberculosis institution for Negroes. 
C William N. Cummings, of the 
Meadowbrook Club, has accomplished a new feat 
by winnin g both the junio r and senior events 
i n the cross countr y championship of the 
Middl e Atlanti c Associatio n of the A . A . U . 
Mr . Cumming s wa s captai n of the cross 
country team at the University of 
Pennsylvania last year. 
(I George Dewe y Lipscomb, a Negr o sophomore of Northwester n University , has been 
selected to represent his college i n the 
Norther n Oratorica l League contest, Ma y 
2, at Northwestern . H e wil l have competitors from the Universitie s of Illinois, 
Michigan , Wisconsin , Minnesota , Iowa , and 
Oberli n College. H e was chosen after win ­
nin g the Kir k Oratorica l Contest against 
five whit e competitors. 
C Th e Cleveland Branc h of the N . A . A . 
C. P., through Attorne y Harr y E . Davis, 36 TH E
Chairma n of its Lega l Committee , has secured a decision involving' the Ohio Civi l 
Rights Law : The Clevelan d Municipa l Court 
in the case of Francis E . Youn g against 
a restaurant-keepe r who had refused to 
serve him had decided i n favo r of the defendant. Attorne y Davis carrie d the case to 
the Court of Appeals, on the groun d that 
the lower court was i n erro r i n chargin g 
tha t the plaintiff was not entitled to redress 
because he had applied fo r service solely 
to stir u p litigation . The Court of Appeals 
ruled against this doctrine. 
C I n Ohio the Beatt y Civi l Rights Bill , 
preventin g discriminatio n against Negroe s 
by hotels, places of amusement, etc., was 
adopted by the Hous e wit h three opposing 
votes. 
(I A bil l by Representative Coffey, Oregon, 
whic h would give equal rights to Negroe s 
i n public places has been defeated 23-21. 
Representative Lewis was late r brought by 
officers from a locked room, where he sought 
refuge to avoid voting. Mrs. Thompson 
voiced a protest against tryin g to stifle the 
bil l withou t debate, although she declared 
that because of her racia l prejudice developed as a native daughte r of Kentuck y she 
must vote against the bill . Representatives 
Gordon . Horne , Coffey, Hosford , Idleman, 
Kubli , Lofgren , Richardso n and E . E . Smit h 
voted for the bill . 
C The Day Nursery Association of 
Evansville, Ind., has raised $2,922.45, of which 
the Negr o citizens contributed $2,000, for 
a day nursery for colored children. Twenty -
five hundred dollars has been used for the 
purchase of a home at 906 S. Governo r 
Street, and the balance wil l be used towar d 
current expenses for the year. Mrs. L . H . 
Stewart is president of the Association . 
C A t Jefferson City , Mo. , the House has 
adopted a resolution providin g chairs fo r 
assistant doorkeepers. Ther e are twentyeight such employees, eighteen of whom are 
Negroes. 
C Loew's Theatr e i n Montreal , Canada , 
was fined ten dollars and costs i n the suit 
brought by Sol Reynolds for havin g been 
refused admittanc e to an orchestra seat 
after havin g been sold a ticket. Justic e 
Forti n found tha t "the printed conditions 
on the ticket, although authorizin g the revocation of the contract can only justif y 
such revocation before the contrac t is executed or i n the course of execution. " 
 CRISIS 
C A petition for Negr o teachers an d prin ­
cipals in the schools for Negroes in 
Richmond, Va., has been circulated through the 
Negr o churches and been signed by 21 375 
persons. 
PERSONA L 
WILLIA M A . SLATER , wh o fo r man y 
years has been president of the 
Joh n F . Slate r Fund , is dead. 
(I Miss Ethe l Caution , a Negr o graduat e of 
Wellesle y College , has been sent to Lo s Angele
creationa l center fo r colored girls. 
C The Rev. Joh n T. Jenifer, wh o built 
Quin n Chape l i n Chicago , 111., thirty-one 
years ago, is dead a t the age of eighty-five 
years. 
(I Dr. Gordo n Phipps, of Corsicana , Tex., 
is dead. H e wa s bor n a t Hartford , Ky. , 
Januar y 4, 1859, and wa s a graduat e of 
Roger Williams and Meharry Medical 
College. 
C[ Bisho p Corneliu s Thadeus Shaffer, of the 
Africa n Methodist Episcopa l Church , is 
dead. 
(I Th e Cit y Commissioners of Knoxvill e 
Tenn., have placed a tablet in the new 
Carnegie Library of that city, which reads: 
'This tablet is erected by the City 
Commissioners of Knoxville in recognition of 
the faithfu l efforts of Charle s W . Cansler, 
who first conceived the idea of this librar y 
for his race, and wh o aided materiall y i n 
securing it." A late edition of Public 
Libraries contains the address given by Mr. 
Cansler upon the dedication of the building. 
GHETT O 
AN amendment to the Nevad a Priz e 
Fightin g La w has been passed b y the 
Senate to prevent a whit e ma n from engagin g i n a contest wit h a Negro . 
C Brigadier-Genera l W . W . Atterbury , 
who wa s grante d leave of absence b y the 
Pennsylvani a Railroa d to become Directo r 
of Transportatio n i n France , has intro ­
duced Negr o trai n porters "ove r there. " 
0 A t Cam p Sherman , Chillicothe , Ohio, 
there remains but one colored officer, 
Lieutenant Lawrence A. Oxley, Morale Officer 
for the Reserve Labo r Battalion . Th e othe r 
Negr o officers have been ordered honorabl y 
discharged, and those of the Depot Brigad e 
have been discharged by command of Major -
Genera l Edwi n F . Glenn . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R •",7 
CRIM E 
THE personnel of the court martia l board 
appointed by President Wilso n for the 
second tria l of thirteen Negr o soldiers accused of assaultin g a whit e woma n of 
Bloomington , 111., last May , wil l include 
Colone l Charle s Young , commandin g the 
development units a t Cam p Grant , who wil l 
be presidin g officer. 
C A report of the tria l of eighteen persons indicted fo r the lynchin g of Wil l Byr d 
and Henr y Whiteside , Novembe r 10-12, at 
Sheffield, Ala. , states tha t the jur y took 
only twent y minute s fo r the first acquittal, 
the second case was quickl y disposed of and 
the remainin g sixteen persons were ordered 
dismissed by the court. 
C Th e Jackson , Miss. , Daily News published the followin g anonymous repl y to the 
telegram of the N . A . A . C. P . protesting 
to the Governo r against the lynchin g of 
Eugen e Green, a t Belzonie , Miss. : 
"Th e Governo r is not in the city , and the 
telegram has not been answered. However, 
the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People need not remain in 
the dar k concerning the fate of Green. H e 
wa s 'advanced' all righ t from the end of a 
rope, an d i n order to save buria l expenses 
his body wa s thrown into the Yazo o River. 
If this informatio n does not suffice, we can 
give yo u the size of the rope and the exact location of wher e this coon was hung. " 
(L Th e followin g lynching s have taken place 
since our last record : 
Monroe , La. , Januar y 29 — Sampson 
Smith , hanged ; he was convicted of the 
murde r of Blanchar d Warner ; the verdict, 
however, specified tha t capita l punishment 
should not be the penalty. 
Newburn, N. C, February 6—John 
Daniels, hanged; he was taken from jail at 
Jacksonville , where he was held for the 
murde r of Grove r Dickery . 
Bossier, La., February 14—Will 
Fortner, hanged; he had been arrested, charged 
wit h the murde r of T. C. Owens. 
Belzonie , Miss. , Marc h 2, Eugene Green ; 
he wa s taken from jail , accused of being 
the assailant of Marsha l Hagan , by a mob 
and has not been seen since. 
Greenville , Fla. , Marc h 12, Joe Walker ; 
he wa s seized by a mob and shot to death, 
charged wit h havin g shot a watchman . 
Pensacola , Fla. , Marc h 14, Bu d Johnson ; 
he wa s taken from the county officers and 
burned to death fo r the alleged attackin g 
of a whit e woman . 
"THES E AR E THEY" ­
or at least some of them. 
I alway s enjoy the perusal of your very interesting: magazine . Fo r one thing , it keeps me from 
becoming too well satisfied with myself and wit h 
existing conditions. Whil e I cannot alway s subscribe to your conclusions, I a m in hearty sympathy with your efforts for Equalit y of Mankind , 
I know it must come. A s a disciple of the groat 
world teacher, Abdu l Baha , this fac t is apparent 
and he who opposes the doctrine wil l be destroyed. 
Fo r Trut h is might y and must prevail! Fo r the 
faithful , it is a might y fortress; for the opposer 
a sword of destruction. Althoug h not of your 
race, I a m heartil y with you. God bless you and 
your work ! 
—Josep h H . Hannen , Washington , D . C. 
Pleas e find enclosed $1.00 for subscription for 
the coming year . I ma y bo able to do without 
my daily pape r but I am afraid I could not get 
along without the CRISI S coming into my home 
once a month. It is with great pleasure tha t 
I offer the names of a few of my friends as possible subscribers. 
—Alfre d T. Darby , Roxbury , Mass. 
Th e dolla r spent for the CRISI S in 1918 was the 
best investment I made in that year therefor e 
I a m willin g to tr y it again in 1919. 
—J . Alle n Reese, Venice , Cal . 
with a!! modern Suburba n Home s improvements on 
electric car line connecting Washington, Baltimore, 
Annapolis and Camp Meade. Aut o road. 30 minutes' ride to city. 
Nea r Washington , D. C . Lots 60 by 150, $270, $10 down. $5 monthly Houses 
built to order after $100 or more is paid" on lot. 
Fertile land, good elevation, gardens, chickens, etc. 
Store, school, churches, community club. Booklet free: Thos. J . Callowa y I 
1403 Ne w Yor k Avenue live Among Friends Washington, D . C . there 
C . M . BATTEY , Instructor PHOTOGRAPHI C DIVISIO N 
Tuskege e Institut e - Alabam a 
Post Cards De Luxe 
"EMINEN T MEN " Series 
comprising a collection of six "Art 
Gems" made from Life Particularly Designed with a Refined and Artistic Temperament and intended only for those 
who arc Refined and Particular. 
The Set—Twenty-five Cents 
Write for Series Sets of "Eminent Men" and 
"Types of Beauty" 
"Ol d Characters " Series to Follow. 
The American Negro 
is one of the many interesting 
articles in the 
MA Y ISSUE O F 
PEARSON' S MAGAZIN E 
Buy it TODAY 20c. a copy 
34 Union Square, New York City 38 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
MEN AND WOMEN TRAINED IN AGRICULTURE 
WILL BE IN GREAT DEMAND AFTER THE WAR 
Secretary Lane is urging that plans and 
surveys and studies be instituted now so that 
when demobilization begins, farms and homes 
may be offered to the returned soldiers on the 
most encouraging terms. 
Under the Smith-Hughes Vocational Ed ­
ucation Act, the Government is already training Teachers, Agriculturalists and Mechanics 
whose services will be in great demand after 
the war to help these soldiers and rural inhabitants adjust themselves to the problems 
of reconstruction. 
Tuskegee Institute offers the Smith-Hughes Course in: 
Teacher-Training Agriculture Mechanics Home Economics 
Splendid opportunities for young men and women of purpose , an d an exceptional 
chance for young men who have been placed in deferred classes or exempted. 
You may enroll NOW. 
Address, R. R. MOTON, Principal, Tuskegee Institute, Alabama 
"Plans for providing the 
returned soldier with land 
are rapidly taking shape. 
* * * Let us not think of 
the individual returned soldier exiled to a tongue of 
green land between the 
stony breasts of western 
mountains * * * but of organic communities of one 
or two hundred farms with 
competent agricultural advisers to brace up the technique of those who are 
willing to learn."—The New 
Republic. 
THE HAMPTON NORMAL AND AGRICULTURAL INSTITUTE 
Hampton, Virginia 
OBJECT—Founde d in 1868 
by General Samuel C. Arm ­
strong to train selected youth 
who should go out to teach 
and train their people. The 
Institute was designed to instruct Negro youth in morality, industry, and thrift. 
HAMPTO N TODAY—A n 
industrial village with 900 
boarding students; 1,100 
acres; 140 buildings; instruction farm of 835 acres; and 
200 teachers and workers 
Hampton stands for a "sound 
body, a trained capacity, and 
an unselfish outlook on life." 
Hampton is on the State of 
Virginia list of approved 
four-year secondary schools. 
COURSE S —Recently revised four-year courses in 
Teache r Training; Home 
Economics; Business; Agriculture; and 13 Trades. 
OVE R 650 HAMPTONIAN S HAV E BEE N 
IN NATIONA L SERVIC E 
The young men are under military discipline, and are formed into a battalion 
with student officers. 
JAMES E. GREGG, D. D., Principal 
Mention The Crisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 39 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FOR YOUR GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary , Grammar , High , Normal , Vocational. 
Nurs e Trainin g at McLeo d Hospital a specialty. Term s reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , - - Principal. 
TALLADEGA COLLEGE 
TALLADEGA, ALABAMA 
Founded in 1867, for the training of Negro Leaders. 
Beautiful and healthful location. First class equipment. 
A Theological Seminary. College courses leading to the A . B. degree — Classics, 
Science, Education, Social Service, Music. Manual training for both sexes. Large 
attention given to debating and public speaking. Nurse Training. Agriculture. 
Graduates enter professional courses in the best Northern Universities. Alabama 
grants first grade teachers' certificates to graduates in Education. 
The product of the College noted for fine character and efficient service. 
Rev. FREDERIC K A. SUMNER , President. 
The Stenographers' Institute 1827 S. 17th St., Philadelphia , Pa . 
Yo u can be a success in the 
RECONSTRUCTION PERIOD if you know 
Phonography Typewriting Bookeeping 
EDWAR D T . DT7NCAN , President 
BUSTS OF 
Booker T. Washington, 
Fred Douglass, Paul 
Lawrenc e Dunbar , 
Bishop Richard Allen. 
$1.50 each. The 4 busts for {5.00 
Agents wanted. Send at once. 
The Isaac Hathaway Art 
Company 
718 S. HICKOR Y STREET PINE BLUFF , ARK . 
Books? See the Selected List on 
Inside Back Cover 
The Colored Teachers'Bureau Wil l Help Yo u Get a Better Paying Position. 
REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TERM S 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Bo x 22, Wilberforce , 0. 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL An Episcopal boarding school for girls, under the direction of the sisters of St. Mary. Address; TH E SISTEK-1N -CHARGE , 6138 Germantown Avenue, Philadelphia, Pa. 
HALE INFIRMARY AND NURSE TRAINING 
SCHOOL, 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. Offers to Hig h School graduates and young 
women of higher education and good moral 
character, between the ages of 18 and 35, a 
three years' course in the profession of nursing. Fo r further information apply to the 
Superintendent enclosing a stamp. 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTED Al l Race s 
Prepare in the best school of its kin d in the State. 
Subjects 
Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, English, Penmanship, Civil Service Training , and SPANISH . 
COMMERCIA L CLAS S 
Lenox Communit y Center—at 
PUBLIC SCHOOL 89 Leno x Avenue and 135th St., Ne w Yor k City . 
Open Ail Year—Four Evenings Weekly. 
Fit z W . Mottley, President. 
A live agency furnishes the TEACHERS connecting medium in a business way between teachers and schools and relieves 
teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida , 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Mary ­
land, Mississippi, • Missouri, New York , North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, 
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virgini a and West 
Virginia . 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1403 Ne w Yor k Avenue Washington , D . C . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 40 
TH E PAC E & HAND Y MUSI C COMPANY , Inc., of New York City, 
under the management of W . C. Handy, invites the attention of readers of 
TH E CRISIS to their wonderful catalog of music and the various concerns 
who are contributing to its popularity. 
A GOO D MA N I S HAR D T O FIN D b y Eddi e Green , shee t musi c 15c. pe r copy . 
Ban d an d Orchestra , .25c. each . 
A GOO D MA N I S HAR D T O FIN D ma y be ha d fo r Columbia , Victor , Emer ­
son , Edison , Pathe , Gennet t an d Aeolia n Records . 
O H DEAT H WHER E I S TH Y STIN G (Comic) . O n al l phonographs . 
RINGTAI L BLUES . O n al l phonograph s an d playe r rolls. 
THINKIN G O F THE E ( a classi c 1. B y Harr y II Pace , an d suitabl e fo r an y 
musica l program . 
TH E SON G TH E SUNN Y SOUTHLAN D SINGS , in whic h th e ol d America n 
airs ar e interwoven . 
SATA N I' M HERE . Ful l o f laughs. 
DOW N B Y TH E CHATTAHOOCHE E RIVER . A beautifu l ballad . 
OL E MISS . B y W . C. Handy . O n Columbi a Records , o n OKE H Records . Mad e 
popula r b y th e Universit y o f Mississippi . 
I' M DYIN G WIT H TH E WORRIE D BLUE S th e greatest BLU E son g sinc e a 
GOO D MA X I S HAR D T O FIND . 
TH E SAIN T LOUI S BLUES , Handy' s masterpiec e A classic . O n ever y phono ­
grap h i n America . Now bein g translate d int o Frenc h an d Spanis h fo r Euro ­
pea n an d Sout h America n exploitation . 
Al l o f ou r musi c ma y be ha d o n Q R S, U . S., Imperial , Vocalstyle , Pianostyle , 
Wurlitizer , Connorized , Aeolian , Universal , Standard , Rythmodik , Automatic , 
Ros e Valley , Nationa l Playe r Rolls . 
Hea r Mr . Handy' s HAI L T O TH E SPIRI T O F FREEDO M Marc h o n th e W . W . 
Kimbal l Playe r Roll , an d if yo u ar e patrio t prou d o f race , insist o n vou r ban d 
an d orchestr a playin g HAI L T O TH E SPIRI T O F FREEDO M b y Hand v 
an d ALLIE S TRIUMPHA L MARC H b y Frederic k M . Brya n 
Th e Followin g song s ma y be ha d o f an y musi c dealer, o r at th e counter s o f an y 
Woolworth , Krc" , Kresge , McCrory , Kraft , Goggan , Wilne r an d othe r Syn ­
dicat e Store s fo r IO C pe r copy : 
SWEE T CHIL D TH E KAISER' S GO T TH E BLUE S 
YOUN G BLAC K JO E WH O HAV E YO U BEE N LOVIN G 
A GOO D MA N I S HAR D T O FIN D SINC E I WEN T AWA Y 
REMEMBE R AN D B E CAREFU L LOVE' S A FUNN Y PROPOSITIO N 
EVER Y DA Y ( A Mothe r Song ) STRON G AN D STEAD Y ROUG H 
I' M S O GLA D M Y DADDY' S COM - AN D READY , SON S O F UNCL E 
IN G HOM E SA M 
SHAKE , RATTL E AN D ROL L N O NAM E WALT Z 
SNAKE Y BLUE S MAUVOLEYEN E WALT Z 
PREPAREDNES S BLUE S TH E DANCIN G DEACO N 
Beside s bein g abl e to suppl y yo u wit h record s t o sui t styl e o f machine , o f th e num ­
bers mentioned , w e als o carr y i n stoc k a complet e lin e o f ROLAN D HAYE S 
Records . 
Whe n in New Yor k cal l to see us. 
Writ e toda y fo r this beautifu l musi c an d ou r illustrate d catalog . 
Address 
PACE & HANDY MUSIC COMPANY, Inc. 
(Home of th e Blues) 
1547 Broadway New York, N. Y . 
Mention The Crisis THE 41 CRISIS ADVERTISER 
FLORENC E COLE-TALBER T 
Soprano 
"Shu lias one of the best voices that God b u given 
her race."—Los Angeles Times. "Special praise must be given Mrs. Florence Tal­ bert who beside her natural gift has already reached a high plane of professional accuracy."—German De­ vries In Chicago American. 
Kiig&cenipnts accepted for Concerts, Recitals, Oratorio. 659 28th Street Detroit, Mich. 
Clarence Cameron White 
VIOLINIST "Critic s are one in their 
high estimate of the splendid 
attainments of Clarenc e 
Cameron Whit e and his Con ­
cert appearance in your city 
means the musical event of 
the season. Fo r terms and dates address 
616 COLUMBUS AVENUE BOSTON, MASS. 
CLEOT A COLLIN S LYRI C SOPRAN O 
"Miss Collins pusses^ & voice of wonderful quality 
which she manages with admirable taste and skill. Her 
personal charm and beauty enhanced the pleasure enjoyed 
from the really excellent program presented. The audience 
of music lovers in attendance were enthusiastic in their 
appreciation of the talented young lady."—Newark Daily 
News. ENGAGEMENT S ACCEPTE D 
103 "W. 143d St. Ne w Yor k City . 
INVINCIBLE CONCERT CO. 
High Class Entertainers 
Churches Schools Lodges Y. M . C. A.'S 
For dates and terms write: 
1910 E . 24th Street, Kansas City, Mo . 
My court* in Penmanship" Bookkeeping, and Shorthand 
through the mat will prepare you lor the position worth 
while. Write for information. 
A. D.Nolley, M . Pen., 519 Michigan Me. , Buffalo N.Y. 
Roland W. Hayes 
Phonograph Records 
NOW READ Y AN D O N SAL E 
(Order by Number) No. I. Swino Low. Swoot Chariot $1.50 
Negro Spiritual, by Harry T. Burleigh. No. 2. Vostl La Glubba (Put on Your Sraook).. .$2.00 Artoeo from I'agllaccl, Orchestral Accompaniment, Leoncavallo. 
No. 3. Twilight $1.00 
By Catherine A. Qlen. No. 7. By and By $1.60 
By Harry T. Burleigh. 
AGENTS BOSTON, Man. , A. J. Jackson & Co.. 130 Boyliton St. BOSTON. Mass., Harold Wbitham. 1781 Washington St. 
BOSTON. Mass., Hicks. Laney 4 Eaton, 798 Tre­ mont St. 
BOSTON. Mail., It. A. Dlnsmore. 1221 Tremont SL CAMBRIDGE. Mass.. Mrs. O. W. Nowell, 890 Main St. SPRINGFIELD, Mass.. J. W Adams. 160 Eastern Ave. WOUURN. Mass.. Edward Caldwell, 388 Main SL DETROIT, Mich., Miss Grace L. May. 253 Woodland 
MONTGOMERY. Ala.. Wm. O. Porter, 368 Margaret St. TUSKEGEE . Ala.. Arthur Logan, Tuskegee Institute. BIRMINGHAM, Ala., Miss E. O. Wyatt, 1319 Ave­ nue H . 
JACKSONVILLE, Fla., J. M. Robinson. Jr.. 1921 East St. 
BALTIMORE, Md„ W. H. Roberts. 236 N. Amity St. PORTLAND, Ore., Mra. E. D. Cannady, 401 Buchanan Bldg. 
PHILADELPHIA . Pa., Mrs. Margaret Corbott, 1941 Balnbriuge St. 
SAN FRANCISCO. Cel.. Harry O. Johnson, Security Savings Bank. 
OAKLAND , Cel., Mrs. A. M. Smith, 494 Moss Ave. CHARLESTON , S. C . E. B. Lawrence, 470 King SL NORFOLK. Va_. Miss B. C. Smith, 822 Avenue A. 
PITTSBURGH. Pa.. Mrs. Chas. H. Trusty, 820 Ana­ heim St. WASHINGTON. D. C Dr. C. Sumner Wormley. 997 Florida Ave. 
SPRINGFIELD. III., Miss Alice E. Williams, Box 131. Chatham, 111. MADISONVILLE. Ky., J. A. Watson, 117 Main St LOUISVILLE, Ky., Mrs. H . W. Jordan, 822 W. Wal­ nut St. 
LOUISVILLE. Ky., Columbia Phonograph Co. PROVIDENCE. R. I., Miss Fiorina M- Williams. 297 Thayer SL 
NEW YORK CITY. N . Y. . Dr. Harry O. Blue, 663 Lenox Ave. 
MONTCLAIR. N . J. . James D. Williams, 7 Walnut Pi. C0LLINGSWO0D, N . J. . Mr. R. M. Taylor, 501 Park Ave. 
WACO. Texas. Miss Lula Mayes, 1127 N. 7th SL MERIDIAN. Miss.. L. L. Foster. 1207 26th SL INDIANAPOLIS. Ind.. W. H. Roberts, 601 West SL WILMINGTON, Del., Mrs. Elizabeth D. Banton, 924 French St. 
GREENVILLE. S. C , Mr. James R. Kennedy. 630 Pendleton St. 
CHARLESTON , W. Va., Mr. Edward C. Lewis. Box 1204. 
WILLIAM SB RIDGE, N . Y., Mr. Robert H. O. Young. 743 E. 218th St. DETROIT. Mloh., Mr. W. Arnold Hooper. 647 SL 
Antolne St. 
TULSA . Okla., Mr. Harrison M. Magill, 3051V4 N. Hartford Ave. 
ATHENS , Ga.. Dr. Charles Walton, 1211 Vt Clayton St. DAYTON, 0.. Mr. R. D. McGregor. 100 Pontlac St. CHICAGO, III., Mr. David Mitchell, 6428 Eberhard Ave. 
PARKERSBURG , W. Va.. Mrs. James E. Edmondson, 591 5th St. 
ST. LOUIS. Mo.. Mr. Clabome Riddle, 4208 W. Cote Brflllante. 
NEW YORK CITY. The Pace 4 Handy Music Co., 
Inc.. 1547 Broadway. 
STAMFORD, Conn.. Mr. Emmett Lewis, Box 277. 
Reliable and energetic Agents wanted in cities not here mentioned. 
Rolan d W. Hires , Tenor , Recitals, Concerts, 
Oratorio , Opera , Bookin g engagements for 
Continenta l Tour , season 1919. Fo r terms, 
dates, eto, please write . 
Roland W. Hayes 
3 WARWICK ST. BOSTON, MASS. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
BOOK S B Y 
PROFESSOR KELLY MILLER 
1. A n Appeal to Conscience (just off the press—Macmillan) $ .60 
2. Race Adjustment (publishers' price, $2) 1.50 
3. Out of the House of Bondage (publishers' price, $1.50) 1.25 
4. The Three Books Listed Above (publishers' price, $4.10) 3.00 
5. The Disgrace of Democracy (100,000 copies distributed) 10 
6. The Negro's Place in the New Reconstruction (Ready about 
Jan. 15, 1919) 10 
Add 10% for postage to all orders. Remittance invariably in advance. 
Agents Wanted Everywhere 
KELL Y MILLER , Howard University, Washington, D. C. 
Inform yourself as to 
TH E EXODU S OF TH E 
NEGROES 
By reading 
Dr. Carter G. Woodson's 
A CENTURY O F NEGRO 
MIGRATION 
220 Pages Price $1.10 
This boo k is unique in that it is the 
fust and only scientific treatise in 
this field. It undertakes to explain 
why the Negroe s have migrated, 
where they have gone and wha t they 
have done. 
Agents wanted everywhere. 
Send all orders to the author 
1216 You Street, N. W. 
Washington, D. C. 
"A D Art Treasure at Home" 
Wm . Edouar d Scott offers a rare 
opportunit y to have a rare art treasure in you r home . Sen d a photograph of yourself o r you r son o r you r 
brothe r wh o is "ove r there" an d he 
wil l paint a beautiful portrait of him ; 
one that wil l retain colo r for . one 
hundred years. Absolut e lightness. 
Guaranteed bot h in colo r an d form 
and beautifully framed to hang. 
PRICE S 
8 x 10 $25.00 
16 x 20 50.00 
24 x 30 100.00 
Terms: One-half down , balance o n receipt of portrait, if absolutely satisfactory. 
Mr . Scott is a graduate of the Ar t 
Institute, Chicago , Julia n Academy , 
Paris, Franc e and the Beau x Arts, 
Paris. H e also studied three years 
wit h H . O. Tanne r and has exhibite d 
in the Roya l Academy , London , Eng ­
land, Salon , Paris and in most of the 
large Ar t Gallerie s of the Unite d 
States. 
Address: 
William E. Scott, ""cttV ^ 
Telephone—Wentwort h 8810 
1124 N . Senat e Ave. , Indianapolis. Ind. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 43 
Southern Aid Society 
of Virginia 
Incorporated 
25th Annual Report (Condensed) 
The Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc., was chartered at Richmond, 
Va., February, 1893, to engage in Industrial Sick Benefit Insurance, 
insuring against Sickness, Accident and Death. The following report 
of business done during 1918 will show that the Acorn of 1893 has 
become the Giant Oak of 1919: 
Receipts 
Jan. 1, 1918 Cash Balance brought forward $88,317.79 
Dec. 31, 1918 Annual 
Income 548,835-64 
Gross Receipts for 
1918 $637.i53-43 
Disbursements 
Dec. 31, 1918 Total Disbursed, including investments made during the year 534,496-73 
Cash Balance, Jan. 
1, 1919 $102,656.70 
Jan. 1, 1919 Total Assets $348,536.95 
Jan. 1, 1919 Total Liabilities including Capital 
Stock 48,676.57 
Jan. 1, 1919, Surplus Fund $299,860.38 
A record unsurpassed by any other Insurance Organization confining its 
business territory to one state. 
A few desirable agency openings in Virginia for intelligent and thrifty young 
men and women. 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VA., Inc. 
527 N . SECON D ST. , RICHMOND , VA . 
OFFICER S AN D DIRECTOR S 
A. D. PRICE , Fret. W. E. BAKER , Trill . 
EDW. STEWART, li t Vice Pres. A. WASHINGTON 
J. T. CARTER , 2nd V. P. and Att'y. W. E . RANDOLPH. 
B .A. CEPHAS, 3rd V. Pres. CHAS. N. JACKSON. 
B. L. JORDAN, Sec.-MgT. W. A. JORDAN, Ant. Se«y.-Mjr. 
Mention TH E CRISIS 44 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Co. 
Home Office, DURHAM , N . CAROLIN A 
Strongest Old Line Negro 
Life Insurance Company in the World 
Insurance in Force - $16,096,722.00 
Assets nearly One-Half Millio n dollars. Owns $160,000.00 i n Libert y Bonds. 
The following Editoria l appeared in the "Durham (Daily ) Herald, " Ma y 10, 1918; 
A SUBSTANTIA L ENTERPRIS E 
(Editorial) 
Th e Nort h Carolin a Mutua l an d Providen t Association , a business enterpris e 
owned , controlle d an d activel y manage d b y colore d me n o f Durham , ha s develope d 
int o an importan t asse t o f the cit y durin g its ninetee n years o f existence . It 
is n o idl e boast no r advertisin g mott o tha t this compan y is thej "largest an d 
strongest Negr o insuranc e compan y i n th e world. " It is just tha t an d more . 
It is manage d alon g the most moder n line s an d is a business whic h no t onl y 
the colore d peopl e ma y be prou d of, bu t on e whic h also deserve s a hig h plac e 
amon g the ne w insuranc e companie s o f th e souther n states. 
Income 1918 - $819,771.09 
Amount Paid in Claims Since Organization $2,082,887.61 
You r Chance to Bu y Stable Lif e Insurance from $500 to $5,000. 
POLICIE S WIT H AL L MODER N PROVISIONS , INCLUDIN G A PERMANEN T DISABILIT Y 
CLAUSE . 
John Merrick , President A . M . Moore, M.D. , Sec'y and Treas. 
C. C. Spaulding, Vice-President and Genera l Manage r 
J. M . Avery , Assistan t Gen'l Manage r E . R. Merrick , Ass' t Sec'y. 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the Negro Problems 
20 Monograph! Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y •• ATLANTA , GA . 
$25.00 PER WEEK 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Ne^ro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War'* combined with "Histor y of the Negro Race," 
400 pages, 60 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A . JOHNSO N 
164 Nassau Street NE W YOR K 
THE NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY 
Contain s 290 Pages, 35 Chapters, Historica l 
an d Biographical , 17 Ful l Pag e Illustration s 
Printe d on Fin e Antiqu e Book , Boun d i n Ful l 
Gree n Extr a Cloth , Gol d Titl e o n Fron t Cove r 
an d Shel f Back . Price , ne t $1.25. Postag e 
Prepai d $1.4 0. Orde r throug h an y bookselle r 
o r direc t fro m the author. Addres s 
JOH N W. CROMWEL L 
1439 Swarm St. Washington, D. C 
HOTEL WASHINGTON 
First-Class Service for First-Class People 
3427 South Park Annus, Chicago. III. 
SALESMAN WANTE D 
Wan t to get in touch with a man of ability, 
influence and thrift. A n opportunity for the 
right man to represent a reliable going business of seven years standing. Writ e and get 
particulars. Bo x 176, Clementon, N . J. 
HOTEL DALE 
CAP E MAY , N. J . 
Comfort and Elegance without Extravagance 
This Magnificent Hotel, Located in 
the Hear t of the Most Beautiful 
Seashore Resort in the World , 
is replete with every modern improvement, 
superlative in construction, appointments, service and refined patronage. Orchestra daily, 
garage, bath houses, tennis, etc., on premises. 
Special attention given to ladies and children. 
Send for booklet. 
E. W. DALE , Owner 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 45 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Colored Dolls for 
Your Children Teach your children pride of race and appreciation of race. Early impressions are lasting. These beautifully dressed, unbreakable, 
brown skin dolls designed and made by colored 
girls in a factory owned and controlled entirely 
by colored people. These are not the old time, 
black face, red lip aunt Jemima colored dolls 
but dolls well made and truly representative of 
the race in hair and features. 
16 inches wit h long flowing curls, beautifully dressed $3.50 
16 inches wit h marce l wave, nicely 
dressed 3.00 
16 inches Buste r Brow n style hair, very 
neat 2.50 
Soldier boy In ful l uniform 1.60 
So far as we know this is the only Negro 
doll factory i n the world. 
BERRYand ROSS, Inc. Factory : 36-38 W . 135th St . 
NE W YOR K CIT Y 
H . B. Boulin , President, 
Dr. E . Bawling , Vic e President, 
Counsellor P . Ifleld, Genera l Manager, 
S. Reid, Business and Sales Manager. 
AGENT S WANTE D WRIT E FO B TERM S 
Only those who mean business need writ e us. 
Earn $35.to MO.WEEKL Y 
AL L OR SPAR E TIME 
Guaranteed 
ForTanYaara 
Ton—yourself-can positively make S35 to »100 a week. I wantmen . hurtling, energetic, ambitious tellom, anrfons to make money, who ore willing to workwith me. Not for me, but vrithme. ar e you that kind? I want you to advertise, sell and aonoint local agents for the biggest, most sensational seller in IS rears-Sthe ROBINSO N FOLDIN G BAT H TUB . Demon­ strating Ta b Furnished. Here's an absolutely new invention -Nothing like it. Makes instant appeal. Sells easily. Gives every home a modern, up-to-date bathroom in on y part of the house. No plumbing, no water-works needed. Folds in small roll, bandy as umbrella. Self-emptying, positively unleakable. Absolutely guaranteed"for 10 years. Remember, fully 70 per cent of homes have no bath rooms. 
Sensational Sales Successes Two sales a day means S300 a month. Breeze, of Idaho, made 
^profi t i n 30 days. Bev. Otto Schulze, Mo., got «1600to date. 
Bidder . Mont, orders i n 1 days. Hamlmton.o f 
Wyo.. made J60 first two days. Hundreds like that. Pleasant, 
permanent, fascinating work. Write a post card. Le t me 
write yon alon g letter. No experience needed, no. capital. 
Yourcreditisgoodif yon mean business. But you must be 
ambitions, yon must want to make money. lha t s all. Write 
a postcard now. . I want to pay you $35 to HOO every week, 
H . S. Robinson,' Pres. The Robinson Cabinet Mfg. Co. 4973 Factories Building Toledo. Ohio 
PATRIOTI C PAGEAN T 
by Mme E. Alalia Hackley 
The Well Known Promoter of Community 
Entertainments 
Fur Churches, Philanthropic or beneficial Societies, 
Schools, or, 03 a source of Income to directors with 
or without Musical Knowledge 
The greatest and surest money making entertainment 
before the public. 
Quick, easy, inexpensive, artistic, full of action. 
*alisfylng, flexible, educational and It never fails 
as Uiu greatest of financial successes. 
Anyone who can walk, old or young, may participate, 
and the Pageant Party may number one hundred or 
one thousand, according to the seating capacity. 
The Patriotic- Pageant may be given as a Victory 
Pageant, a Pageant of Nations, a Queen's Pageant 
or a Queen's Masque. 
The first book earned over $7511 fur a church in a 
small town and was conducted by an Inexperienced 
woman with no musical ability. 
Give a Patriotic Pageant for your Church, your Day 
Nursery, your Old Polk's Home, your N. A. A. C, 
P.. your Y. W. C. A. , or your School. Vary the 
idea until you wear It to shreds and still money 
will come to your cause. Get the Pageant habit. 
It pays. 
Patriotic Pageant Book, complete Instructions, $3.00, and 10c for postage. P. O. order only. 
LANGSTON and BRASCHER, Sole Agents 
3129 So. State Street Chicago, Illinois 
A LITERARY CLUB IN 
EVER Y TOWN 
Every Club under System. Fo r Pleasure, Education and Profit. Writ e Na ­
tional Literary Association, 123 0 Yo u 
St., N . W. , Washington, D . C. 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
Beautiful Idlewild The most wonderfully ideal spot where young and old cast aside for the time all the cares and worries of their strenuous, nerve-racking routine lives and romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the full nature in all her wondrous glory. The waters of the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
Do you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting? 
Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking wild flowers and wild berries? 
Do you want a place to go where you can build up 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency? 
Do yoj enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, progressive people of the day—people who do things? Do you believe in progress and do you want to have a part in one of the most progressive move­ ments of the time? Surely I 
Then you will be interested in, and want to own a lot of your own in Beautiful Idlewild, Michigan. If you act at once you can se­ cure a beautiful let for only $30.00 each; $6.00 cash; $1.00 per week. When your payments are completed the lot will be transferred to you by an absolute warranty deed with abstract show­ ing clear, title. 
Good live energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 1110 Hartford Bldg 
So. Dearborn St. 
Chicago, 111. 
Mention THE Crisis. 46 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TH E MOS T ATTRACTIV E 
LOT OFFE R EVE R MADE ! 
IDEAL BUILDING LOTS, improved and developed, with 
FRUIT TREES PLANTED ON THEM , in 
Beautiful ORCHARDVILLE 
FOR 
ONLY $49 50 ON VERY 
EASY TERMS 
This offer is attracting the attention of people all 
over the country and is one that should receive 
YOU R careful consideration. 
Orchardvill e is located in a high grade fruitgrowing region and when it is fully developed 
it will be the only place of its kind in the country, 
and the kind of place we all like to dream about. 
Unlike other lot offers, where the purchasers are 
left to develop their lots themselves, W E D O 
THA T FO R YO U AN D PLAN T FIV E HIG H 
GRAD E FRUI T TREE S O N EAC H LOT , as 
well as A BEAUTIFU L SHAD E TREE , and we 
take care of the property and trees for FOU R 
YEAR S WITHOU T EXTR A COST . Whe n the 
fruit trees are in commercial bearing they should 
earn you EXCELLEN T YEARL Y RETURN S on 
your investment WITHOU T AN Y EFFOR T O N 
YOU R PART . 
Th e lots are sized 30 x 144 Feet and have plenty 
of room for a house, garden, chicken yard, shed, 
etc., besides the fruit trees that we will plant 
and take care of on each lot. EAC H LO T IS 
GUARANTEE D T O B E HIG H AN D DR Y 
UNDE R A MONEY-BAC K GUARANTEE , AN D 
TH E CONTRAC T YO U GE T GIVE S YO U 
JUS T TH E PROTECTIO N YO U MIGH T 
WANT . 
Th e price of the lots, as stated above, is only 
$49.50 each, and the terms are only $3.00 a month. 
(Smaller terms when more than one lot is purchased.) N O INTEREST . 
Bear in mind that the NUMBE R O F LOT S IS 
LIMITE D and that it is a case of FIRS T COM E 
FIRS T SERVED . W e have a beautiful circular 
that gives you all the details of this offer and 
which you will find very interesting. Send for 
a copy TODAY . 
Simply write your name and address on the 
coupon attached below, mail it to us NO W and 
as soon as we receive it we will send you the 
circular without any obligation to you. SEN D 
FO R I T RIGH T AWAY ! 
ADDRES S 
THE SWAN-ARENSON REALTY and DEVELOPMENT CO. 
19 SO. L A SALL E STREE T CHICAGO , ILL . 
WRITE PLAINLY 
TH E SWAN-ARENSO N REALT Y and DEV'P T 
Chicago, 111. 
CO. 
Dat e 1919. 
Gentlemen:— 
I am Interested in your Orchardvill e lot offer and would be glad to receive one of 
your circulars without any obligation to me. 
Name 
Address 
Town State . 
C. 6-19 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 47 
WHIC H OF THESE SUITS DO YOU WANT ? 
SEN D 
NO 
MONE Y 
Here's the Biggest Tailorin g Offer ever made. Stylish perfect-fitting suits 
made to your individua l measure, of the season's choicest silk decorated 
weaves, silk-stripe fabrics, gold-mixed worsteds, and imported dress cloths, 
guaranteed to please you completely, or Money Back. Writ e for free 
samples to-day, and pick the one you like best, at: 
SEND 
NO 
MONE Y 
$
8.95 12.85 15.48 21.95 25.90 
DRESS UP AN D MAK E BIG MONE Y 
If you care to see the BIGGES T VALUE S I N TAILORING , i f you 
care to see the ehoicest up-to-date patterns, if you oare to make a 
big- saving, writ e us to-day, and we wil l send you, entirely free, 
our tine tailorin g hook wit h cloth samples of imported and domestic weaves i n those rich , stylis h patterns, now worn by dressy 
men and young men. Don't thin k of placing an order for new 
clothes anywhere "before you see this book of surprising tailoring 
values. 
YO U SAV E from 30 to 50 PER CENT 
That's wha t your saving amounts to when you order 
clothes of us. An d ours is genuine hand-tailoring expertly-done, beautiful work. Ever y garment tailored 
strictl y to individua l measure, and guaranteed to satisfy 
and please you completely, or ful l purchase price cheerfull y returned. W e Wil l Not Kee p One Penny Of You r 
Money, Unless Yo u Ar e WELL-PLEASED , thus leaving it 
to each customer to judge whether the clothes ordered 
of us are the best-wearing, the most satisfactory garments 
you ever wore. 
NO EXTR A CHARGES-POSTAG E 
PAID 
Whe n you order of us you pay No Extr a Charges of any 
kind. Whethe r you prefer a conservative, or a fancy 
novelty style, the price is always the same. No matte r 
how tal l or stout you are, there are No Extr a Charges 
of any kind , and every order is sent postage paid. 
THIS BEAUTIFU L GOLD -
PLATE D PIN FRE E 
To make certain you wil l tell others about us, 
we wil l give you absolutely FREE , wit h your 
first order, this handsome Gold-plated PIN . 
There Is no advertising on this Pin . Yo u wil l 
be proud to wear It. You r friends wil l ask 
you wha t this beautiful emblem stands for—and 
this wil l remind you to recommend OU R 
STYLIS H TAILORIN G to them. 
CASH PROFITS FOR SPARE-TIME WORK 
Together wit h our free samples, we wil l send you also ful l information of how you can earn 
a lot of extr a money by sending orders for your relatives and friends. Yo u wil l be surprised 
wha t a rea l money-making opportunity this means to you, even i f you can spare only a few 
hours for this work. Orders come easy when you can show tailorin g values lik e ours. The 
big saving can be seen at a glance. Some of our agents make from $25.00 to $50.00 a week, 
others as hig h as $76.00. Mr . Wil l J. Davis, of Nort h Carolina writes: "Orders are easy to 
get. I made $16.89 In three hours. " That's nice money for three hours' work, and we have 
thousands of simila r letters, al l tellin g the same pleasing, satisfying story. Yo u wil l find the 
work easy and pleasant, no experience needed, nothing at al l to learn, nothing to study. Send 
us your name—send It to-day—now—while the whole matte r is fresh in your mind, and get 
complete book of fashions wit h free cloth samples and ful l information. AddreBS 
CHICAG O TAILOR S ASSOCIATIO N 
515-521 So. Frankli n Street Dept. L-572 Chicago 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 48 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
FEET 
SORE AND TENDER 
Antisepti c Foo t Powder , relievin g excessiv e perspiratio n an d 
offensive* odors. 
Pric e 5 0 cents . B y Mal l BO cents . 
DR . WILLIA M J . CARTER , Foot Specialist 
167 Wes t 136t h St. . Ne w Yor k City . 
Mrs. M . WATSO N RUDD , 
154 West 131st St. New Yor k Cit y 
has placed upon the market her new 
ROS E NINO N NUFEE T POWDE R 
It is especially recommended for soldiers, clerks, railroad and factory employees, dancers and all persons 
who arc required to stand or walk to any extent. 
Agents Wanted—Writ e for particulars. 
PRINTING a t 
POPULAR 
PRICES 
100 
Good Letterheads, En ­
velopes, Cards, billheads or statements. $1 
500, $2.25; i.ooo, $3.50; 5,000, $14.75. Cash 
with order. Money Back Guarantee. 
ye MISSION PRINT SHOP 
SA M H. READING, ye Printer 
611 N. 43rd Street PHILADELPHIA 
Mention THE Crisis. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 49 
• OU R COLORED SOLDIERS IN ACTION" 
"WELCOME HOME" "TRUE BLUE" 
"OUR COLORED FIGHTERS" 
"TRU E SONS OF FREEDOM" 
"OUR COLORED HEROES" 
Greatest Si x Negro Patriotic Pictures of our own boys published in the World . Portraying the scenes of battle, etc., of our great brave and true colored soldiers. These 
pictures are most beautiful, size 16x20. Every CRISIS reader gets the six pictures with 
large catalog for 60c postpaid. Discharged Soldiers, Sailors, Agents and Dealers everywhere wanted to handle these pictures. $10.00 to $25.00 a day and more selling them. 
Retail at 25c each. Cost you wholesale only 30 for $2.00. 100, $5.50. 250, $13.50. 500, 
$24.00. Prepaid anywhere in United States. Parcel Post. Me n selling 100 to 300 a day. 
Selling by the thousands everywhere. Agents amazed over their sale. Million s will be 
sold. Special prices in large quantities. Illustrated catalog Free. 
Shipments to all Allie d Nations of the World . Prices Prepaid to Foreign Countries 
outside U . S.: 100, $6.50; 250, $16.00; 500, $28.50. RUS H I N YOU R ORDER S A T 
ONCE . SHIPMENT S leave same day order is received. 
HANZEL SALES COMPANY 
Largest Patriotic Picture House. Dept. 22. N. S. PITTSBURGH, PA., U. S. A. 
O. M . Shackelford, Author of 
Popular Books "Lillia n Simmons," a colored story, tends to unite 
the race and to lift it to a higher plane of thought. 
It causes Northern colored people and Southern 
colored people to think more of each other. It 
amuses, instructs, advises, criticizes and inspires. 
"Seeking the Best," our other book, is a character 
builder. Nothing in print can beat the true stories, 
essays and poems which it contains. 
Thes e two books are combined into one 400-page 
volume. Pric e $2.50. Address all orders to the 
author, 
O. M . Shackelford, 1806 E. 14th St., Kansas City, Mo. 
Be A Business Man Do You Want To So Your Own Boas? LR m thow ros how to n n • bmiwm of rom ova. Smur capiat »• IIII i Pmbiliiin ueJimucd Nnisrr rmcslM sor on auk*> ,-T ; rirr-;r-r.".r roar ABILITY cavaB. U foo trt llrndr In 
w--«.-4 (ei ottim. and rnlhr vuit to b* md#p*no>«l, wr.u lor y «•* bookm 
W Buiintit Without a Color ll fun Hi ft. nMhm W" l la .-f-r •mSit.ms COtoffd nin imt - - • • in ' . Scad 12c (or p«l|t. cj 
Inter-State Sales Company DOS S*v*mh 1»t. Ueftk 5. New Yor* Otj 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS. Dignified Work 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Telephone, Baring 7794 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgages 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Patents secured on easy terms Write*] for particulars. 
JOS. H . STEWART , Attorney-at-Law, 494 Louisiana Ave., N. W., Washington, D. C. 
ATTENTIO N ! W e are publishing two brand new Patriotic Pictures 
of Colored People. "Heroe s Abroad'' and " A Hero's 
Welcome." Genuine hand colored, 16' x 20 inches. 
Price , post-paid, 25c each. Special prices to agents. 
Thes e pictures should be in every home. Positively 
the most elegant of their kind ever published. These 
would sell at almost any price asked. Secure the 
agency in your locality and prosper. 
TH E PICTORIA L AR T PUBLISHIN G CO., 537 So. Dearborn St. Chicago, 111. 
_ , , ( Central 104-W Telephones: { M a i n 6 1 
HARR Y E . DAVI S ATTORNEY-AT-LA W NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
1607 Williamson Builidng Cleveland, Ohio 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
818 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis Minn . 
BROW N S. SMIT H ATTOR N EY-AT-LA W 
Offices: Suite 802 Sykes Block 
Nea r Thir d and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn . 
Tel . 3437 For t Hil l Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
34 School Street Boston Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbic Hawkins George W . F . McMcche n 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md . 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
JOS. L. JONES, Pr.. . 
N . E. Cor. 8th and Plum Su., Cincinnati, Ohio 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 50 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
KELL Y MILLER'S HISTORY OF 
TH E WORL D WA R FOR HUMA N 
RIGHTS or 
TH E NEGRO IN TH E WORL D WA R 
New Book Published April 1st, 1919 
TH E KELL Y MILLE R HISTOR Y O F TH E WORL D WA R 
is all that the title can possibly mean. The author takes up the 
Great Conflict, following it step by step through the thirty excellent chapters, including the Terms of the Armistice, and General 
Pershing's full report to the War Department, and gives us the 
only condensed History of the Great War that is fair to the 
Negro Race 
The Negro's War for Democratization—He braces Himself and 
Claims to be the Champion of Democracy—Enters the Arena of 
Combat! The German Indigent—The South Sensitive—The North 
Quizzical — The Whole World Hesitant. 
The Negro Turns the Tide at Chateau Thierry—He Helps Hurl 
Back the Hordes of the Hun— 
Wins His Place and Right to a 
Voice in the Affairs of Mankind 
against Prejudice, Ridicule, Race 
Hatred and almost Insurmountable Obstacles! 
Kelly Miller, Dean of Howard 
University, residing in Washington. D. C., the friend of Government officials in the National Capital, is the best prepared Negro to 
give a complete record of what 
the soldiers and sailors of his race 
have accomplished in the World 
War for Human Rights. It is the 
most satisfactory and impartial 
War History yet written. 
The book is bound in durable 
cloth, with substantial head band, 
price $2.50. In Full Kerotol 
Morocco (similar to cut) $3.25. 
Copy mailed to any address upon 
receipt of the price. Satisfaction 
guaranteed or money refunded. 
AGENTS WANTE D 
The Book is a RECOR D 
BREAKER ! 
Send 25 cents for a prospectus 
— It will be the best investment 
you ever made—Grasp the Opportunity of Making Money faster 
than you have ever done before! 
Our agents are sending us thousands of orders weekly—There 
will be A MILLIO N copies of the 
book sold during the next six 
months and A MILLIO N DOL ­
LAR S profit made by agents—Are 
you going to get your share? 
Many Agents are leaving high 
salaried positions to canvass! 
We will quote you agent's prices 
that will surprise you—Our agents 
consider a day lost when they fail 
to make at least $10.00—Get in 
touch with us and let us tell you 
about our liberal terms, large 
profits and free book offers. 
We are a live company and are 
looking for live wires to represent us. If you are a hustler you 
can make an income that wil l 
cause your friends and neighbors 
to sit up and take notice and 
gain you the respect and serious 
consideration of your community. 
AUSTI N JENKIN S CO . 
523 9th St., WASHINGTON, D. C. 
New Western Office : 
Chicago, III. Address Nearer Office 
The Largest Publishers of special 
books for Negroes. 
700 Pages 
50 Pages of Negro Soldiers. 50 
Pages of other appropriate and Interesting pictures. 
Prof. Kelly Miller, Author, Howard University, Washington, D . C 
Dean Miller's Picture II x 14 Given With the book, or Picture Mailed for 25c 
Mention TH E CRISIS. A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL . (Mary White Ovington) $1.0 0 
TH E HEAR T OF A WOMA N AN D OTHE R POEMS . (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1.25 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNEY . (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
TH E LIF E AN D TIME S OF BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (B. F . Riley) 1.50 
A NARRATIV E OF TH E NEGRO . (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLAC K FOLK . (W. E . B. DuBois) r. . 1.25 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGR O MIGRATION . (Carter G. Woodson) ... . 1.10 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
TH E NEGR O MIGRAN T I N PITTSBURGH . (Abraham Epstein) .. . .50 
GRANN Y MAUME E AN D OTHE R PLAY S FOR A NEGRO THEATRE . 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.50 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIF E AN D WORK . (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 
TH E NEGR O I N LITERATUR E AN D ART . (B. G. Brawley) 1.35 
FIFT Y YEAR S AN D OTHE R POEMS . (James Weldon Johnson) . . 1.25 
JOH N BROWN . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 1.50 
NEGR O I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W. Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W. Crawford). . 1.00 
TH E HAITIA N REVOLUTION . (T. G. Steward) 1.25 
NEGR O CULTUR E I N WES T AFRICA . (George W. Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO . (W . E . B. D U Bois) 7 5 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGR O PRIOR TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACT S OF RECONSTRUCTION . (John R. Lynch) 1.50 
LIF E AN D LETTER S OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR. (W. C. BerwickSayers) 2.2 5 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.25 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H . E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T OF TH E HOUS E OF BONDAGE . (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address, TH E CRISIS, : : : : : 7 0 Fifth Avenue , New Yor k LEAR N BEAUT Y CULTUR E 
Through Scientific Instruction 
Send for Catalog 
We Teach Beauty Culture 
by mail 
Take our course. Become a professional Beauty Culturist and go 
into business for yourself. It is 
a clean, pleasant occupation and 
you earn money quickly and easily. 
Our instruction requires from six 
to eight weeks. The latest and 
most approved methods taught. 
"TH E KASHMI R WAY " 
When you visit a Beauty Shop be sure the operator uses Kashmir Preparations and 
has learned the Kashmir Way—then you know you are getting the best of service and 
the finest preparations for Hair and Skin to be had. 
A Kashmir Diploma gives you prestige. 
STUDENTS WANTE D 
FREE 
Kashmir Institute Catalog and 
Kashmir DeLux e Beauty Boo k Write today 
KASHMIR INSTITUTE 
Dept. K. 
312 S. Clark Street CHICAGO , ILL. 