The CRISIS 
AUGUST, 1921 FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY ON TO WASHINGTON, D. C. 
Th e Superintendent of Insurance of the District of Columbia, 
after a satisfactory investigation of 
our contracts and business, has 
granted the Society license to do an 
Industrial Sick Benefit Insurance 
Business in the District of Columbia. 
W e therefore announce the opening of our Washingto n (D . C.) District Office on Monday, June 6, 
1921. 
Th e Washingto n District Office 
will occupy the Specially Designed 
Office Suite No . 300, 3rd floor front, 
in the Society's own Modern Four 
Story and Basement Building, N . W . 
Corner of 7th and T Sts., Washing ­
ton, D. C. 
W e invite our members, friends and the general public to call on us 
when visiting the Capitol City of the Nation. 
Th e Acorn of 1893 is now the Spreading Oa k of Protection of 1921. 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, INC. 
Home Office: 527 N. Second Street RICHMOND , VA. 
OFFICERS AN D BOAR D 
Jas. T. Carter, President and General \V. E. Baker, Treasurer. 
Counsel. B. L. Jordan, Secretary. 
Edw. Stewart, Vice-President. W. A. Jordan, Assistant Secretary. 
B. A. Cephas, Vice-President. C. N. Jackson. 
A. Washington. Vice-President. W. E. Randolph. 
A. D. l'rice, Jr. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE, A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CONDUCTE D B Y W . E. BURGHARD T D U BOIS ; JESSIE REDMO N FAUSZT , LITERAR Y EDITOR ; 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, BUSINES S MANAGER . 
Vol. 22—No. 4 AUGUST, 1921 Whole No. 130 
PICTURES Page 
COVER. Reproduction of a Drawing by John Henry Adams. 
COMMENCEMENT DAY AT HOWARD UNIVERSITY 153 
PLAYING AT IDLEWILD 159 
MEN OF THE MONTH 167 
RANKING STUDENTS OF NEGRO COLLEGES 173 
WHERE TO STOP—SOME COLORED HOTELS 179 
ARTICLES 
NOSTALGIA. Jessie Fauset 154 
HOPKINSVILLE, CHICAGO AND IDLEWILD. Illustrated. W. E. B. DuBois 158 
THE SPRINGFIELD RIOTS 165 
DEPARTMENTS 
OPINION 149 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED 
PEOPLE 161 
MEN OF THE MONTH 166 
THE LOOKING GLASS 168 
THE OUTER POCKET 174 
THE HORIZON 176 
THE SEPTEMBER CRISIS 
Tke September CRISI S will carry an article on the Southern Aid Society and its new building 
in Washington, I>. C. 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS ; The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be gh en. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second clas» matte r Novembe r 2, 1910, at the post office at Ne w York, Ne w 
York , under the Ac t of March 3, 1879. 146 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it ii young In history, the Institution fecit a juit pride in the work thui 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Trainiag Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Science! The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economic! 
The Department of Social Service 
TERM OPENED SEPTEMBER 21, 1920 
For farther information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manual Training & Industrial School 
FOR COLORED YOUTH 
BORDENTOWN , N . J. 
A high institution lor tht training of colored 
youth. Excellent equipment, thorough instruction, 
wholesome surroundings. Academic training tor all 
students. 
Courses In carpentry, agriculture and trade* for boys. 
Including auto repairing. 
Courses in domestlo science and domestic art for 
girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and modernly 
equipped. 
Tnrms reasonable. 
Fall term opens September 15, 1921. 
For information address 
W . R. VALENTINE , Principal 
SHAW UNIVERSITY MISSIONARY 
TRAINING SCHOOL 
Offers thorough courses to prepare 
young women to become Missionaries, 
Home and Foreign, Workers in Social 
Centres, Sunday School Leaders and 
1'astors' Assistants. 
One year course for Colleije and Normal 
Graduates. Three year course for 
High School Graduates. 
Apply to 
DEA N EDN A B. PEACOCK . 
Shaw University. RALEIGH . N. C. 
LINCOLN UNIVERSITY 
Pioneer in Collegiate and 
Theological Education 
Lincoln Men are Leaders in the various 
professions in Forty States. 
The College is ranked in Class I. by the 
American Medical Association. 
Address: 
John B. Kendall, D.D. , Lincoln University, 
Chester County, Fenna. 
Cheyney Training School For 
Teachers 
Cheyney, fa . 
Made in 1920 an accredited State Normal School, 
ottering, in addition to the regular Normal Course of 
two years, professional three year courses in Home 
Economics and Shop Work. A diploma from any of 
these courses makes a graduate eligible to teach in 
the public schools of Pennsylvania. A three-year 
High School Course is offered to all who have completed the eighth grammar grade. 
Send application now for fall term opening September 
20th, 1921. 
For further particulars and catalog, write 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , Prlneipal. 
Cheyney, Pa . 
THERE WILL BE NO SUMMER SCHOOL FOR 1921 
MENTION TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 147 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City o l Atlanta, 
Ga. Th e courses of study include High School, 
Normal School and College. Special emphasis 
is laid upon the training of teachers. Students 
come from all parts n' the South. Graduates 
have a fine record ioi' successful work. 
For furtHer information address 
President Edward T. Ware 
Atlanta, Ga. 
s^mtmiiitiiriiiiiiiuiuiiuwiiuiiiiJUiiiiitiniiiiiiiiJiEuiiiiiiiiJiittttiii'iiiiim^uiiiiiiitiijiiiiittiiJiiijiiiiiiiiiitiirir 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Best Mora l and Spiritua Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atnosnhere . 
Noted for Honest and Thoro.;ph Work . 
Institution offers full courses In the following departments: College, Normal, High 
School, Gramma r School, Domestic Science. 
Nurs e Training and Industrial. 
Good water , steam h«at, electric lights, 
natural drainage, splendid dormitories. Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term Begins Septembe r 14, 1921. 
For catalog and other information address 
PRESIDENT J. KELLY IrlFFEN 
Knoivllle, Tens. 
g 
TimiiiiiiimiiiiiiinNimiuiimniimiimimiiimiiiimmimm 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1921 
ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Over 100 acres of beautiful campus. Twelve buildings 
with new Jl'iO.OOO atlmlnistratioti building with modem 
chapel, gymnasium and laboratories ready for use In 
September. Strong faculty—Religious atmosphere—Athletics—Co-educational. Adm-JtiOD only by application. 
RE-ARRANGED COURSES OF STUDY 
Junior /Hah School—7th and 8th Grades and 1st and 
2nd Year?' High School Courses, with Certllcate. 
Junior Collegfv—3rd and 4th Year High School with 
Freshman and Sophomore years of College work, with 
Diploma. 
Co I leoe—Four yea rs above High School, or two years 
above Junior College Course, with degree of A.B. 
Domestic Science—Commerce—Normal— 
Pre-medlcal Course 
T>3rd year of nine months opens September 21. 1021 
$150.00 per year pays tuition, board, room and laundry. 
HARRY ANDREWS KING. President 
&fje Jflort&a Agricultural 
anb iWrchantcai College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahassee, Florida 
STATE UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. 
bounded 1879. 
The only Institution In the Bute n.rtm tot Its obJ«t 
Colleti«». Ministerial, Medical, and Legal training for Colored citizens In Kentucky. . . . . 
8p«cl«J training In lniuranoe. Social Berrlce. Nunlng and 
NorSaU nSfclllllT M«lc . Donartlo Bctance. MlMlonar, 
Smt u taa. oonewondeno. eoana. Decroai offered 
I're.ld.nt C. H. ParrUh 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent yean 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational. 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood anO. 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE. N. C. 
Middle TJoiverstty, eperated under the aaiplcea »r 
the Northern P»"*ibyterlan Cborch, has four Departments—Higr- Scnool, Art* and Sciences Theological 
and Industrial. The completion sf a Grammar School 
course Is the requirement for entrance te the first vear 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific, in the 
scientific, German is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class Is 
16 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first Is purely smgllsh. 
Greek and Hebrew are taught In the others. 
All students In the High School Dept. are reaalred 
to take trades In the Industrial Dept. 
Far furthsr information, address 
.•resident H. L. MsCrsrey, 
Charlotte. N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, High School, Nor. 
mal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Sewing, 
Printing and Tailoring. 
For further information address 
JOHN H. LEWIS, President 
BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Chairman Tru.tee Boaid 
Mention T n Caws. 148 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Wiley University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and Oklahoma State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University, University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented or. its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
Talladega College 
Talladega, Alabama 
Founded in 1867 for the Education of 
Negro Leaders 
Beautiful and Healthful Location. 
Literary, Scientific, Educational, Social Service, Theological, Musical. 
Business Administration. Journalism, 
Nurse Training Courses. 
High Standards of Christian Manhood and Womanhood . 
For further information address 
F. A. SUMNER, President 
"JUST THE PLACE FOR YOUR GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Flsu 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational. 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terras reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEOD BETHUNE, - - Principal. 
HALE INFIRMARY AND NURSE TRAINING 
SCHOOL, 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. 
Offers to High School graduates and young 
women of higher education and good morai 
character, between the ages of 18 and 35, a 
three years' course in the profession of nursing. For further information apply to the 
Superintendent enclosing a stamp. 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND, LA. 
Supported by Baptist Stat e Woman's Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H . Society of Ne w York. Students 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN, President 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding ickool for girls, under th< 
direction of ti e sisters of St. Mary . Address: THE 
SISTER-IN-CHARGE . 6138 Germantown Avenue 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
ST. PAUL'S HOUSE 
A TRAINING SCHOOL FOR BOYS 
High Christian Standard 
Address the Chaplain 
TH E REV . \VM . F-. HENDRICK S 
254 West Pen n Street 
Germantown , Philadelphia , Pa. 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincoln Hospital and Home 
New York, N.Y . 
DARKWATER 
O R 
20th Century Uncle Tom's Cabin 
Dr. DuBois * new boo k is the sensation of 
the day ; selling like "wild fire." It contains 
a good picture of Dr. Dullois. Price onl y 
$2.00. Order todav. .Satisfaction guaranteed 
or mone y refunded. AGENT S WANTED ; 
send 50 cts. fo r outfit. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO. 
BOO K AN D BIBLE PUBLISHER S 
Catalog Free 
523 9th St. N. W., Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH I Calais. THE CRISIS 
Vol. 22. No. 4 AUGUST, 1921 Whol e No. 130 
Opinion of W.E.B. Du Bois 
PAN-AFRICA 
THIS month, streaming from 
the ends of Earth, Pan-Africa's children meet in London, 
Brussells and Paris. It will 
not be a river of tumultuous waters, 
but rills of single hearts and thoughts 
forecasting mighty futures. Always 
Africa was. Always Africa will be. 
There has never been a world without 
its black and brown men and there 
never will be. Come sit with us, all 
Colors and Races and Groups of 
Earth, and let us reason together as 
men of Peace and Good Will. And 
if you cannot come, will you not contribute to the great expense of this 
movement? Write for information 
to this office. 
A TELEGRAM 
A YOUNG People's Conference 
held at Westtown, Pa., under 
the auspices of the Fellowship of Reconciliation, sent 
the following telegram to President 
Harding: 
As a group of 115 young people gathered 
to consider international questions, we wish 
to protest against the continued occupation 
of Haiti by American marines. There seems 
to us no moral justification for the interference of the United States in the affairs 
of another independent, self-governing nation, however small, ancl we earnestly urge 
you to put into execution without delay 
«hat, from your words, we conceive to be 
your own wish, viz., the withdrawal from 
Haiti of all our forces. 
LYNCHINGS AND MOBS 
YOU are frightened? 
Thieves , hold-ups and 
crime? 
But the police and the 
courts are with you. Public opinion 
is behind you; your neighbor's arm 
is ready to help. 
How would you feel if you were a 
Negro and lived in Georgia or Mississippi or Oklahoma? 
There the police is the mob. 
The courts are the lynchers. 
The press will lie to the last ditch 
to distort the truth. Suppose you 
lived there and heard a noise in the 
night? 
OF PROBLEMS 
WHY is it that nothing is said 
of social equality save in 
the case of Negroes? The 
nation is mute as to Irishmen, Italians, Poles and Armenians. 
One may dine with Chinese, Japanese 
Dr East Indians. But Negroes? Social Equality! 
Why is it that only Negroes should 
give up the right to vote? 
Why is it that only Negroes should 
not oi"ganize for self defense against 
mobs? 
Why is it that only Negroes must 
be meek, and wait and wait! 
For all others: Equality, Votes, 
Fight for Right! 
Such is the Negro Problem. 
HAITI 
THE reason for the present governmental unrest in Haiti is 
easy to see. With high hand 
, the Americans have suppressed legislative government and installed a rump parliament and a 
dummy president. But, according to 
Haitian law, which even the marines 
pretend to respect, an electoral camHi) 150 THE CRISIS 
paign opens next October, and a legislative body will be elected in January, 1922 . This new legislature will 
next April elect a successor to the 
president. Consequently the Americans have already begun the electoral 
campaign by putting a quietus on 
free speech and are evidently arranging to nullify in advance the coming 
election. How far is President Harding going to allow this to proceed? 
PAN-AFRICA 
Department of State 
Washington 
July 8, 1921 . 
Mr. W. E. Burghardt DuBois, 
EDITOR OF TH E CRISIS, 
New York, N. Y. 
Sir: 
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of 
your letter of June 2 3 communicating the resolutions passed by the PanAfrican Congress of 1919 , and informing me that a second Pan-African Congress will be held in August 
and September at the time and place 
indicated by the bulletins you enclosed. 
I wish to thank you for your kindness in informing me of the aims and 
purposes of the proposed conference, 
and we shall be glad to have any further information which from time to 
time you may have at your command. 
I am, Sir, 
Your obedient servant, 
(signed) CHARLES E. HUGHES. 
THE AMERICAN NEGRO 
THE report of the census of 
192 0 enables us to construct 
this chart of the growth of 
Negro population in th e 
United States: 
1750 220,000 1850 3,638,808 
1770 402,000 1860 4,441,830 
1790 757,208 1870 5,392,172 
1800 1.002,037 1880 6,580,793 
1810 1,377,808 1890 7,760,00C 
1820 1,771.656 1900 8,833,994 
1830 2,328,642 1910 9,827,763 
1840 2,873,648 1920 10,463,015 
The rate per cent, of increase per 
decade has been as follows: 
1790-1800 31.7 1860-1870 21.4 
1800-1810 32.9 1870-1880 22.0 
1810-1820 28.6 1880-1890 17.6 
1820-1830 30.5 1890-1900 13.8 
1830-1840 23.4 1900-1910 11.2 
1840-1850 24.5 1910-1920 6.5 
1850-1860 22.0 
The South gained only 1.9% in 
the decade, while the North and West 
gained about 50r; ; this shows the 
migration movement to escape disfranchisement, lynching and lawlessness. Naturally many of these migrants failed of enumeration, while 
others passed over into the white race. 
Despite this our increase in time of 
war and stress has been healthy and 
encouraging. 
MIXE D SCHOOLS 
WE anticipate agitation looking 
towards the establishment of 
separate High Schools in Indianapolis. In order to disJ cuss the matter intelligently, 
we are asking you to be so kind as to give 
is the benefit of your observation, experience and judgment. " 
The theory of the public school is 
that it should be the foundation of 
the democracy of the land. To separate children usually means their 
virtual separation through life. This 
means misunderstanding, friction, 
group, class and racial hatred. So 
far then as possible we should strive 
in every way to keep the public 
schools open to all citizens, white and 
black, Jew and Gentile, rich and poor, 
native and foreign. 
In some parts of the land, however, 
and in some cases, racial feeling is 
so strong that it would be impossible 
to carry on schools of this sort. But 
the community suffers from this and 
must, if it will keep down riot and 
race hatred, substitute other bonds of 
social sympathy to take the place of 
public school common training. 
In a few cities it has been found 
possible while maintaining separate 
graded schools to have common high 
schools. 
In these cities, above all others in OPINION 151 
the United States, there is the greatest opportunity for real national service. If it is impossible for children 
of high school age to work together 
at common knowledge and human 
training for four years, then it is 
impossible for white and colored people to live together in the United 
States and for different races to live 
together in the world. The test of 
the possibility of democracy lies in 
a certain very real sense in the mixed 
high schools of Indianapolis. 
THE AFRICAN MANDATES 
THE "B" mandates, dealing 
with Central Africa, have 
been kept secret, although it 
is with regard to these that 
the greatest anxiety is felt by Liberalminded experts. A strong demand 
for the immediate issue of the remaining drafts was made at a conference held by the Anti-Slavery Society 
at the Victoria Hotel this afternoon, 
in order that they may be generally 
discussed before confirmation. . . . 
Resolutions were passed intended to 
safeguard the interests of the natives 
in the mandated territories, particularly as regards the raising of black 
armies and industrial exploitation. 
Mr. Charles Roberts presided. 
Professor Gilvery Murray moved a 
resolution which called for the immediate publication of the remaining 
mandates. The delay in fixing the 
mandates, he said, was notorious and 
amounted to an open scandal. . . . 
The chief cause of misgiving was 
the openly-expressed intention of the 
French Government to raise large 
African armies. . . . 
Sir Harry Johnston described the 
suppression of the mandates as entirely indefensible secret diplomacy. 
He thought two months ought to 
be allow<& between the official publication and the acceptance or rejection 
of the mandate so as to allow of gen-
_ eral discussion, and the terms should 
' also be circulated in the native regions of Africa. "There is a growing 
feeling ef indignation against ourselves and one or two of our Allies," 
he said, "for trying to collar the 
whole world, and especially that part 
of the world which contains the most 
valuable raw materials."—The Manchester, England, Guardian. 
THE CLASS STRUGGLE 
THE N. A. A. C. P. has been 
accused of not being a "revolutionary" body. This is quite 
. true. We do not believe in revolution. We expect revolutionary 
changes in many parts of this life and 
this world, but we expect these 
changes to come mainly through reason, human sympathy and the education of children, and not by murder. 
We know that there have been times 
when organized murder seemed the 
only way out of wrong, but we believe 
those times have been very few, the 
cost of the remedy excessive, the results as terrible as beneficent, and 
we gravely doubt if in the future there 
will be any real recurrent necessity 
for such upheaval. 
Whether this is true or not, the N. 
A. A. C. P. is organized to agitate, 
to investigate, to expose, to defend, to 
reason, to appeal. This is our program and this is the whole of our 
program. What human reform demands today is light, more light; clear 
thought, accurate knowledge, careful 
distinctions. 
How far, for instance, does the 
dogma of the "class struggle" apply 
to black folk in the United Stages today? Theoretically we are a part of 
the world proletariat in the sense that 
we are mainly an exploited class of 
cheap laborers; but practically we are 
not a part of the white proletariat 
and are not recognized by that proletariat to any great extent. We are 
the victims of their physical oppression, social ostracism, economic exclusion and personal hatred; and 
when in self defense we seek sheer 
subsistence we are howled down as 
"scabs". 152 THE CRISIS 
Then consider another thing: the 
colored group is not yet divided into 
capitalists and laborers. There are 
only the beginnings of such a division. 
In one hundred years if we develop 
along conventional lines we would' 
have such fully separated classes, but 
today to a very large extent our laborers are our capitalists and our 
capitalists are our laborers. Our 
small class of well-to-do men have 
come to affluence largely through 
manual toil and have never been physically or mentally separated from the 
toilers. Our professional classes are 
sons and daughters of porters, washerwomen and laborers. 
Under these circumstances how 
silly it would be for us to try to apply the doctrine of the class struggle 
without modification or thought. Let 
us take a particular instance. Ten 
years ago the Negroes of New York 
City lived in hired tenement houses 
in Harlem, having gotten possession 
of them by paying higher rents than 
white tenants. If they had tried to 
escape these high rents and move into 
quarters where white laborers lived, 
the white laborers would have mobbed 
and murdered them. On the other 
hand, the white capitalists raised 
heaven and earth either to drive them 
out of Harlem or keep their rents 
high. Now between this devil and 
deep sea, what ought the Negro socialist or the Negro radical or, for 
that matter, the Negro conservative 
do? 
Manifestly there was only one 
thing for him to do, and that was to 
buy Harlem; but the buying of real 
estate calls for capital and credit, and 
the institutions that deal in capital 
and credit are capitalistic institutions. 
If now, the Negro had begun to fight 
capital in Harlem, what capital was 
he fighting? If he fought capital as 
represented by white big real estate 
interests, he was wise; but he was 
also just as wise when he fought labor which insisted on segregating 
him in work and in residence. 
If, on the other hand, he fought the 
accumulating capital in his own 
group, which was destined in the 
years 1915 to 1920 to pay down $5,-
000,000 for real estate in Harlem, 
then he was slapping himself in his 
own face. Because either he must furnish capital for the buying of his 
own home, or rest naked in the slums 
and swamps. It is for this reason 
that there is today a strong movement in Harlem for a Negro bank, 
and a movement which is going soon 
to be successful. This Negro bank 
eventually is going to bring into cooperation and concentration the resources of fifty or sixty other 
Negro banks in the United States, and 
this aggregation of capital is going 
to be used to break the power of 
white capital in enslaving and exploiting the darker world. 
Whether this is a program of socialism or capitalism does not concern us. It is the only program that 
means salvation to the Negro race. 
The main danger and the central question of the capitalistic 
development through which the Negro American group is forced to 
go is the question of the ultimate 
control of the capital which they 
must raise and use. If this capital is going to be controlled by 
a few men for their own benefit, then 
we are destined to suffer from our 
own capitalists exactly what we are 
suffering from white capitalists today. And while this is not a pleasant prospect, it is certainly no worse 
than the present actuality. If, on the 
other hand, because of our more democratic organization and our widespread inter-class sympathy we can 
introduce a more democratic control, 
taking advantage of what the white 
world is itself doing to introduce industrial democracy, then we may not 
only escape our present economic slav • 
ery but even guide and lead a distrait economic world. COMMENCEMENT DAY AT HOWARD UNIVERSITY, WASHINGTON, D. C. — Scurlock NOSTALGIA 
JESSIE FAUSET 
ON those rare mornings when I have a 
moment to spare I go into the little 
fruit shop on Seventh Avenue and buy a 
hard, sweet, red apple and a small rusty 
orange. The foreign proprietor knows me 
now and greets me with as much eagerness 
as though I were about to buy out all his 
stock. There are bunches of ruddy grapes 
hanging up on a piece of twine; the precious life-juice is dying out of them and 
they are becoming shrunken purple masses. 
They fascinate me. 
"Will those grapes become raisins?" I 
asked him finally. 
"They would if they were left there long 
enough, but that is not the usual way. As 
a rule they gather the grapes and dip them 
into hot water in which potash"—he looks 
in his pocket dictionary for the word—"has 
been boiled. Then they hang them up, to 
cure in the sun." 
I like the subject. "Where is all this 
done. In California, in Italy? " 
"In Greece," he corrects me, his tongue 
lingering with love on the word. My interest switches. 
"An d you are Greek?" He is short and 
squat and one eyelid droops. I have to 
readjust my views, a misleading composite 
taken from the Hermes of Praxiteles and 
the storied heroes of Homer. 
"I am a Greek," he says slowly, and 
momentarily is transformed. "I like this 
country," he anticipates me, "but in Greece 
—ah! it is so different." He sighs. 
Somehow I get a vision—Greece and 
the Acropolis many templed; olive trees, 
sunny vineyards, garlanded messengers 
running Pheidippides-wise with an ardor 
that takes the arduousness out of their labor. 
I ask him where he lives; in Larissa, in 
Arcadia, in Elis? 
His answer is a classic phrase. 
"I live in the islands of the sea." He 
names his particular island, but neither 
Xenophon or Lysias trains one's ears too 
well for modern Greek. I am loath to ask 
him again, afraid to break the spell. 
He sighs and sweeps his drooping gaze 
about the store. "In the summer I shall 
sell my stock, and if I am lucky, if I am 
lucky, I shall go back." He does not mean 
if he is lucky at his sale, but if the gods 
favor him, if the fates are kind, his will 
be the ecstatic privilege of returning. 
"But it is hard to make a living in Europe," I remind him and hate my materialism. 
"It does not cost much to live, though," 
he counters. "With only a little one can 
get along." He clutches at his manners. "I 
like America, you know, but in Greece—ah 
—I cannot tell you what I mean. In Greece 
it is so different." 
I GO thoughtfully through the muddy ways 
to the little cobbler shop on Twelfth 
Street and sit down to have my boots 
cleaned. 
My handsome Italian bootblack leaves his 
cobbling and begins on my shoes. 
"Well, how you like this weather? " he 
asks in a loud voice, which makes me think 
somehow that he is talking to keep up 
courage. 
I like the weather well enough, being 
used to the flurry of snow and the grey 
winter days of our eastern coast. 
"In Italy, where I come from, it would 
be so sunny and the skies would be blue." 
He pauses in his work with a shoe brush 
in each hand. But he makes a romantically wistful figure for all that. 
He is homesick, too, poor fellow. But 
he has not learned the lesson of the older 
Greek—that contentment is best—is the only 
thing. He is young, he thinks he must 
make money which will bring success, happiness. 
He was in the war, and tells me about 
it with wide, extravagant gestures. He 
has a fine head and deep, dark eyes that 
glow. I am sorry for h:m. He seems so 
caught, so trapped by life, so deserving 
of a better fate. Incurable sentimentalist 
though I am, I am still unable to cast a 
halo about the profession of cobbler and 
bootblack. 
"I shall never, never forget the 19th of 
15 4 NOSTALGI A 155 
September and the 6th of October. I fought 
in the Argonn e on those days in 1918. I 
never thought to come back alive." W e 
both forge t my boots. Let them dry or 
go uncleaned altogether. One does not 
hear an iliad at first hand every day. 
Even in his enthusiasm he is mournful 
"Yo u did not fight with the Italians 
then? " 
He shakes his head sadly. "No , I am 
American now. I go fight with Americans. 
Some day I go back to Italy maybe, but 
not now. " 
"Yo u don't like Italy? " 
Not like it! He looks at me speechless 
for a second. How can one ask such a 
question? "It is so hard to make a living 
in Italy," he tells me simply. "When I 
make plenty of money, then I go back and 
stay forever. " 
I look around the mean shop, with its 
iron stove in the center, which keeps only 
itself warm; I glance at the pile of ugly, 
wrinkled shoes over which he spends his 
hours, and reflect how hard indeed must 
it be for the poor in Italy, if in spite of 
soft skies and blue seas, he can force himself to live thus under the shadow of the 
6th Avenue "L. " 
I always give him double his price,—I 
did it timorously at first, but he took it 
with a quiet gratitude. He must have needed 
it—for that spirit would never accept alms. 
Rather his manner says, "Yo u can afford 
to give it; I can afford to take it. We are 
both helping each other." 
He sees me to the door with a magnificent 
bow. All his movements are spontaneous, 
at once awkward and graceful like those 
of a child or a faun. 
A t the door—"Well, good-day. Yo u come 
in again soon? Yes? " 
His tragic eyes follow me out into the 
drab weather, pass beyond me, across the 
Alps, to Italy! 
NOSTALGIA—homesickness! All languages must have the word. It is as 
universal a phenomenon as that of possessing a mother. The Greek stem nostos 
means a returning home, and algos means 
pain. A pain for returning home! How 
vivid and keen that is! The French speak 
of la nostalgie, personifying it. The Germans have Heimweh—home-woe. That pulls 
at the heart-strings. I asked my Italian 
for the word in his tongue—"amor di patria, love of fatherland," he said. I don't 
know whether or not the single word exists, 
but love of fatherland is certainly nostalgia's cause. 
It is of all pangs the least endurable. For 
it there is only one cure. Sometimes it 
arises from the lack of material things,— 
familiar scenes, skies, flowers, food. Sometimes it arises from the lack of things of 
the spirit, a difference in ideals. That is 
very hard to bear. 
Across from the College Settlement, at 
Fourth and Christian Streets, in Philadelphia, lives Rachel, aged twelve. She 
comes over once to seek her flyaway younger 
sister, Bessie, and remains to visit with 
me. There was never a quicker recognition of kindred spirits. 
Rachel should have lived in the great 
days of France. Hers would have been 
a marvelous salon, out-rivaling the Hotel 
de Rambouillet. All, all things in this world 
are to be talked about, not quickly, but 
slowly, relishfully, with a choosing of fit 
words, a probing into inner meanings and 
much reflection between topics. Such is 
Rachel's code. 
She does not come over to the settlement 
regularly because she goes to school every 
morning—even through the long, hot Au ­
gust which we are now enduring—to study 
Hebrew—and she aged twelve! She pronounces her name Rachel for me with a 
combination of aspirate and guttural, which 
I am powerless to reproduce either with 
tongue or with pen. 
"M y father says we should all be well 
educated," she explains. "Education, he 
thinks, is a great thing. He is a Zionist— 
if you know what that is," she ends doubtfully. 
I do know, I hasten to inform her quickly. 
I would not for anything show ignorance 
in the presence of this grave young personage. She has very white skin of the tint 
we call pearly, the dark seeing eyes of 
the sybil and a noble head. 
"And your father expects to go to Jerusalem?" 
"Yes, he has a farm there and some day 
he is going to sell out here and go to 
Jerusalem to stay forever." 156 TH E CRISI S 
This strikes me as foolhardy. "Has he 
ever been to Jerusalem." 
"No , my father is from Roumania and 
so is my mother. We were born in America, 
but all my father's and mother's people are 
Roumanian Jews. But my father,"—she 
says in her grave voice with its precise accent, "my father says, 'Here or in Roumania it is all the same,—no place for a 
Jew. For a Jew, living in a Christian 
country is like being a stranger in someone's 
else house. You are never at home ; you 
always feel you are not wanted. But Jerusalem,' he says, 'that is ours, we can do as 
we please; nothing that we do shall be odd. 
The other people will be the strangers.' " 
I am no longer doubtful. 
"An d your mother and all of you will go? 
You want to go? " 
Rachel shakes her curly head—so youthful by contrast with her serious manner. 
"My mother does not want to go. She 
says, 'Wh y should we go to Jerusalem? What 
will we do? If we make money, what will 
we have to spend it on? ' She says she will 
stay here and open a store." 
"But your father will not go off without 
her and you. He won't want to go by himself." 
"My mother wouldn't, but my father 
would. My mother," intones Rachel, "says 
to my father, 'A father's heart is not like 
a mother's. You could go off and leave your 
children or take them to a strange land. 
I am their mother. I must stay with them 
and keep them where is comfort.' " 
I should like to be present at these dignified, aphoristic disputes. 
The father comes to the gate one day to 
inquire after Bessie,—Bessie, who will never 
know the meaning of homesickness. Wherever Bessie is, there will be home. She is six 
and short and charming, with merry blue 
eyes that glance quickly squirrel-wise, a 
cherubic head and a ready tongue. Nothing of the introspective about Bessie. 
But the father! He has plainly come to 
see me, for we stand facing each other in 
the narrow gateway, and he makes no attempt to look beyond. Perhaps Rachel has 
told him of her new confidante. He is 
small and slight in a nondescript, baggy grey 
suit and a little cap. He wears the thin, 
wispy, circular beard of the Semitic, around 
the chin and half way up the jaw-bones. 
And his eyes see visions. 
Abruptly he is satisfied and bids me goodday. 
"It is unfortunate that his wife is such 
a materialist," I think. 
The very next day Rachel corrects me. 
"M y mother," she begins apropos of nothing, "does not want to go to Jerusalem, but 
she would like to go back to Roumania. 
'Ah, Roumania!' she says, 'what difference 
would it make if we had nothing to live 
on if we were only back there!' My mother," 
reflects Rachel aloud, as though realizing 
this for the first time, "always cries when 
she speaks about Roumania." 
So she is homesick, too! I am sorry for 
her, but I am sorrier for him. She has 
at least had some time that which she 
craves so unceasingly. Her ideal is stat'c, 
it is just a matter of ships ami trains and 
money. But his ideal—who shall say that 
he will find—even in Jerusalem—freedom 
for the Jew? And yet it must be somewhere, he reasons, with his keen Jewish 
mind, else all the presag'ng great movements of the world—the French Revolution, 
che Great War—have been lies. 
His is a homesickness of the spirit! 
O N a rainy, blowy night in Philadelphia 
n y doorbell rings and I usher in the 
colored boy whom I used to see at the Art 
School. He left his classes very hurriedly 
to go to France, and this is the first time 
I have seen him since his return. He towers above me in the magnificent and yet 
vaguely unfamiliar khaki of a second lieutenant. The magnificence and the unfamiliar:ty alike, he explains to me later, are 
due to its French cut. 
"I wanted my mother to see how I could 
look," he grins boyishly. 
She certainly must have approved of his 
looks, as must any one else who sees him, 
for he Ftretches up, up, well over six feet, 
with a marvelous development of brawn 
and muscle. 
I get him into the warm dining room and 
proffer him tea and other comforts. He 
eats—cavernously. "It's so wonderful to 
get back to civilian fare," he tells me. 
"An d home, " I add. 
His young face undergoes a startling 
change. "Home? " he echoes, "where is it? 
Do you know, I never knew what home 
was until I went to France ? There in the 
midst of all those strange people, and the NOSTALGI A 157 
awful food and the foreign jabber, I felt 
myself less homesick than I have ever felt in 
my life—yes, than I feel this minute. 
"Home, " he rushes on, his words tumbling over each other in his eagerness, "I 
don't know how to define it. Is it where 
one is surrounded by the sights and sounds 
to which he's been used all his life? Or 
is it where mentally and spiritually he is 
recognized and taken for what he is? What 
is home? " 
I think of a line in an old hymn— 
"Oh, what is that country and where can 
it be?" 
"I didn't realize it while I was away, " 
he goes on somberly. "I used to put up 
with the army prejudice, along with the 
dirt and noise and fighting as part of the 
general show. And when something too 
bad happened, I'd lay it to a few individual 
prejudiced Americans in command. But I 
used to think, 'Well, anyway, it'll be all 
right when I get back.' " 
He laughs shortly. "I've been home one 
month. The second week I went to Arkansas to take my uncle a message and some 
things his boy had sent him. He died over 
there,"—this very simply—"and I knew 
uncle wanted to hear all about it. . . . 
I hadn't been in town ten hours before 
white boys,—boys for whom my cousin had 
died,—stopped rre on the street with, 'Nigger, you can't stay around here in that 
uniform. Take it off or git!' I wanted to 
put up a fight, but my une'e couldn't see 
it. He spirited me away that night, wouldn't hear to my staying. 
"And there are hosts of others—Gosh! 
to think of it—born and bred in America— 
and I'm homesick for France! " 
He gets up. "I'm leaving just as soon 
as I can." 
"Yo u don't mean to tell me, " I say in 
amazement, "that you're actually going back 
—and to stay? " 
"And my mother and—a girl I know,"— 
he softens a little. "Oh, 1 can find plenty 
to do. You know I wanted to be an architect. Where'd 1 get a chance at that here? 
America is all right, only not for us. French 
people and their customs are different, but 
they know how to make a man feel he's a 
man, all right." 
A hasty handclasp and he is plunging out 
into the bitter night. 
It is from the spiritual nostalgia that the 
American Negro suffers most. He has 
been away so long from that mysterious 
fatherland of his that like all the other 
descendants of voluntary and involuntary 
immigrants of the seventeenth century,— 
Puritan, pioneer, adventurer, indentured 
servant,—he feels himself American. The 
past is too far past for him to have memories. Very, very rarely does he have a 
backward reaching bond, be it never so 
tenuous. 
Mr. DuBois indeed in his "Darkwater " 
tells in a striking passage in that striking 
book of a Bantu ancestress who hugged her 
knees and swayed and sang: 
"Do bana coba—gene me, gene me! 
Ben d'nuli, ben d'le " 
Wh o knows what scene of Afric sands and 
Afric freedom those words may have conjure ! up? How the bleakness of New England and the harshness of captivi'y must 
have fostered her homesickness! 
In the main, the American Negro is without ties and the traditions that throw back. 
Instead, he has built unconsciously from his 
childhood a dream-country, and yet surely 
no dream country since it is founded on 
that document which most realizev and sets 
forth the primal and unchanging needs of 
man—the Constitution of the United States. 
Where the Greek dreams of his statues, 
he dreams of Justice; where the Italian 
yearns for his opera, he yearns for Opportunity; and where the Jewish visionary 
longs for freedom of sect, he cries out 
for an escape from Peonage. 
As a child in his readers, he learns of 
great principles in the Declaration of Independence, in Fourth of July speeches, in extracts from Daniel Webster, in Mr. Lincoln's Gettysburg address. 
He grows up and finds them—not here— 
just beyond, always beyond; in a country 
where all things are possible he has found 
exactly what ought not to be possible. 
He keeps on longing for these principles 
with an aching, voiceless longing; with 
Chateaubriand's "Exile " he sighs: 
"Their memory makes me sorry every 
day." 
Is he mocking himself? The cold fear 
strikes him that perhaps there is no such 
country. The Greek—if he is lucky—will 
return to his island of the s.ea. He knows 
it is there. The Italian will go back to 158 TH E CRISI S 
Italy sometime. A t least the Jews have 
lived in Jerusalem. But the black American 
is something entirely new under the sun. 
Shall he ever realize tht land where he 
would be? 
"For thee, oh dear, dear country, 
Mine eyes their vigil keep!" 
That second lieutenant is doomed to know 
homesickness of both body and spirit. In 
France he will want the comforts of America ; in America, he cries out for the rights 
of man which he knew in France. 
A nostalgia of body and soul—there is 
nothing harder to bear. 
HOPKINSVILLE, CHICAGO AND IDLEWILD 
W . E. B. DuBois 
I CONFES S I was suspicious of Hopkinsville. I couldn't find it on the map, and 
I knew no one who knew it. It took twelve 
hours of "Jim Crow" to reach it from 
Cincinnati. But it was worth it. It was 
worth twelve hours of wakefulness, three 
in a seat, to see the Woman approach. She 
was buxom, sweet, fair and golden of skin, 
and she had a little thin baby in her arms. 
"How's your baby? " asked a traveler. 
"It ain't mine," she answered blithely, 
"that poor woman yonder is traveling with 
four and I just took this one to 'tend for 
her." Can you beat it? Ar e we not the 
sweetest-souled people in America ? Imagine 
any other brand of American female voluntarily taking the mewling, scrawny infant of a poor stranger and sitting up 
with it all night in the worst "Jim Crow" 
car of the Louisville and Nashville'railroad, 
just because the poor mother "had four" ! 
It chastened my withered soul. I was glad 
to let a woman and a tired boy crowd on 
me and sit half on my knees while I sat 
happily and talked with God. 
And then that breakfast in Hopkinsville 
—that glorious breakfast—tiny, hot, buttered biscuits that couldn't be counted; 
steaming, pleasing coffee; fried and salty 
ham; pancakes glistening and melting; fried 
potatoes—0 Joy—I ate an hour and slept 
three and then arose and wandered up into 
the hills and among the tiny ivied cottages 
of the "colored" town. At night the audience listened to that which was not easy 
listening, and I flew away in early morning with beautiful memories. 
Chicago scares me : the crowd at State 
and Madison, the ruthless raggedness 
and grime of the blazing streets, the brute 
might of the Thing. And the colored folk 
are fighting today just as they fought in 
the Battle of the Riot, with heads bloody 
but unbowed, triumphant, fearless, wild. 
Fo r a poor people they buy and build the 
best homes in the world. Compared with 
poor Italians, Slovaks, Jews and Irish people, they sacrifice far more for a home than 
any—they overspend on homes; they will 
have them; they fight and bleed and die 
for them, and they have swept like a wave 
over the South Side and bought it and 
own it and keep it despite lies and bombs. 
It's splendid! It's as fine as Washington, where a Congressman died "accidentally" during the riot which taught Negroes 
their place—and barricaded the President 
of 100 millions in the White House. How 
polite white Washington is today to "niggers" ; and the only way they fight them 
in Chicago is at night in swift and sneaking automobiles. It is good and brave to 
be a rising race. 
I stayed at the Vincennes. Around me 
were ghosts of white folks who used to 
live at this beautiful, quiet and exclusive 
hotel. Now Negroes own it and it is still 
beautiful and quiet but, thank heaven, 
neither exclusive nor dear. Every Negro in 
the United States ought to take a trip to 
Chicago, just to stop at the Vincennes with 
his family. 
FO R sheer physical beauty—for sheen of 
water and golden air, for nobleness of 
tree and flower of shrub, for shining river 
and song of bird and the low, moving whisper of sun, moon and star, it is the beautifulest stretch I have seen for twenty years; 
and then to that add fellowship—sweet, 
strong women and keen-witted men from 
Canada and Texas, California and New 
York, Ohio, Missouri and Illinois—all sons PLAYING AT IDLEWILD 
159 160 TH E CRISI S 
and great-grandchildren of Ethiopia, all 
with the wide leisure of rest and play -
can you imagine a more marvelous thing 
than Idlewild? 
I know the cost and prejudice and intriguing ugliness of Atlantic City. I have 
tasted the lovely beauty of the beach at 
Sea Isle and sat in the pretty dining room 
at Dale's, Cape May. I have heard of Arundel and Oak Bluffs, I have walked the 
mountains of Ashville and Harper's Ferry, 
and I know all the by-ways around little 
old New York. Beside Idlewild they are 
nothing. Not for one moment in fine jo y 
ot life, absolute freedom from the desperate cruelty of the color line and for the 
wooing of the great silence which is Peace 
and deep Contentment—not for one little 
minute can they rival or catch the bounding pulse of Idlewild. 
I have seen the moon rising above purple waters against the velvet background 
of tall and silent trees. 
I have seen the stars mirrored in the 
depths of the mystic bosom of the lake. 
I have seen the sun sink gloriously to rest 
with no roar of noise or rage of heartbeat, but filmed an ! crowned and kissed 
by the music of a million waving leaves 
and the song of many w;.ters. 
I have seen the myitery of Dawn, the 
filmy mists that swathed the light limbs 
of the world, the hush of dreamless sleep, 
the chill of conquered death and then— 
the wide, wild thunder of the rising sun. 
All this I have seen, yet this was least. 
There was one who lost love and found 
work and was happy. There was one whose 
canning fingers daily raised the dead. There 
were those who builded mansions, moved 
the worlds, healed the sick, contrived garments, defended the innocent and guilty, 
made homes and explored the world. And 
all of them did these things even as you 
and I, within the Veil. They came to 
us from the earth's ends, full of our own 
experience with these tales of proud triumph over the White Devils of America, 
of fine friendship with the White Souls of 
Justice. Whatever you have in little and 
with one now and then we have every day 
with men and women from everywhere, 
and this is the Soul of Idlewild, and to 
prove it, listen: For the first time in my 
life I bought a lot—a little silvery point, 
dark with oak, that pursued the lovely 
lake, and I named it Bois du Bois. (I've 
let go since, but what of that? ) 
Forgive these d.thyrambs, for this was 
written in the spell of the thing. Listen 
now to sober truth. In some years since 
certain white men, yes, just ordinary white 
men, bought land here and determined to 
sell it to colored folk. They did. The 
result is Idlewild. 
It is not fashionable: men in khaki, 
women in knickers and overalls, no servants, food cheap, victrolas for orchestra, 
no high-heeled shoes, but hiking, fishing, 
tennis, rowing, dancing, spooning and sleeping. Especially sleeping. Long, quiet, glorious naps, night and day, to the sound of 
dancing waters. Fairies and water nymph 
abound, mermaids, hobgoblins, nice gracious ghosts, and drinking water straight 
from the hills of Paradise, filled with diamonds and pearls and reeking with champagne. Everybody knows everybody, and 
the world is happy. One dress-up dress 
will do you, and you won't need that. There 
is a legend that one man once brought a 
dress coat. They point out his grave yet. 
No one will accuse me of over-partiality 
toward my paler neighbors. I deeply regret that as I grow older a white face is 
to me a sign of inherent distrust and suspicion, which I have to fight in order to 
be just. Now white men developed Idlewild. They recognized its beauty, bought 
it and attracted colored people there. They 
have made money by the operation. That 
was their object. But they have not been 
hogs. They have not squeezed the lemon 
dry, and they have apparently been absolutely open, square and just. Idlewild 
is worth every penny paid for it. It is 
worth a good deal more than most people 
paid for it. The present price of $100 
a lot is very cheap, but hundreds of lots 
sold for ten and twenty dollars. White 
nen developed it because they knew how. 
We pay for their experience, but we pay 
a very low sum. Our hats are off to the 
Idlewild Resort Company. 
Now comes our turn. The lots are nearly 
all sold. It is our duty to develop, beautify 
and govern it. It must be a center of 
Negro art, conference and recreation. Its 
whole future is being turned over to a 
democratic Lot Owners' Association, composed exclusively of colored folk. Behold 
the day and the chance! National Association for the Advancem
TH E TWELFT H ANNUA L CONFERENC E 
HPH E annual conferences of the National 
Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People have come to be the most 
remarkable meetings of Negroes in the 
world. It is not simply the numbers of 
people who come—and this rises in the 
thousands—but it is rather the intense and 
unflagging interest. A solid week of real 
conference, with packed meetings at the end 
of each day, is a thing that one would 
not deem possible unless it was worked 
up by frenzy and clap-trap and loud, vacant talk. But here at Detroit there were 
no absolute remedies; there was moderation and reason, but there were tremendous 
earnestness and a deep sense of the reality of the cause. It was carried through, 
although under intense heat and partially 
with rain and storm, a combination of 
weather conditions hard to withstand; yet 
we withstood it. 
First, and perhaps greatest of all, came 
the silent marching of 4,000 men and women 
and 250 automobiles from the Lincoln 
School, down Antoine and Gratiot to Woodward Avenue and thence to the great Tabernacle which was filled on Sunday afternoon to the last seat. The Knights of 
Pythias were there, the Elks, the Odd Fellows and the Masons, the American Legion and the American Woodmen ; six 
bands—it was a singularly moving scene. 
Groups of eleven carried banners with 
these devices: 
1. W E PROTES T 
The Mother Social Evil— 
RACE PREJUDICE! 
2. W E PROTES T 
All Attacks Against 
GOOD GOVERNMENT! 
3. W E PROTES T 
Every Deviltry to Make 
15 000,000 Loyal Americans 
IGNORANT AND INEFFICIENT! 
4. W E PROTES T 
Burning Homes, Churches, Schools— 
WRECKING CIVILIZATION! 
5. W E PROTES T 
Dishonoring and Outraging 
ALL WOMEN AND GIRLS! 
6. W E PROTES T 
Lynching and Torturings— 
MOB MURDER! 
7. W E PROTES T 
law s Pased on Race— 
CLASS LEGISLATION! 
8. W E PROTES T 
Burning Babies and Women— 
AMERICAN CANNIBALISM! 
9. W E PROTES T 
Denial of Personal Rights 
IN PUBLIC PLACES! 
10. W E PROTES T 
Discrimination and Robbery 
N COMMON CARRIER TRAVEL 
11. W E PROTES T 
Those Churches and Newspapers— 
RUBBER STAMPS OF RACE 
PREJUDICE! 
12. W E PROTES T 
Wrong's Done by Stronger 
AGAINST WEAKER PEOPLE! 
These slogans were carried by groups o 
;even: 
1. W E PROTES T 
Higher Wage s Paid Other Workers 
Over Negroes for the Same Work— 
CRIME AGAINST SERVICE! 
2. W E PROTES T 
The Color Caste System 
Wh !c h Operates Against 
PROMOTING PROVEN 
WORKERS! 
3. W E PROTES T 
All Laws and Customs Fostering 
RACE PREJUDICE! 
4. W E PROTES T 
Violence Against Voting— 
GOVERNMENT BY FRAUD! 
5. W E PROTES T 
Making Negro National Guards 
SEPARATE LABOR UNITS! 
10l 162 TH E CRISI S 
6. W E PROTES T 
The Double Standard in Courts— 
MOCK JUSTICE 1 
7. W E PROTES T 
Debtor Slavery— 
PEONAGE! 
8. W E PROTES T 
Southern Sham Schools— 
FOSTERING IGNORANCE! 
9. W E PROTES T 
East St. Louis, Washington, 
Chicago, Elaine and Tulsa—All 
REVENGE PLOTS! 
Groups of three protested these wrongs 
1. W E PROTES T 
Robbing Innocents— 
CHILD LABOR! 
2. W E PROTES T 
Organized Terrorism— 
KU KLUX KLAN! 
3. W E PROTES T 
The Industrial Blockade 
AGAINST NEGRO LABOR! 
4. W E PROTES T 
Law and Order's Enemies— 
WHITE SUPREMACY ADVOCATES 
5. W E PROTES T 
Exclusion of Negroes from 
INSPIRING NAVAL SERVICE! 
6. W E PROTES T 
Failure to Name Negroes 
FOR WEST POINT! 
7. W E PROTES T 
Closing Annapolis Academy 
TO 15,000,000 AMERICANS! 
At the first session Moorfield Storey said: 
"We ask nothing that is not due a citizen 
of the United States. The principles of 
the Constitution are trampled on today. The 
Ku Klux Klan stands for lawless rule and 
every man who believes in law and order 
should set his face against such organizations." 
Judge Ira W. Jayne cried: "They hide 
behind the mob and encourage lynching as 
a support. I would advise Negroes at all 
costs to come North and bring their friends 
and families with them." 
A message came from the President of 
the United States and a message went back 
to him saying: "At present an insidious 
attack is being made upon the Association 
by secret and clandestine organizations, 
like the Ku Klux Klan. and sectional 
bodies, such as the newly launched Dixie 
Defense Committee, which attempt to spread 
the impression that the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People is inimical to peace and the amicable relations of the races. Every utterance, written or spoken, of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People has been made openly and in 
the light of the ideals of American democracy. This Association works neither 
through secret meetings or anonymous letters, nor behind masks. A s can be ascertained by anyone who investigates the records of the Association's work, its efforts 
have been directed solely to the end that 
common justice and equal opportunity shall 
be assured to every American citizen regardless of color. 
"In this effort to realize the democracy 
that is preached, as completely as possible 
in the democracy that is practiced, the Association invites the co-operation of all 
American citizens, white and black. " 
On Monday night, after a day of formal 
welcomes, there was a discussion of peonage, led by U. S. Bratton, forme r United 
States Attorney for the Eastern District 
of Arkansas. "Peonage is general throughout the South," he declared. 
On Tuesday came the discussion of the 
economic aspect of the race problem, and 
James H. Maurer, President of the Pennsylvania Federation of Labor, said: "The 
antagonism between Negro and white in 
the United States is a result of their struggles to live, and is inspired by those who 
exploit both. The union must open wide 
its door to every class of worker, women 
as well as men, and there will be no lower 
class and racial antagonisms and prejudices 
will disappear, at least among the workers. Their interests are identical, no matter whether white or black, male or female." 
On this day, too, a fraternal message 
came from the Socialists, who sent a delegation with this resolution: 
"W e pledge the Socialist Party, through 
its national, state and local organizations, 
through its press and through the work of 
individual members, to do all in its power 
to abolish those evils (lynching, political 
discrimination, etc.), and cultivate an ac-N. A. A. C . P. 16 3 
tive solidarity in the whole body of workers, regardless of race, creed or color." 
Wednesday was given up to the discussion of branch methods, and at night came 
a speech by Robert T. Kerlin, a whit>> 
Southerner, which was in many respects 
epoch-making. He said: "Americans are a 
dangerously uninformed and misinformed 
people on the Negro. The task of making 
known that fact and of driving home the 
truth is a most important one, but it is an 
almost impossible task. Ours is not, generally speaking, an open press in any part 
of America . And this is particularly true 
of it when the Negro is concerned 
"The consequences are perilous, sometimes calamitous. Had the facts of Elaine, 
Ark., been adequately published through 
America, the shame of Tulsa would net 
be written in the charred ruins of homos 
and the ash heaps of stores and churches." 
William Pickens made a singularly clear 
and concise exposition of the interest which 
society has in the uplift of each of its constituent parts. 
Thursday morning the conference sailed 
up the beautiful river, and danced, talked 
and rested. 
In the afternoon they discussed membership and at night again the great Woodward Tabernacle was filled to its last seat, 
with many standing, to hear talk on PanAfrica. The history of the Pan-African 
Congress and the story of the rise of 
centers of interest and agitation throughout the Negro worl d were outlined by the chairman, and then two 
men came forward to impress by their 
earnest speeches the sentiment of different 
parts of the African world. Sol Plaatje, 
first vice-president of the South African 
Native Congress, spoke for the Basuta Nation, and Stenio Vincent of Haiti, former 
President of the Haitian Senate, gave a 
historical outline of service of Haiti for 
freedom in America and the shame of 
the overthrow of its liberties by the United 
States. 
In behalf of Charles S. Gilpin, who was 
absent on account of illness, the chairman 
received from the representative of the 
Governor of Michigan the Spingarn Medal 
and explained the significance of the Negro 
to American art. 
A large number of prominent visitors attended the conference and spoke to the 
delegates. Amon g them were Bishop C. S. 
Smith of the A . M. E. Church, Miss Hallie 
Q. Brown, President of the National Association of Colored Women, Eugene Kinckle 
Jones, Executive Secretary of the National 
Urban League, ex-Congressman Thomas E. 
Miller, R. W. Jelliffe of Cleveland, Frederick G. Detwiler of Chicago and others. 
All day Friday came the interesting reports of the branches; at night the history 
and future of the N. A. A. C. P. and 
Tulsa were discussed by Miss Ovington and 
Mr. Walter F. White. Partial reports of 
the drive were made: Twenty-one branches 
have gone over the top. 
The largest membership gained was on 
the part of the District of Columbia Branch 
which obtained 6,800 new members. 
Rochester, N. Y., as the result of the drive 
numbers half of its colored population as 
members of the Association. 
A considerable number of the principal 
branches have not yet made their returns. 
Pasadena, Cal., Rockford, 111., Emporia, 
Kas., Parsons, Kas., Frankfort, Ky., Springfield, Mass., Kansas City, Mo., Buffalo, N. 
Y., Rochester, N. Y., Ashville, N. C , Akron, 
0., Okmulgee, Okla., Franklin, Pa., Newport, R. I., Florence, S. C , Fairfax Co., 
Va., Berkley, W. Va., Lexington, Ky., 
Maysville, Ky., are the branches that went 
over the top. The Association's membership as the result of the drive has been increased to about 135,000. The following 
resolutions were adopted:— 
The National Association for the Ad ­
vancement of Colored People in its twelfth 
annual conference, meeting in this great 
crisis of the world's reconstruction, would 
remind the nation that from our very first 
conference we have planted our agitation 
and action upon a careful and thorough investigation of the truth concerning the 
Negro problem. Often when we have published in our organ, TH E CRISIS, and in 
letters and articles in the press, our findings and conclusions, we have been accused 
of exaggeration. Today we stand vindicated 
before the world in the revelations in 
Georgia; and knowing that Georgia is little if any worse than a half dozen other 
States, we solemnly adjure this nation to 
give more serious attention and more earnest action to this festering social sore. 164 THE CRISIS 
Lynching and mob violence against Negroes still loom as our most indefensible 
national crime, and unless the present administration takes early action by legal enactment it will stand condemned of all 
thoughtful citizens, North and South. Increasingly the Negro at Washington, Chicago and Tulsa has been forced to give his 
life in self-defense. No man can do less 
for his family and people, and it is a 
cruel campaign of lying that represents 
this fight for life as organized aggression. 
Negroes are not fools. Eleven million poor 
laborers do not seek war on a hundred million powerful neighbors. But they cannot 
anj will not die without raising a hand 
when the nation lets its offscourings and 
bandits insult, harry, loot and kill them. 
What is the cause of the new conflict 
of race in America ? It is not simply a 
growing sense of manhood on the part 
of the blacks, it is increased lack of sympathy and sense of justice on the part of the 
ivhites, and this arises from the snapping 
of those human bonds which must exist between neighbors. If the Negro child is 
not educated; if the Negro is segregated 
in Federal Departments and Oklahoma 
cities; if he is publicly insulted by "J.m 
Crow" cars; if he is treated unjustly in 
the courts, as in the twelve pending Arkansas peonage cases; if in the army and navy 
the Negro is grossly ahd continually discriminated against and faces plans for further discrimination in the National Guard; 
if he has no voice in the administration of 
the law, especially as to labor, agriculture 
and education; and if finally, the nation is 
being honeycombed by secret societies like 
the Ku Klux Klan, who stir up race hatred 
by innuendo and an appeal to the lowest 
brute instincts—if all these things are 
done, how can we help but k.ll the human 
sympathy, the spirit of the Prince of Peace, 
the strong faith and the desire for humble, 
effective co-operation which alone can save 
civilization? 
Men and women of America, the program of those who would save America 
from bitter racial hatred and conflict and 
murder is short and simple: 
1. The right to vote under the same conditions as other persons vote, 
2. A federal law against lynching and 
mob violence, 
3. Justice for the convicted peons in Arkansas. 
4. Equitable treatment for Negro soldiers 
and sailors, 
5. Abolition of the "Jim Crow" cars in 
inter-state traffic, 
6. Free public schools for all children, 
7. The appointment of an Inter-racial 
Commission of high-class, fair-minded men 
and women representing both races, to make 
a scientific survey of race relations, 
8. The withdrawal of our military forces 
from Haiti and carefully planned aid for 
Haiti and Liberia, 
9. The weight of our influence to secure 
Justice for the natives of Africa , particularly in the former German colonies, 
10. A world-wide attempt to promote 
Peace through inter-i.,t 
and equality, and through a wider recognition of the basic identity of race and labor 
problems. 
Other resolutions were adopted (1 ) commending the Governor of Oklahoma for his 
prompt action in regard to the Tulsa riot 
and calling upon the State to prosecute 
those guilty of the terrible outrages committed; (2 ) pledging the Association to use 
every effort to secure clemency for the soldiers of the Twenty-fourth Infantry now in 
Leavenworth Prison; (3 ) commending the 
Department of Justice for its activity in the 
investigation and prosecution of peonage 
cases in the South; (4 ) endorsing the bill 
introduced by Representative Tinkham of 
Massachusetts asking for an investigation 
of disfranchisement; (5 ) asking the President of the United States to call a conference to discuss world disarmament; (6 ) 
recommending the encouragement of colored 
women to exercise their right to vote ; (7 ) 
urging the Committee on the Judiciary of 
the House of Representatives now in charge 
of the Dyer Anti-Lynching Bill to expedite 
this bill and report it favorably. THE SPRINGFIELD RIOTS 
E Y A SPRINGFIELD RESIDENT 
I NOTE in your CRISIS, May, 1921, under 
A heading of Crime, a statement concerning 
the Springfield, Ohio, Riot. I realize how 
hard it is to obtain true facts of these race 
disturbances, owing to the white press' desire to magnify and misrepresent. 
There were no persons killed in the riot 
and only one person wounded—the policeman. The trouble started from the raping 
of a young girl by an alleged colored man; 
however, no colored person was found that 
could be connected with the cas<5 and when 
suspicion began to turn toward a white man 
the matter was dropped. 
White people, becoming incensed after the 
newspapers gave such prominence to the 
raping and not being able to find a victim 
for their wrath, decided to do a little bumming and general mobbing of Negroes; but 
Springfield colored people have had two 
other riots in the past twenty years and 
were duly and truly piepared for the occasion. Residents on South Yellowsprings 
Street and that vicinity, a Negro district, 
created a second "N o Man's Land" for police and solaiers, ar.d wo; nd up by running 
the Mayor hozr.e. 
Indictments were returned by the Grand 
Jury against four colore J nun and no white. 
Three of the colored boys were freed yesterday, May 6, by a jury who found them 
not guilty; the fourth man, a hotel proprietor, pleadid guihy because l.e feared that 
sentiment was so against him, he could not 
get a fair trial. He was fined $300 and costs 
and 60 days in the Work Hou;e. After goin^ to the Work House he applied for a 
Writ of Habeas Corpus which was granted 
at Dayton, Ohio. 
Ti e policenxn was shot by a youn^' colored man and he was sentenced to a term at 
Lancaster Reform School. 
TH E MARINE S A S SLAVE-DRIVER S IN HAIT I 
165 Men of the Month 
WILLIA M L. HOUSTO N was born May 
14, 1870, in Mound City, 111. His 
father, the Rev. T. J. Houston, was a Baptist minister. Mr. Houston taught school 
for two years in Kentucky, and in 1890 he 
was appointed a clerk in the Wa r Department. In 1892 he was graduated from 
Howard University Law School and admitted to the Bar of the District of Columbia. In 1908 he was admitted to practice before the Supreme Court of the 
United States. He was recently appointed 
a member of the District of Columbia Board 
of Education for a term of three years, 
beginning July 1, 1921. This Board has 
under its control 3,000 teachers and employees of whom more than 700 are colored; it is charged with the responsibility 
for the expenditure of all school funds, 
for which Congress is making an extra 
emergency appropriation of $1,900,000 for 
the coming year. 
Mr. Houston is National Secretary of 
the Supreme Order of Helpers and a professor in the law school of Howard University. He is married, and a son, Charles 
H. Houston, is a student of law at Harvard. 
GEORG E W. Carver has been connected 
with Tuskegee Institute for 21 years. He 
was born on the plantation of Moses Carver, 
at Diamond Grove, Mo., about the close 
of the Civil War. After having been stolen 
and sent to Arkansas with his mother, he 
was returned to the Carver plantation, his 
price being a horse valued at $300. A t the 
age of 19 he started his schooling and supported himself by cooking and laundering. He was graduated from high school 
at Minneapolis, Kan.; at Iowa State College 
he studied agriculture and was awarded the 
Bachelor's and Master's degrees. When he 
had received his Bachelor's degree he was 
elected a member of the faculty and given 
charge of the greenhouse and bacteriological laboratory work in systematic botany. 
More than 100 varieties of products from 
peanuts, ranging from the purest of milks 
to ink for writing and sketching, have been 
discovered by Mr. Carver. 
TH E late Miss Marietta Lilian Chiles was 
a woman of rare executive ability and 
one of the foremost women of Richmond, 
Va., where she was born January 18, 1862. 
She was the daughter of the late Richard 
Chiles, the messenger who carried the note 
to Jefferson Davis, as he sat at service in St. 
Raul's Church, telling him of Lee's surrender. Miss Chiles was graduated from 
the High and Normal School of Richmond, 
in 1881, with highest honors, receiving two 
gold and one silver medal. For more than 
thirty-five years she was a teacher in the 
public schools of Richmond, being connected 
with the Baker School. 
EDGAR RANDOLP H BECKLE Y and his 
wife, Martha D. Beckley, celebrated 
their sixty-second wedding anniversary on 
June 9. Mr. Beckley was born May 2, 1836, 
and his wife March 17, 1838. They are the 
parents of 11 children, 5 of whom are living, the oldest being 53 years of age. They 
have 19 grandchildren and 7 great-grandchildren, including the Pinkett brothers. 
Mr. Beckley was General Grant's Orderly 
during the Civil War. When Mr. Grant 
became president he took Mr. Beckley with 
him to the White House, where he remained 
as Special Messenger to presidents for 40 
years; then he was transferred to the Bureau of Printing and Engraving, where he 
served 15 years. He is retired on a pension, after 55 years of continuous service 
to the government and is now living in 
Washington. 
EtIENN E MATHON , together with other 
~ Haitians in Paris, has done honor to 
black soldiers who fought in the World War. 
A wreath has been placed on the tomb of 
the Unknown Soldier. The inscription says: 
"In thee we glorify heroic and victorious 
France, whose valorous children fell on 
the Great War's field of honor. 
"In thee we glorify also the sons of hoary 
Africa, the black troops of America, and 
all our blood kith and kin who rushed from 
every part of the world at the call of the 
Allies . 
"May the blood which they so generously 
spilled for the triumph of right and civilization obtain henceforth for their race more 
goodness and justice." 
Mr. Mathon has served as Secretary of 
State in the Department of Foreign Affairs and of Public Instruction. WILLIA M L. HOUSTO N ETIENN E MATHO N 
GEORG E W . CARVE R I N HI S LABORATOR Y A T TTJSKEGEE 
TH E LAT E MIS S M. L. CHILE S MR . & MRS . E. R . BECKLE Y 
167 The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
JAME S OPPENHEI M in Unity: 
They set the slave free, striking off his 
chains 
Then he was as much of a slave as ever. 
He was still chained to servility, 
He was still manacled to indolence and 
sloth, 
He was still bound bv fear and superstition, 
Py ignorance, suspicion and savagery. . 
His slavery was not in the chains, 
But in himself. 
They can only set free men free . . . 
And there is no need of that: 
Free men set themselves free. 
* * * 
As in the Bent Twig and many of her 
novels, Dorothy Canfield, in The Brimming 
Cup, docs not forget or fail to have her 
readers remember that there are black folk 
in America and that they are not justly 
treated. There is no propaganda, but the 
t! ing simply slips into the story naturally 
but earnestly as, for instance, the quiet, 
sensitive old white man is speaking and 
says of a letter he has received: "'It made 
a very painful impresden cn my m'nd, her 
letter, very. She gave such instances. I 
hiven't been able to get it out of my mind. 
For instance, one of the small things she 
told me. .. . it seems incredible. . . 
is that southern white people won't give 
the ordinary title of respect of Mr. or 
Mrs. or Dr. even to a highly educated 
Negro. They call them by their first names, 
like servants. Think what an hourly pinprick of insult that must be. Ever since 
her letter came I've been thinking about it, 
the things she told me, about what happens when they try to raise themselves and 
refine themselves, how they're made to suffer intimately for trying to be what I 
thought we all want-d all Americans to 
be.' He looked at Mar.se with troubled 
eyes. 'I've been thinking how it would feel 
to be a Negro myself. Wha t a different 
life would be in front of your little Elly 
if she had Negro blood!' 
"Marise had listened to him in profound 
silence. Sheer, unmixed astonishment filled 
her m ind up to the brim. Of all the totally 
unexpected things for Mr. Welles to get 
wrought up about! " 
* * * 
Recent periodical literature on the Negro : 
Garvey's Empire of EthioDia. T. H. Talley. World's Work. 41: 264-70. Jan., '21. 
Negro Republic in Africa . H. Lutz-Munchen. Living Age. 308: 386-9. Feb., '21. 
Negro Americans and Their Problems. R. 
W. Roundy. Missionary Review. 44: 214-
18. March, '21. 
piavo-round for Colored America . Playcround. 15: 84-9. April, '21. 
Race Commission: A Constructive Plan. 
Nation. 112: 612. April 27, '21. 
Ner o I abor During and After the War. 
Month'y Labor Review. 12: 853-8. April, 
'21. 
Negro Woma n in Industry. A. S. Cheyney. Survey. 46 : 119. April 23, '21. 
I'd Like to Show Yo u Harlem! A Prosperous City of 150,000 Negroes. R. L. Hartt. 
il. Independent. 105: 334-5. April 2, '21. 
Serving New York's Black City. E. 
Rose. Library Journal. 46: 255-8. March 
15, '21. 
Fruits of Peonage. New Republic. 26: 
223-4. April 20, '21. 
Georgia's Death Farm. Literary Digest. 
69: 13-14. April 16, '21. 
Slavery in Georgia, A. D. 1921. H. J. 
Seligmann. Nation. 112: 591. April 20, 
'21. 
IS TULSA A SYMBOL? 
Out of the welter of fire and blood, in 
which Tulsa lies submerged, one fact 
arises stark and challenging. Regardless 
of the odds and heavily outnumbered, the 
Negroes united to save one of their own. 
An armed mob met armed resistance. Is 
not this the beginning of that worst of 
conditions, a "popular war" ? The New Republic comments: 
Wha t gives the American race problem 
a new and menac'ng aspect is the emergence of a spirit of forcible resistance on the 
part of the Negroes. "Get a gun, " is the 
advice of scores of Negro leaders. "Hit 
back; make them respect you. " Tha t is 
dangerous doctrine; if we could kill it by 
preaching, we should preach. But it is 
impossible to do anything with a doctrine 
unless you understand it. An d we shall 
168 THE LOOKING GLASS 169 
never understand the militant attitude 
among Negroes unless we try to put ourselves in their place. Suppose that America were mainly a black man's country, 
with nine Negroes to every white. Suppose that the blacks held all the offices, 
controlled the police and the courts, owned 
practically all the property, monopolized all 
lucrative business and professions. And 
then suppose that in addition to exploiting the whites, the Negroes sporadically 
rushed together in mobs and tore white 
men away from their families, beat them 
unmercifully, shot them down or hanged 
them or even burned them at the stake on 
charges of crimes that black men's courts 
would have dealt with not too gently if 
there had been any semblance of proof. 
Finally, suppose that in some cases the 
burning of a white man was widely advertised in the press, a holiday declared, and 
excursion trains put on for the benefit of 
those who wished to view the spectacle. 
Wha t white man is there among us who 
would not get a gun and urge all other 
white men to do likewise? 
* * * 
These are sane and just remarks. And 
what if this union of Negroes means the 
loss of many rather than the lynching of 
one? Human nature is stronger than common sense. Life is not worth much without manhood. The article continues: 
But it will he said that the Negroes will 
not improve their lot by using force ; on 
the contrary, many more will be insulted 
and abused and slain than would be the 
case if +^ev accented the wrongs done 
them in the old spirit of resisnat'on. We 
believe that is true. At Tulsa, if the 
Negroes had made no show of resistance, 
the most that might have happened was 
the lynching of one Negro, possibly an 
impudent fellow though not a criminal. 
Because a group of Negroes rallied to hi > 
defence, over a score were killed and more 
than ten thousand were driven from their 
homes by fire—men, women and children, 
in ghastly fear of a mob more cruel than 
the flames. But a cold-blooded calculation 
of this kind will not carry far in a world 
which has recently sacrificed twenty milHon lives to the Manes of an Austrian 
Archduke. It would not carry far with 
us whites if we were the minority from 
which the majority race selected victims 
to mutilate and torture to death. Wh y 
should we expect it to carry far with 
the Negroes ? Ar e they utterly without a 
feeling of race solidarity? Ar e they a't>-
gether immune to that species of unreason 
that makes the white man say: Better ten 
thousand dead in battle than one single 
worthless individual wrongfully done to 
death in despite o f his race or nation. 
• • * 
This tendency to self-organization is absolutely natural. The best thing for the 
country to do, this writer thinks, is to face 
it and shape the attitude of America accordingly. 
The Negroes are coming into a sense of 
solidarity: so it is declared by witnesses 
from all over the country, equally by those 
who deplore the fact and by those who 
rejoice in it. They are coming nto a 
spirit of collective self-defence, often a truculent spirit. It is asserted by Southerners 
that the war is responsible for this spirit, 
and there is much to be said for this view. 
The Negroes who faced the German guns 
and were regarded as citizens of the firstclass when it came to stop r
in r German 
bull pts might easily become centres of disaffection with a civil status ranging from 
disfranchisement to death at the stake. But 
war or no war, it was probab'y hound to 
come. The servile acceptance of kindness 
or outrage at the hands of the whit" man 
could not survive slavery by many generations. 
Whatever its origin, the spirit of collective resistance is abroad in the Negro 
population. And that sririt presents a 
grave challenge to Americans. Shall we 
go on about our other affairs as heretofore, declaring complacently that the rac» 
problem is one that can never be solve' ? 
Or shall we address ourselves seriously to 
find ng a modus vivendi un'e r which the 
Negro will he assured of his ordinnry rights 
as a man? 
"INCIDENT OF THE FRENCH 
CAMP." 
The Cri dc Paris gives us this amusing 
anecdote, the hero of which is the 
deputy from Senegal: 
M. Diagne, deDuty from Senegal, commissioner general of the black troops, enjoyed an almost limitless pre^ti^e among 
the African soldiers in Paris. The following- gives some idea of his authority: 
The Commissariat and the black troops 
were installed at the military school. 
Fo r some time horse stealing had been 
going on in the stables nenr th" Commissariat. Certain individuals ('is'nii'-ed as 
soldiers entered the courtyard through the 
gateway, above which ran the legend "Commissariat of Rlaek Troops, " went to the 
stable, jumped on a horse and rot'e off 
w
!
th their acquisition as coolly as you 
please. 
Of course this could not he allowed to 
go on. 
M. Diagne, when told of this, stationed 
p sharpshooter at the gate with the injunction : 
"Don't let anybody come in unless he 
is an officer or a civilian." 
Some staff secretaries came out. The 
sharpshooter let them pass, but when they 170 THE CRISIS 
wanted to come back he presented his bayonet and barred the gate. 
"Why, " said the secretaries, "we are employed there in the office." 
"Ar e you an officer?" asked the black soldier. 
"No , of course not." 
"Ar e you a civilian?" 
"Yo u can see for yourself that we are 
not." 
"Then if you are neither an officer nor 
a civilian, you can't pass." 
"But—." 
"If you advance I will fire." 
They held a parley. 
The sharpshooter was unshakable. He 
allowed officers who were trying to convince him of the secretaries' identities to 
pass in, but so far as the secretaries themselves were concerned he remained as firm 
as a rock. 
"M . Diagne says if you are not an officer or not a civilian you can't pass. 
So. " 
They had to find the High Commissioner 
himself, in order to have the injunction 
changed. 
"An d the Germans pretend that our soldiers aren't disciplined," observed M. Diagne. 
AN OPEN LETTER FROM 
GANDHI 
YOUNG INDIA, edited by Gandhi in 
Ahmedabad, India, prints the "Saint's " 
appeal to "every Englishman in India" : 
Let me introduce myself to you. In my 
humble opinion, no Indian has co-operated 
with the British Government more than 
I have for an unbroken period of twentynine years of public life in the face of 
circumstances that might well have turned 
any other man into a rebel. I ask you to 
believe me when I tell you that my cooperation was not based on the fear of the 
punishments provided by your laws or any 
other selfish motives. It was free and voluntary co-operation based on the belief that 
the sum total of the activity of the British Government was for the benefit of 
India. I put my life in peril four times for 
the sake of the Empire,—at the time of 
the Boer Wa r when I was in charge of 
the Ambulance corps, whose work was mentioned in General Buller's dispatches, at 
the time of the Zulu revolt in Natal, when 
I was in charge of a similar corps, at the 
time of the commencement of the late 
war, when I raised an Ambulance corps, 
and as a result of the strenuous training 
had a severe attack of pleurisy, and lastly, 
in fulfilment of my promise to Lord Chelmsford at the Wa r Conference in Delhi, I 
threw myself in such an active recruiting 
campaign in Kaira District, involving long 
and trying marches, that I had an attack 
of dysentery, which proved almost fatal. 
I did all this in the full belief that acts 
such as mine must gain for my country 
an equal status in the Empire. So late 
as last December I pleaded hard for a 
trustful co-operation. I fully believed that 
Mr. Lloyd George would redeem his promise to the Musulmans and that the revelations of the official atrocities in the Punjab would secure full reparation for the 
Punjabis. But the treachery of Mr. Lloyd 
George and its appreciation by you, and 
the condonation of the Punjab atrocities 
have completely shattered my faith in the 
good intentions of the Government and the 
nation which is supporting it. 
* » * 
Experience has taught Gandhi that he 
need expect nothing from the Englishman's 
fine words, so he is staking his all on the 
far-famed British love of fair play. He 
continues then: 
But though my faith in your good intentions is gone, I recognize your bravery, and 
I know that what you will not yield to 
justice and reason, you will gladly yield to 
bravery. 
See what this Empire means to India:— 
Exploitation of India's resources for the 
benefit of Great Britain, 
An ever-increasing military expenditure, 
and a civil service the most expensive in 
the world, 
Extravagant working of every department in utter disregard of India's poverty, 
Disarmament and consequent emasculation of a whole nation lest an armed nation 
might imperil the lives of a handful of 
you in our midst, 
Traffic in intoxicating liquors and drugs 
for the purpose of sustaining a top-heavy 
administration, 
Progressively repressive legislation in 
order to suppress an ever-growing agitation 
seeking to give expression to a nation's 
agony, 
Degrading treatment of Indians residing 
in your dominions, and 
Yo u have shown total disregard of our 
feelings by glorifying the Punjab administration and flouting the Musulman sentiment. 
I know you would not mind if we could 
fight and wrest the sceptre from your hands. 
Yo u know that we are powerless to do 
that, for you have ensured our incapacity 
to fight in open and honorable battle. Bravery on the battlefield is thus impossible for 
us. Bravery of the soul still remains open 
to us. I know you will respond to that 
also. I am engaged in evoking that bravery. 
HAIL, LIBERIA! 
The New Yor k Tribune speaks o f the 
* ordination of a native Liberian as 
bishop: 
The consecration of the Rev. Dr. Theophilus M. Gardiner as a bishop suffragan THE LOOKING GLASS 171 
of the Protestant Episcopal Church seems 
to merit remark. Dr. Gardiner in his childhood was a member of a wild and savage 
African tribe, living in the jungles of 
inland Liberia, and was civilized and educated and prepared for entry into holy 
orders in the Negro schools of Cape Mount 
and Cape Palmas. Thus he is purely a 
product of African Negro culture. 
Coincidentally comes the announcement 
that the President of Liberia has just selected four American missionaries, of the 
Protestant Episcopal, Methodist Episcopal, 
Baptist and Lutheran churches, respectively, to serve as advisory members of the 
Liberian Board of Education; indicating a 
purpose not to disregard all external aid, 
nor yet to be wholly dependent upon it, 
but wisely to make avail of it. 
The present year is the centennial year 
of Liberia's existence. For, while it was 
not until 1822 that Jehudi Ashmun began 
his great work, and not until 1824 that 
R. R. Gurley invented the name "Liberia," 
it was in 1821 that the American Colonization Society selected the site of Monrovia 
for the landing and settlement of the first 
company of emancipated Negroes from the 
United States. 
Liberia, relying chiefly upon itself, has 
maintained its place on the map and has 
made creditable progress in the arts of civilization. Its government has been far more 
stable and orderly than that of many a 
white republic, and in producing, in its 
own schools and from pure Negro stock, 
a statesman like Arthur Barclay and a 
scholar like E. W . Blyden, it has shown 
capacity for keeping pace with the intellectual progress of the world. Founded almost in a counsel of despair, it has attained 
an honorable place among the nations. 
MEXICO MARVELS 
As American, Langston Hughes, living 
in Mexico, sends us the following letter, published in a Mexican newspaper and 
written by a Mexican, Miguel de Zarraga, 
who lives in New York. The Latin countries are well aware of this country's right 
to bad fame in racial matters. Mr. John S. 
Brown translates: 
From the South comes a disquieting menace: The Ku Klux Klan prepares to take 
New Yor k by fire and sword. The Ku Klux 
Klan? Yes, readers, the same. Do you 
not recall having heard of that organization? 
It is the society which came into being 
shortly after the Civil Wa r in the southern United States. When peace was made 
with the North this was founded with the 
exclusive purpose of persecuting Negroes, 
prohibiting them from voting and punishing mysteriously those who did vote. Of 
course, there were sometimes exceptions to 
this exclusiveness; the victim was occasionally, in order to include all, an Indian or 
even a white person. To carry out their 
punishments the members of the Ku Klux 
were clothed in white robes, with a long 
mask covering the face, white also, and 
an enormous white cornucopia forming the 
headgear; something like a caricature of 
the mystic Christians of our Sevillian processions. In such garb they mounted their 
horses and penetrated into the forest selected to complete the sentence. There they 
awaited the guilty Negro, whom they hunted 
like a wild beast, and carried out the torture of the unfortunate by lashings and 
blows with a club or stones. In this simple 
manner vengeance was carried out and civilizat.on bathed itself in the mud of this 
iniquity. The war of the North against the 
South, which had begun with the generous 
motive of the freedom of the Negroes, exerted little influence among the whites 
dominated by every class of prejudice. Race 
hatred followed persistently. Lynch law 
was the product of this race hate, and it 
is still practiced here with impunity, to the 
boundless shame of this disconcerting nation which considers itself too great to 
shrink from the publicity of its guilt. 
The latest happening is that the Ku Klux 
Klan has had a re-birth and that now it is 
not alone and preferably the Negroes whom 
they prosecute. To race hatred has been 
added religious hatred, and in its new form 
it is revealed as a violent enemy of Catholics and of Jews. Judged by the signs, it 
is a genuine representative of the modern 
Lutheran Puritanism and comes, seemingly, 
to impose upon us the observance of the 
Blue Laws. 
That such things should happen in the 
height of the 20th century and in the United 
States may seem absurd. But the fact is 
that the Ku Klux Klan announces its establishment in New York. . . .that the 
worthy Mayor of this cosmopolitan city has 
already ordered the police—some 20,000 men 
—to proceed against such people as against 
presumed criminals. They have the impudence to assert that in view of unsettled 
social conditions they alone propose to deal 
out justice. But this mission is the duty 
of suitable tribunals who will not permit 
such misdeeds. Surely it is enough for 
Negroes still to be lynched in small cities 
of poor police protection, but in New York ! 
In New York that would be too much! 
If the Ku Klux Klan were a product 
of Mexico or of Central America, there 
would be a call for an immediate naval 
intervention. In New York it is all reduced to a series of sensational information in the Herald, to which the discovery 
is due. In a later stage of development the 
entire world will comment upon this with 
the greatest amazement. An amazement 
that, nevertheless, calls for our wondering 
comment that these things take place in 
the United States. 
Not everything bad comes from Spain! 172 THE CRISIS 
EDITORIAL COURTESY IN 
NORTH CAROLINA 
A LETTE R written to the editor of the 
Greensboro, N. C , Daily News shows 
the attitude of the thinking Negro toward 
the appointment of Linney. The writer, Mr. 
W. C. Craver, says: 
You speak of "the Negroes who are displeased with the appointment of Mr. Linney" as a mere baker's dozen, but the fact 
is more than 100,000 Negro men and women 
of North Carolina would protest in the 
same manner but for the nefarious practices and methods of intrenched political 
and civil agents wdio make it their business 
to suppress free speech in our state. 
As to playing of "late years" to the Negro vote, the editor of the Neiis knows full 
well that the vote of the Negro has been 
such an insignificant factor that no party 
needed to make any overtures to it. 
* * * 
Mr. Craver then takes up the case of 
the Republican party: 
The Republican party was not created primarily for the bentfit of Negroes. No one 
recognizes this fact more than the Negro 
himself and his best witness is the "poor 
white man" of the nation. But the creation 
of the party was due largely to a sentiment against human slavery and in this the 
Negro was vitally interested. And it might 
be well for the Republican party and all 
other parties in America to note well the 
end of all parties, since human history began, when they failed to recognize human 
interests. 
Speaking of a "political bone-head" pulled 
in North Carolina by the Negro Protestants 
of Mr. Linney, one is amused when he 
thinks of the "political bone-head" pulled 
by the entire Southland where the Negro 
has been robbed of practically all his civil 
rights. The South lost its great chance to 
"use the Negro" when it was not wise 
enough to use him in politics. 
* * * 
However, there is no reason to think that 
the Negro can be forever excluded with 
impunity from his rights. Very recent historical facts prove that. 
"The whole incident should be illuminating to senators" and a revelation too of the 
determination of certain interests in the 
South to keep the Negro on the plane of 
easy exploitation. The Ncics will never 
concede the fact that it is as impossible to 
keep the Negro out of politics as it is to 
keep him out of the economical situation. 
There is one thing, however, that the South 
can do, and that is keep "the Negro issue 
out of politics,'' and with this we most 
heartily agree. The very fact that those 
Negroes who are opposing Mr. Linney are 
"exceptionally intelligent" lends weight to 
their opposition to the case in question. 
The "final test of Americanism" is not 
to please the Negro group any more than 
it is to please the labor group or the capitalistic group, or any other group, but 
the "acid" test" of Americanism lies in the 
fact that it will survive only in proportion 
to the honesty and square dealing that 
American people put into their efforts to 
try to justly please all groups. 
* * * 
The editor comes back with the usual 
line of "old stuff": 
The Linney proposal is one that ought 
to be supported heartily by every intelligent Negro, and that is supported by many. 
Linney has proposed nothing more radical 
than that both parties shall agree to make 
no attempt to vote the great mass of ignorant and politically impossible Negroes. 
He has not proposed to disfranchise any 
Negro who can pass the intelligence test 
imposed on all voters. It is the ignorant 
and untrained Negro vote that.is dangerous, 
as every white man knows. 
* * * 
Then he begins to bluster: 
Now for a few plain words to W . C. 
Craver. We have printed your letter, 
Craver, because it exhibited so plainly the 
animus of the fight on Mr. Linney; otherwise the insolence of its tone and the imbecility of its argument would have won 
for it room in the waste-basket and nowhere else. If you think that by this sort 
of thing you are advancing your cause, or 
helping your race, you are a fool. So far 
from robbing the Negro of his civil rights, 
North Carolina, at least, has been steadily 
extending them; but the task has been made 
infinitely harder by the bawling of Negroes who are all mouth and no brains. 
There are white men in North Carolina, 
Craver, who have fought more battles for 
your race than you have ever imagined, 
and who are ready now as ever to struggle 
to preserve for every Negro in North Carolina the protection of the law and every 
opportunity to develop whatever talent God 
has given him; but there are no white men 
wdio will permit you, unrebuked, to sneer at 
the state that they, not you, have made, 
and that they, not you, have maintained. 
The final paragraph is symbolic of the 
good old "Southern Courtesy"—toward Negroes : 
Paste this in your hat, Craver. North 
Carolina has a helping hand for any Negro 
who wants no more than an opportunity 
to live peaceably and earn a living unmolested; but for one who thinks to rule her, 
sue has equally ready a swift kick, accurately placed. Yo u can choose whichever 
you prefer; and rest assured that the state 
doesn't give two straws which you take. RANKIN G STUDENT S OF NEGR O COLLEGES 
MAMI E CARUTHERS , 
Wiley, Magna cum laude 
VICTO R C. SMITH , 
Virginia Union 
MA E D E LEWIS , 
Samuel Houston 
M. L. METT3 , 
Virginia Theolog cal 
EDWAR D N. WILSON , 
Morgan 
MATTI E E, BEVERL Y 
Hartshorn 
CYRU S W . PERRY , 
Benne'1 
A. V. GAMTREL L 
Morris 
HUBER T MITCHEL L 
Morehouse 
FRANKI E L. H0RT0N , 
Morris Brown 
L. E. LISTER , 
Prairie View 
SADIE COOK, 
Thilander Smith 
EFFI E M. BULLOC K 
Knoxville 
RUSSELL E. MOSS, 
West Virginia 
BESSIE M. WEEKS , 
Shaw 
JAME S C. EVANS , 
Roger Williams 
17 3 The Outer Pocket 
I HAV E just read for the first time a copy 
of your publication. Permit me—as a 
humble, private citizen—to commend the 
reasonable, sincere tone of your remonstrance against brutal oppression of the Negro race in the South. 
I am a white man with no predilection for 
alarmist or sob stuff, but I am shamed, 
shocked and horrified at the monstrosities 
committed by my own race in the name of 
"white supremacy". I never let a remark 
from friends or acquaintances about "putting the nigger in his place", go unchallenged. 
But the point that strikes me so forcibly 
about the attitude of the fire brand Southerner is its silly inconsistency, its evident 
insincerity. He professes a repulsion for 
the person of the black, yet Negroes shave 
him, cook his meals and nurse his children. 
He rants about the sacred purity of womanhood, but shows no respect for Negro women 
and forgets his boasted "chivalry" where 
they are concerned. They profess here in 
the South that the Negro isn't fit to vote ; 
the real objection is that Negro suffrage 
would be intelligent enough to crumble the 
"Solid South", where an insignificant minority control all elections. In El Paso, the 
dirtiest Mexican peon, ignorant, primitive 
and speaking an alien tongue, goes unrestrained on.his way, in the street cars, the 
theatres, the public library; while a Negro, 
intelligent perhaps, native, English speaking, is never allowed to forget that he is one 
of "America's Subject Race" . 
I cannot believe the great body of Americans can long remain callous to mob law, 
lynchings, disfranchisement and southern 
feudalism. Herein is the greatest field of 
conquest for iconoclasts, reformers and social workers in America. Let American efforts for world betterment begin at home. 
FRED DEARMOND , 
El Paso, Texas. 
I HAV E just laid down your book "Darkwater", which has stirred me deeply. 
Through 22 years of living among the peoples of Cuba, the Philippines, Japan and 
* * * * I have come to believe with all my 
heart the truths set forward in your book. 
I say 22 years, but probably the first 27 
—passed with parents whose lives and pens 
were dedicated to the cause of justice among 
peoples—were even more potent in preparing 
me for the work I am trying to do and to 
which I want, from now on, to dedicate what 
of life and money remains to me. 
Knowing how many must be the taxes put 
upon your time and strength, I would hardly 
feel justified in writing you were it not 
that I have an exceptional opportunity for 
influencing the young of * * * * 
Five months ago I came to take charge 
of the Training School for Nurses of Hospital **** 0 f*** * These 
pupils are young women who will g o into 
homes and into new hospitals opening up 
through Central and South America . 
In their hands lie infinite possibilities for 
maintaining the dignity of their race and 
for promoting its advancement. Not long 
ago I was trying to awaken their enthusiasm 
for the Red Cross, telling them how I was 
trying to get the Red Cross Society of 
* * * * to affiliate with the International 
Society as a first step toward the formation 
of a Nursing Corps—through which they 
would belong to the great nursing sisterhood of the world. 
I could have cried or cursed when one of 
them said, flushing through her clear, beautiful, dark skin, "Yes, but we are black." 
With all my heart I assured them that in 
this sisterhood, of humanity, race could make 
no difference—and then was told a few 
days later of that picture of the race which 
is being painted in Washington for the Red 
Cross—upon the canvass of which it is stipulated that no black figure shall appear! 
That to me is the most damning thing I 
know of the white race. I had pinned my 
last remnant of faith to the Red Cross— 
as the great tie which should bind us all together—and now if this fails us! 
Little by little I have cut loose from most 
of the old moorings—even my two dear 
brothers, standing beside their conventional 
wives, seem to look wistfully across to me 
from a gradually receding shore. 
I did not at first realize this and I wrote 
happily, telling them of the boy I had adopt174 THE OUTER POCKET 175 
ed and was sending to school—my brown 
Pedro. My sister-in-law's cool reception 
showed me where my future path would lie. 
I found Pedro a messenger-yoy in the Hospital when I came—a bright, eager boy, 
orphaned and longing for an education. He 
had received permission to work for his 
board and attend school, but there was no 
one to provide clothes and books. Like yourself, he can boast of not one drop of AngloSaxon blood! African, a little Spanish, Indian and Jewish blood he has. I have never 
seen a 16 year old boy with keener mind 
and more exquisite natural refinement than 
this Pedro * * * * has. His grandfather 
was Hebrew but except for his prominent 
nose he shows the other racial characteristics 
more, and is a rich brown. I ask to see 
nothing more beautiful than the look on his 
face yesterday when he told me of standing 
100 in his examinations. He is studying for 
an electrical engineer in the Academy of 
Arts and Sciences of * * * *. He is picking 
up English rapidly, but it will be a long 
time before the delicate shadings of our 
language will convey their full meaning to 
him—and I want him to read your books 
now—while all the fire and idealism of youth 
are in his veins. 
This is what I come to ask—have you any 
translations into Spanish? What can I give 
my boy to fill his heart with the purpose to 
help! 
I do not want to sadden his youn^; life. I 
long to fill it with the joy which should be 
the portion of youth, but already he has felt 
the chill of its dark waters. When I have 
taken him to concerts even here in * * * • 
(where the American population of * * • • 
is catered to), he knows that when ha 
bought the tickets (now I buy them myself), 
our seats have been selected for us, and he 
must have felt the ignoring of his tentatively extended hand by some of my one-time 
friends to whom I have presented him. 
Other cruel, cruel things happen here in 
* * * *—where the near-white are only too 
ready to climb upon the backs of the real 
people of * * * *, in their struggle for 
money and recognition. And so the great 
body of music and) beauty-loving brown 
people are made to feel uncomfortable in 
their own concert halls and movie theatres. 
A few days ago my assistant, a woman of 
rare intelligence and beauty, had tickets 
given her for a concert at the Conservatory 
of Music of * * * *. I had bought tickets 
for Pedro and myself and I suggested that 
we go in a party. Her lovely, sensitive face 
quivered—she would "rather not—so many 
Americans went there". Then with the 
tears running down my own cheeks, I tried 
to tell her in my broken Spanish how we 
both owed it to future generations—to the 
little sister she is educating and to my Pedro, 
to do our best toward saving * * * * for 
the inhabitants. I ittle by little she 
poured out the story of what she had suffered here at the hands of the white race— 
a story matching any you tell in cool brutality. But we went to the concert—taking our places proudly in front of a line 
of American acquaintances of mine. 
Two have come to me since, telling me 
how glad they were to see my little group 
there—so perhaps we are making them 
think at lastl 
But in the eyes of most I have committed 
the one unpardonable sin—disloyalty to my 
class. I have refused to say "my country, 
right or wrong". No family group or nation holds me now—nothing short of the 
great Human Family. 
I would not blame you for being a little 
skeptical—this might so well be the sudden 
conversion of a sentimental young woman 
but looking back over my 49 years I can 
see the same ideal, the same purpose, always working in my Training School in 
Cuba, in my passionate espousal of the Filipino cause while there during the war, and 
in my fight for the rights of the Japanese on 
the western coast—the Japanese whom I 
learred to respect and love while working 
shoulder to shoulder with them as Red Cross 
nurse during their war. 
I can see that some are thinking that if 
my boy does not turn out well, I shall be disillusionized. He may spurn and forsake me 
—it will, of course, hurt the mother-feeling 
that yearns over him—but I shall go steadily on, toward the only goal I see on the dim 
horizon—Human Brotherhood. 
I have written an unmercifully long letter 
—the temptation to pour it all out to some 
one who could understand and sympathize 
was too great. The superintendent of this 
hospital is a Virginian and several of the 
American head nurses are Southerners— 
you can guess how deep their antagonism 
toward my attitude as regards the graduate 
* * * * nurses and my 36 pupil nurses, 
is! 
Please let me know about the Spanish 
translations. THE HORIZON COMPILE D B Y MADELIN E G ALLISON . 
MUSIC AND ART 
J. FISHER and Brother, New York, have 
published settings to "Swing Low, 
Sweet Chariot," and "Travelin' to de 
Grave," by William Reddick, a white composer. 
G Mrs. Mabel L. Eason has been graduated 
from the New England Conservatory of 
Music, Boston, as the first colored student 
to complete the theoretical studies in one 
year. The course usually requires three 
years. In harmony Mrs. E.'.scn received the 
highest mark given by any instructor in 
the conservatory. 
Over $1,000 was realized from the "Concert De Luxe" given by the jun or and senior choirs of First A. M. E. Church, Los 
Angeles, Cal. The chorus numbered 200 
voices, with Elmer C. Bartlett as the director. The proceeds are for a larger 
church building. 
Wilberforce University during the past 
year produced a race play, "Tbe Way of 
the World," by Rachel Brock Pratt, a college graduate, '21. 
A Negro Art Exhibit, which will include all branches of art,—painting, sculpture, drawing, music, bookmaking and the 
crafts,—will be held at the 135th Street 
Branch of the New York City Public Library during August. Miss Ernestine Rose, 
librarian, is chairman of the general committee, and Mr. A. G. Dill is the director. 
Walter S. A. Thomas is a Negro graduate from the Chicago Musical College, where 
he has studied piano, counterpoint, harmony and composition. 
At Elmwood Park. East Orange, N. J., 
a piece of statuary is to be unveiled on 
Columbus Day. The work consists of a 
center group, "The Shrine of Human 
Rights," surrounded by bust figures symbolizing America, Europe, Asia and Africa, the last being portrayed by Frederick Douglass. On the pedestal of each 
piece will appear the names of those who 
have contriluted to the culture of their respective races. Ulrich H. Ellerhausen of 
New York designed the work, which is the 
gift of Alden Freeman. 
An organ recital has been rendered at 
Plymouth Congregational Church, Washington, D. C, by Claude Robeson, assisted by 
Mrs. Margaret Cannon Bennion, soprano. 
The numbers included works of Liszt, Rachmaninoff and Boellman. 
Negroes of Chicago will have a chorus 
of 1,000 as a part of 12,000 singers in the 
Chicago Pageant of Progress Exposit'on 
Chorus. J. Wesley Jones will direct the 
colored group. 
Three new Negro spirituals, "Bear the 
Burden," "I'm Goin' Home," and "Down 
by de Ribber," by Clarence Cameron White, 
have been published by Carl Fischer, under 
the title, "Cabin Memories." 
During its first th'rty days of business, 
the colored Pace Phonograph Corporation 
of New York sold 10,300 "Black Swan" 
records. The company plans to market a 
phonograph. 
Tlarry T. Burleigh, the Negro composer, 
.has sailed for England, where he will spend 
three months. He will appear in recital 
with Roland Hayes, the Negro tenor. 
At the West Philadelphia School of Music, Marie Holland, colored, has been 
awarded the medal offered for the most distinguished advanced student. 
Of the recital given at Jordan Hall, Boston, by R. Augustus Lawson, pianist, William H. Richardson, baritone, and Maud Cuney Hare, accompanist, under the auspices 
of the Coleridge-Taylor Association, the Boston Herald says: "Mr. Lawson played here, 
we believe, for the first time. He has a 
fluent, even and polished technic, an agreeable touch and a firm control of dynamic 
gradations. His phrasing is that of a wellgrounded musician who has individual feeling. 
In the Advanced Students' Recital at the 
176 THE HORIZON 177 
Chicago Music College there was a Negro 
harpist, Ernest V. Tucker, who rendered 
selections by Gounod and Schubert. 
"The Emperor Jones," with Charles S. 
Gilpin, the Negro star, is to be played in 
London, England. 
"Goat Alley," a drama dealing with contemporaneous Afro-American life, has been 
presented at the Bijou Theatre, New York 
City. Ernest Howard Culberson is the author. The play marks the first appearance 
at a legitimate theatre of a colored company in a serious play. 
The colored Lincoln Motion Picture Company, Inc., at Los Angeles, Cal., is presenting "By Right of Birth," featuring Clarence 
Brooks, Anita Thompson and Webb King. 
A $250,000 moving picture theatre—the 
Republic—has been opened in Washington, 
D. C. Walter Pinchback is manager, Joseph H. Douglass musical director, Reginald Freeman, chief projectionist. 
The Sabbath Glee Club of Richmond, Va., 
has given a concert of Negro spirituals 
at Grace Covenant Presbyterian Church. 
The club has forty members. Joseph Matthews is the director. 
The Orchestra of Symphony Players, 
conducted by Agide Jacchia at Symphony 
Hall, Boston, has presented "Nobody 
Knows de Trouble I've Seen" and "Negro 
Dance," by Clarence Cameron White, the 
Negro violinist-composer. 
MEETINGS 
THE first convention of the Pennsylvania 
State Organization of Negro Voters 
has been held at Harrisburg. There was 
an attendance of seventy-six delegates from 
fifty-two counties. Robert L. Vann, of 
Pittsburgh, is president, and Mrs. Julia 
Craig, of York, a vice president. 
The eighteenth annual session of the National Association of Teachers in Colored 
Schools will be held in Oklahoma City, Okla., 
August 3-5. L. J. Rowan is President and 
R. S. Grossley Secretary. Governor Robertson is expected to attend and among the 
speakers are J. A. Wilson, Superintendent 
of Oklahoma Public Schools; John J. Mullowney, President of Meharry Medical College; Dr. P. P. Claxton, former Commissioner of Education; A. L. Smith, Field 
Agent for Rosenwald Fund, and Dr. J. W. 
E. Bowen of Gammon Theological Seminary. 
Negro physicians, dentists and pharmacists have organized the Pennsylvania State 
Medical and Pharmaceutical Association, 
with Preston M. Edwards, M. D., of Philadelphia, as president. 
The Old Dominion Medical Society has 
held a three-day session at Petersburg, Va., 
in its seventeenth annual meeting. Clinics 
were held at Central State Hospital and 
the Rialto Theatre. G. Hamilton Francis, 
M. D., of Norfolk, was elected president; 
Carrie M. Sharps, of Petersburg, is president of the nurses' division. 
EDUCATION 
TH E colored Lincoln School of Trenton, 
N. J., won first pri::e in a music memory contest in which twenty-eight schools 
competed. The highest average attainable 
was 15; Lincoln's average was 14.61. Miss 
B. Edna Jones teaches music at the school 
and T. Edward Kinney is the principal. 
Graduates and students of Talledega College have formed a Talledega Club in Washington, D. C. One hundred dollars has 
been sent to the school for work this year. 
Mrs. Georgia J. Taylor, of Baltimore, Md., 
is president. 
Among Howard University's graduates 
in dentistry is Dr. Addie B. Williams of 
Richmond, Va. Ruth M. Easterling, a colored girl of Cambridge, Mass., has been 
graduated from Tufts College with the degree of Doctor of Medicine. 
Lincoln Institute at Jefferson City, Mo., 
was founded in 1886. It has no endowment 
fund. It has a campus of forty acres and 
a farm of sixty acres. The Missouri Legislature has appropriated $629,500 for the 
Institute, of which $29,500 is for additional 
land and $100,000 for a new dormitory, 
and $500,000 for the University. The latter sum is awaiting the organization of the 
University. 
Knox Institute and Industrial School at 
Athens, Ga., has been made an accredited 
high school of the University of Georgia. 
This is the first colored high school in 
Georgia to reach this status. 
Anna J. P. Comegys is tiie first Negro 
graduate of Temple University, Philadelphia, to receive the degree of Doctor of 
Pharmacy, having completed post-graduate 
work in chemistry, blood analysis and bacteriology. During the term she was appointed Assistant Botany Instructor. 178 THE CRISIS 
For the third consecutive time Dr. William S. Quinland has been awarded a Rosenwald fellowship at the Harvard Medical 
School. The award has been increased from 
$1,000 to $1,300. Dr. Quinland has also 
been appointed Assistant in Pathology to 
the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital, Boston, 
being the first Negro appointee. 
Lisle C. Carter, a Negro graduate of 
the College of Dental and Oral Surgery, 
New York, won the Faculty Gold Medal for 
having the highest average in operative 
dentistry. He was one of ten men to receive the highest general average in the 
final examination of the graduating class. 
Booker Washington School won eight 
events and established records in the annual 
field and track meet held by the Terre 
Haute, Indiana, City Schools. Fifteen 
schools participated. 
Tuskegee Institute Summer School for 
teachers has an enrollment of 600; the A. 
& I. State Normal, Nashville, Tenn., 700; 
A. & T. College, Greensboro, N. C, 425. 
E. F. Frazier, winner of one of the competitive scholarships offered each year by 
the American Scandinavian Foundation, 
will study next year at the University of 
Copenhagen. Mr. Frazier is a Negro graduate of Clark University, where he was 
awarded a scholarship in sociology and 
received the degree of Master of Arts in 
1920. 
Negroes at Roanoke, Va., are to have a 
branch of the Public Library. The library 
will be situated in the colored business 
section and will start with 2,500 volumes. 
( 1 T. Milton Selden, a Negro graduate of 
Dartmouth College, was elected to membership in the Phi Beta Kappa. Mr. Selden 
is also winner of the Barge $100 gold medal 
for competitive work in public speaking. 
Additional graduates from white colleges are: Elmer O. Ward, A. B., Toledo University; Herman M. Riley and 
Hurlbert T. Riley, A. B., Butler College; 
Hattie R. King and Louise T. Simpson, 
Teachers' Training Course, Pratt Institute (Miss Simpson finished in two years, 
at the age of 20) ; Mamie Lucas, A. B., 
University of Southern California; Grace 
Frederick, A. B., Drake University (completed course in three years) ; Brown University, Rhode Island, gave degrees to six 
colored men in June: Russell A. Lane, Aurelius D. Pickney, Maynard J. Wartman 
and Jay M. Williams received the degree of 
Bachelor of Philosophy. Chester W. Chinn 
and A. T. Peters received the degree of 
Master of Arts. Colored institutions: Morris Brown, Georgia, 7 Bachelors, 11 normal, 
20 commercial graduates; Bennett College, 
North Carolina, 2 Bachelors, 24 high school 
graduates; Roger Williams University, Tennessee, 1 Bachelor. James E. Coleman was 
graduated from Wilberforce University 
with the rank magna cum laude. 
THE CHURCH 
MOTHE R BETHEL A. M. E. Church 
of Philadelphia, Pa., owns property 
worth over a quarter of a million dollars. 
In a recent rally $6,000 was raised. 
The Rev. Dr. A. C. Garner has retired 
from the pastorate of Plymouth Congregational Church, Washington, to accept the 
work of developing a church among Negroes in New York City. During his administration at Plymouth, the debt of the 
church was paid, the membership increased 
2009r, the revenue 500%, and self-support 
was attained. 
The Board of Managers of the Maryland 
Colored Baptist Convention has elected its 
first woman member, Mrs. Beale Elliott, of 
Sharon Baptist Church. The Rev. Junius 
Gray is president of the convention. 
At the Church of the Incarnation, New 
York City, the Rev. Dr. T. Momolu Gardiner has been consecrated Bishop Suffragan 
of Liberia, West Africa. Rev. Gardiner 
traveled from Cape Palmas for the consecration. 
Mt. Zion Baptist Church at Evanston, 
111., has a new $100,000 edifice. The church 
was organized twenty years ago. Since 1918, 
when Dr. Jones became pastor, its membership has increased from 80 to 800. 
Mother Zion A. M. E. Zion Church in 
New York City, has a membership of 3,000, 
an increase of 2,700 during the past eight 
years; the Sunday School membership has 
grown from 150 to 700; the income from 
$8,394 a year to $49,182. The property of 
the church is valued at $157,000. The Rev. 
James W. Brown is pastor. 
NATIONAL URBAN LEAGUE 
CHARLES S. JOHNSON, formerly Associate Executive Secretary of the Chi-179 
WHER E T O STOP—SOM E COLORE D HOTEL S 
HOTE L DALE , CAP E MAY , N . J. 
VINCENNE S HOTEL , CHICAGO , ILL . 
ROADSID E HOTEL , PHILADELPHIA , PA . 
HOTE L WALDORF , LO S ANGELES , CAL . 
CHICAG O HOTEL , NE W ORLEANS , LA . 
HOTE L BILTMORE , DETROIT , MICH . 
STERLIN G HOTEL , CINCINNATI , 0. ISO THE CRISIS 
cago Commission on Race Relations, appointed by Governor Lowden of Illinois, has 
been engaged by the National Urban League 
to direct its Bureau of Research and Investigations, for which the League has received an appropriation of $8,000 per year 
for three years. 
The League sent its St. Louis representative to Tulsa, Okla., following the race 
riot, to assist in the rehabilitation work 
and to establish a permanent program of 
social service. The League plans to encourage the continuation of a permanent 
inter-racial organization. 
The Urban League has been established 
in Los Angeles, Cal., through the instrumentality of Mrs. Katherine J. Barr of the 
Tuskegee Industrial Welfare League. It 
is endorsed by the Social Service Commission of Los Angeles, a municipal agency, 
which has to approve of all movements 
which solicit funds in the city. 
A League has also been established in 
Toledo, Ohio, with R. Maurice Moss as 
secretary. 
The New Jersey Urban League has placed 
colored girls as ushers in the Fox Terminal 
Theatre in Newark. This is one of the 
largest motion picture houses in the city 
and the first to employ colored girls in thi; 
capacity. The League is conducting evening block parties and sending boys and 
girls to summer camps, both in the mountains and at the seashore. 
The Booker T. Washington Settlement of 
Youngstown, Ohio, affiliated with the 
League has, through its director, Mr. Suliy 
Johnson, developed a play-ground, a movie 
theatre, a branch library, a Big Brother 
movement, a Boy Scout Troop, a baby clinic, 
boys', girls', young men's and mothers' clubs 
and a night school. The gross attendance 
at the settlement from November to June 
15th was 16,260. 
The Kansas City Community Service Urban League served as a relief headquarters 
for a large number of refugees from Tulsa, 
Okla. They were suppled with clothing, 
money and other necessities. The chairman 
of the Citizens' Committee was J. B. Watkins. 
Professor J. R. E. Lee, Principal of Lincoln High School, Kansas City, and President of the local Urban League, is serving 
as Extension Secretary of the National Urban League. 
THE GHETTO 
WHIT E citizens of Montgomery, Ala., 
have rejected the idea of establishing 
a hospital for disabled Negro soldiers in 
or near the city. Among opposers are Jack 
Thorington, president of the County Board 
of Education; Dr. M. W. Swartz, president 
of the Women's College; Dave Allen, chairman of the County Board of Revenue, an 1 
Dr. S. W. Welch, State Health Officer, who 
termed the idea as "Governmental interference in southern affairs." 
INDUSTRY 
I N 1910 Negroes in the Southern States operated 880,824 farms, or 28.4% of all 
farms; in 1920 the figures had increased 
to 920.976 farms, or 28.7%. Negro tenants 
in 1910 operated 668,556 farms, or 43.5% 
of all farms; in 1920 these figures had increased to 702,215 farms, or 44.1%. During 1910-20 the land in these farms increased from 41,284,376 to 41,346,943 acres; 
improved land from 27,170,318 to 27,706,281 
acres; the value of lands and buildings from 
$873,493,010 to $2,239,062,790. 
Savings of Negro workers in typical industrial centers have been but slightly affected, according to the Department of Labor. Figures for December 31, '20 and April 
30, '21 are: Number of depositors, 47,368,-
47,699; total amount of savings, $3,809,809-
$3,721,474; amount of savings per capita 
$80-$78. 
Tyson and Company, manufacturers of 
toilet articles at Paris, Tenn., are employing a colored traveling salesman, August 
W. Palmer, for whom the company furn'shes an automobile. 
The Second Mortgage Building and Loan 
Association, a Negro enterprise, of Baltimore, Md., has declared a dividend of 20%. 
The officers of the organization are E. B. 
Taylor, president; Clark L. Smith, vicepresident; C. Henry Jenkins, secretary an! 
treasurer. 
At St. Louis, Mo., a Negro physician, Dr. 
Charles E. Herriot, has purchased a block 
of property at $80,000. It consists of six 
stores and twenty-two flats. 
The Block Oil and Gas Syndicate of El 
Dorado has been incorporated by Negroes 
at Little Rock, Ark. The capital stock is 
$100,000. The president is J.' H. Garrett; 
vice-president, J. B. Johnson; secretary, O. 
S. Strickland; treasurer, Emma Garrett-THE HORIZON 181 
Merritt. Mrs. Merritt has forty-seven producing wells from which she is said to 
derive an income of from $30,000 to $47,000 
a month. 
Robert R. Church, at Memphis, Tenn., 
has sold his auditorium and park to the 
city for $85,000. 
Negroes at Baltimore, Md., have opened 
the Standard Benefit Society. Its capital 
is $100,000, one-half of which has been deposited with the State Insurance Company. 
The officers are William Lewis, president; 
Isaiah Smith, vice-president and general 
manager; Truly Hatchett, secretary-treasurer; Dr. Harry P. Brown, medical examiner. 
According to the Monthly Business Review, issued by the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New Orleans, retail business among Negro merchants increased 30 per cent, during the past year. 
In Baltimore, Md., Negroes have organized the Dunbar Film and Theatrical Company, with a capital of $150,000. The promoters are E. B. Taylor, banker, and C. H. 
Jenkins; A. W. Caulk is secretary-treasurer 
and C. F. Vodery is in charge of photography. Among their releases are: "The 
Fighting Fifteenth Colored Regiment," 
"The Southern Negro Baptism," "The Negro Rice Farmer" and "Negro Logging in 
Louisiana." 
The Supreme Life and Casualty Company has been organized at Columbus, Ohio, 
by Negroes. The capital is $200,000. At 
the meeting eighteen states and two foreign countries were represented. Truman 
K. Gibson was elected president and Harry 
H. Pace, chairman of the Board of Directors. 
A colored girl, Julia Hodge, who is 17 
years old, has appeared as a bootblack in 
Bryant Park, New York City, after having 
worked as a lady's maid and in a dress 
factory. She aims, through her earnings, 
to become a violinist. 
On the opening day of the colored Commercial Bank of Wilson, N. C, 258 people 
deposited $14,000. 
During the past three months 19.33% of 
unskilled Negro labor was affected by unemployment; of skilled Negro labor, 2.63% 
was affected. 
POLITICS 
The National Committee of the Republican party has agreed that any district electing a member to Congress in the 
colored belt will be given two delegates. 
The agreement, which is the result of a 
protest by the Negroes, will take twentythree convention votes from the South. 
FRATERNITIES 
COLORE D Masons in Chicago have purchased a site upon which a Masonic 
Temple is to be erected at a cost of $600,-
000. The president of the Prince Hall Masonic Temple Association is Samuel Matthews. 
The Pullman Porters' Beneficial Association, organized in Chicago during February of this year, has a membership of 
3,904 and a bank account of $25,000. 
Thomas R. Webb is head of the organization. 
In New York City Negro Masons have 
bought property for a $300,000 Masonic 
Temple. David W. Parker is president. 
Negro Knights of Pythias at Boston have 
purchased the Ruggles Building, a 4-story 
structure in the business section. 
Royal Arch Masons of Texas have held 
a 3-day meeting at Fort Worth, as its 35th 
annual session. A. W. Edwards, grand high 
priest, of Cleburne, presided. The report 
of the grand secretary showed a large increase in the number of companions over 
the previous year. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
T N Huntington, W. Va., there are 2,850 
••• Negroes, whose realty holdings total 
$825,000. 
Arthur B. Hill, who is secretary of th?. 
Association of Train Porters, Brakemcn 
and Switchmen at Richmond, Va., was a 
Negro representative at the hearing of the 
Interstate Commerce Commission and the 
United States Railroad Labor Board. 
Oil and mineral rights in property at th" 
Claiborne Parish, La., amounting to $20,-
000,000, have been awarded to Lillie Taylor, 
the colored child of the original owner. 
A City Federation of Colored Women's 
Clubs has been formed in Tacoma, Wash. 
The president is Mrs. Dolly Vanderpost. 
Mrs. Nettie J. Asbury, who is treasurer of 
the organization, has been elected to the 182 THE CRISIS 
executive committee of the Tacoma Federation of Social Agencies. 
The Colored Orphan Asylum in New 
York has issued its 84th annual report. 
Last year nine classes were conducted in 
the school, with an enrollment of 240 pupils; the expense for operating the institution was $124,234. Mason Pitman is the 
superintendent. 
Charles F. M. Brown, a messenger in 
the English Embassy at Washington, has 
been decorated with the medal of the Order of the British Empire. Mr. Brown 
has served nine ministers and ambassadors 
during thirty-five years' service. He is the 
only colored man in the United States to 
wear the order. 
Ada Dozier has been awarded $2,300 
against the City of Chicago. Her husband, 
William H. Dozier, was killed by a mob at 
the stockyards. This is the first of thirtyeight damage cases originating in the race 
riots of July, 1919, to be tried against 
the city. 
Supernumerary Policeman Otis C. Tisdale, the only Negro member of the Waterbury, Conn., Police Department, has been 
appointed doorman at Police Headquarters. 
Two playgrounds supervised by Negroes, 
—Obelea Jackson and Gertrude Collins,— 
have been opened at Houston, Tex. 
President Harding has delivered an address at Lincoln University. He said, 
among other things: "No government can 
wave a magic wand and take a race from 
bondage, and in one or two generations 
establish its full rights. If the colored 
race expects to come into possession of 
their full privileges, it is up to them, 
through the opportunities of education afforded them." 
(According to the last report of the American Legion there are thirty-three colored 
posts in the United States, with an average 
membership of fifty. There are 375,000 
ex-service Negroes who are eligible to join. 
Two thousand Negro ex-service men are 
in training under the Federal Board for 
Vocational Education. 
Mrs. Carrie B. Price, at Chicago, is the 
first colored woman to be appointed a food 
inspector. In the Civil Service examination she ranked third among sixty-five. Mrs. 
Price has served as a laboratory assistant 
and a quarantine field nurse. 
The city of Baltimore, Md., has opened 
a swimming pool for Negroes. It measures 
150 x 50 feet, 6 inches, and there is accommodation for 2,000 bathers. 
Philip Bomar, a colored policeman at 
Los Angeles, Cal., rescued nine occupants 
from a burning building. 
"America's Making," a pageant, will be 
held in New York City, under the Board of 
Education, during the first two weeks of 
November. Eugene Kinckle Jones is chairman of a Negro committee of fifty. 
Dr. Conwell Banton, a Negro, has been 
elected a member of the Board of Education at Wilmington, Del. His votes averaged fourth on a list of seven candidates. 
John W. Martin, a Negro at Grafton, W. 
Va., recently laid 42,000 bricks in eight 
hours. The bricks weighed 10 1-2 pounds 
each, or a total of 200 tons, and were 
served to him by twenty-two carriers and 
eight laborers, who placed the bricks on 
carrying boards. The statement is vouched 
for by W. S. Downs of the State Highway 
Commission and B. E. Gray, Federal Highway Engineer. 
Eight Negro firemen are on duty in St. 
Louis, Mo. After the first six months their 
salary will be $140 a month. 
Among Negroes killed in the Tulsa riot 
are Dr. A. C. Jackson; Mr. Howard, Teal 
estate owner; Mr. Williams, proprietor of 
Williams' Garage; Mrs. Stratford, proprietor of Stratford Hotel, worth $100,000. 
Property destroyed included Elliott & 
Hooker, department store, stock and building valued at $100,000; plant and building 
of the Tulsa Star; Neil's Shoe Store; 
Dreamland Theatre, one of the finest colored theatres in the South; Red Wing Hotel; Masonic Temple; A. M. E. Church; 
C. M. E. Church; Dunbar Grade School, 
valued at $100,000; Mt. Zion Baptist 
Church, recently completed at a cost of 
$85,000. 
Bellevue Hospital, in New York City, has 
agreed to admit a group of six colored 
graduate nurses for post-graduate work. 
Governor Sproul of Pennsylvania has cut 
appropriations to Negro institutions as follows: Douglass Hospital, $44,000-$42,000; 
Mercy Hospital, $40,000-$37,000; Mudgett 
Hospital, $10,000-$7,000; Berean M. T. & I. 
School, $25,000-$15,000; Philadelphia Association for the Protection of Colored THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 183 
Women, $4,000. Many similar white institutions received increased appropriations. 
Governor Alfred Taylor of Tennessee has 
signed a bill to pension Negroes who served 
in the Confederate Army. 
Of 165 clubs participating at the annual 
conference of the National Federation of 
Boys' Clubs, held in Binghampton, N. Y., 
one was colored, the Wissahickon School 
Club of Philadelphia. The Negroes won 
three first, one second and three third 
prizes. 
At the explosion of the Diamond Oil and 
Paint Company, in Scranton, Pa., Millard 
Oldham rescued a woman and attempted to 
dig three victims from the debris. Mr. 
Oldham has been a Negro truck driver for 
Swift & Company for 13 years. 
There are 2,747 units of the American 
Legion's Women's Auxiliary, but very few 
of these are colored. 
A tribute of esteem was recently paid 
the 511th Engineers by their commander, 
Lieutenant-Colonel Fairely, who said in 
part: "I certainly owe much to the loyal 
and faithful Virginia colored men, who 
composed at least 95 per cent, of the enlisted personnel of my battalion. These 
men never flinched in time of danger and 
were rated as one of the best Engineer 
battalions in France." 
A Negro surgeon, Dr. Roscoe Giles, at 
the colored Provident Hospital, Chicago, has 
successfully performed an operation on a 
man in which two ribs were removed and 
three stitches taken in the heart. Dr. 
Giles is a graduate of Cornell. 
The Booker Washington Sanitarium, a 
colored private institution in New York 
City, has been in operation one year, during which time 300 cases were treated, of 
which 56 were medical, 215 surgical and 
22 obstetrical; there were 13 deaths. The 
superintendent, Aileen B. Cole, R. N., was 
one of the colored Red Cross nurses at 
Camp Sherman. Dr. James L. Wilson, the 
owner, served as a lieutenant in the Medical Corps. 
Any State, according to Secretary of 
War Weeks, may include colored Americans 
in the federalized National Guard. This 
repudiates the order issued by former Secretary of War Baker, which prevented Negroes from enlisting except as pioneer or 
labor organizations. 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the Negro Problems 
20 Mon»gT*ph* Sold Separately 
AilJrm 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y " ATLANTA , GA . 
BOOKS- BOOKS -BOOKS 
The Emperor Jones with Charles 
Gilpin $2.oo 
The play that stormed Broadway 
and shook the theatrical world. 
Book just published, by mail 2.IO 
Poems and Letters of Phillis Wheatley first Pub. 1773 introduction by 
A. A. Schomberg 3.00 
The Haitian Revolution — T. G. 
Steward .. 1.50 
Native Life in South Africa—Plaatje 2.50 
The Aftermath of Slavery—Sinclair 2.00 
YOUNG' S BOOK EXCHANGE 
1S5 W«» t 13St h St. , Ne w York , N . Y . 
Book* by Colored Authors a specialty 
SPECIAL 
rhe CRISIS one year ---- - $ 1 5 0 
[•he BROWNIES' BOOK one year 1.5 0 
)ne year's subscription to each if ordered 
ogether - - - - - - 2.5 0 
Spend Christmas In Liberia 
Joi n th e Africa n Cruis e o f 1921 
Endor-e d by President Kin g and the Liberian 
Plenary Commission . 
A 45-da y cruis e to th e Wes t Coast o f Afric a 
Startin g fro m Baltimore , Decembe r 3, 1921— 
Returnin g Januar y 17, 1912, 
B y the luxurir us passenge r steamer 
8. 8. TUNISIAN—10,70 0 ton s 
o f th e Canadia n Pacifi c Ocea n Service , Ltd . 
Attraction s 
"Th e Gran d Convocatio n o f Chiefs " 
Monrovia , Liberia , Decembe r 21 t o 31 , 1921 
Th e Missionar y Conventio n of the Nationa l 
Baptist Conven t on will IK- held in Monro v a, 
Liberia , Decembe r 21 to 31 1921. 
Inclusiv e rat e fo r th e complet e 45 da y 
cruis e $495 and up . This rate a vers every 
expense while aboard steamer, meals and stateroom included. 
Visiting the followin g ports 
Canar y Island s Daker. Senega l 
Bermud a Island s Freetown , Sierr a Leon e 
and Libya n Ports 
Specia l colonist aii'I freight rates 
upo n appl ication. 
For full particulars address 
AMERICA N AFRICA N TOURIS T CO. , 
701 S. 19th St., Phfadelphia , Pa . 
For further particulars address 
America n Trave l Club , Inc., Baltimore, Md. : 
W . H. Jernagin, Pres. ; L. G. Jordan, Sec'y ; 
R . R. Wright , Treas. . Majo r \V . H . York , 
Business Manager. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 184 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y 
WASHINGTON , D . C . 
Founded by GENERAL O. O. HOWARD 
J. STANLE Y DURKEE , A. M., Ph . D . 0 . D.. President 
EMMET T J. SCOTT . A.M. , L L U., Secretary-Treasurer 
COLLEGIATE AND PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS 
Junior College, coverin g the Freshma n and Sophomor e years an d leading to the Senio r 
Sclluuls. 
Senior Schools, consisting o f the Schools o f Libera l Arts, Education , Journalism, an d Com ­
merc e and Finance , granting respectively the degrees, A . 13. or B. S., A . B. o r B. S. 
in Education . B. S. in Journalism; U.S . m totnnurc e an d Finance . 
School of Applied Science, four year course , granting the degree , It. S., in Civil Engineering, B. S. in Electrical Engineerin g B. S. in Mechanica l Engineering , B. S. in 
Architecture , B. S. in Agriculture , and B. S. in Househol d Economics. 
Evening Classes. Th e wor k o f the Junio r Colleg e and the Senio r Schools ma y be taken in 
evenin g classes with full credit. 
School of Music, four yea r course , granting the degre e o f Mus. B. 
School of Religion, three yea r course , granting the degree s o f B. D . an d Tli B. Course s 
are offered also b y correspondence . 
School of Law. three year course , granting the degre e o f LL . B. 
School of Medicine, includin g Medical , Dental, Pharmaceutica l Colleges. Fou r yea r 
course s for Medica l and Dental students: three yea r cours e fo r Pharmaceutica l students'. Fl 1-
lowin g degree s granted : M . 17., D . D . S., Phir. C. 
Students may enter tor collegiate work at the beginning ot any quarter. 
( Autumn Cjuar'er September 28, 29, 30. 1921 
REGISTRATIO N } Winter Quarter January 3. 4. 1922 
/ Spring Quarter March 18. 20. 1922 
FOR CATALOG AND INFORMATION II RITE 
F. D . WILKINSON , Registra r 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y WASHINGTON , D . C. 
Hampton Institute 
Agricultural School 
HAMPTON, VIRGINIA 
Opportunity Knocks at the Door 
of the Man Wh o Knows 
and Can Do 
If you wish to prepare yourself to fill a 
responsible position of wide 
usefulness as a 
County or farm-demonstration agent 
Teacher of vocational agriculture 
Rural-school principal 
Hampton now offers in Agriculture 
A COLLEGIATE COURSE 
Based on Four-Year Secondary Course 
With Work in Well-Equipped Classrooms, 
Shops, and Laboratories; With Summer 
Field Practice; With All-Round Training 
Under High-Grade Instructors. 
James E. Gregg, Principal, 
Warren K. Blodgett, Director 
I 
I 
Educate Your Girl at 
The National Training 
School for 
Women and Girls 
Lincoln Heights, Washington, D. C. 
Among the best schools for women and 
girls in the United States. 
The School that develops CHARACTER and PERSONALITY. We fill 
our students with a burning desire to 
go out into the world and make not 
only a LIl'ING but a LIFE. 
COURSE S 
6th, 7th and 8th Grades, Norma l Preparator y 
and Normal , Music . Business, Domesti c 
Scienc e an d Arts 
Socia l Servic e 
Beaut y Cultur e Physica l Cultur e 
Ideal Location High Grade Teachers 
Thorough Training 
SEN D FO E CATALO G 
Nannie H. Burroughs, President 
Mentio n TH I Cutis . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 185 
JOSEPH K. BRICK AGRICULTURAL 
INDUSTRIAL and NORMAL SCHOOL 
BRICKS, N. C. 
This School offers a first-class High School 
Course, including Domestic Science, Domestic 
Art, Agriculture, Work in Wood, Iron and 
Mechanical Drawing, Piano and Vocal Music, 
Night School. 
Teachers and officers, 25; enrollment, 350; 
hoarders, 220. Cottage and buildings, 34. 
School farm, 1,129acres. Strong athletic, 
literary and Christian associations. School term 
34 weeks. Environment fine. School receives 
four mails a day. Our postoffice handles money 
orders, registered matter and parcel post mail. 
For further information write 
T. S. INBORDEN, Principal, BRICKS, N. C. 
VIRGINIA UNION UNIVERSITY 
(RICHMOND, VA.) 
often young men an excellent opportunity to secure a 
rood College or Theological education at moderate 
cost. 
Special Fro-Medical courses are offered for those 
who plan to enter a medical college. 
Information cheerfully furnished. Write to the 
President. 
Hartshorn Memorial College 
Richmond, Va. 
A superior school for the separate education 
of young women. 
College, Academic, Junior and Music 
Departments. 
Send for catalog to the President. 
TALLADEG A THEOLOGICA L SEMINARY 
Talladega, Alabama 
Frederick A. Sumner, President 
I* training men for the Tiospel Ministry at 
home and abroad. Students are also being 
trained for work in the fields of 
SOCIAL SERVICE 
RELIGIOUS EDUCATION 
THE Y. M. C. A.. AND 
THE Y. W. C, A. 
The Seminnry has an enviable record of 40 
years of service. For full information address 
FAMES P. O'BRIEN, Dean, 
399 W Battle St. Talladega. Ala. 
IMPROVE YOURSELF 
HELP OTHERS! 
Easy, pleasant, dignified 
work. $2 per hour. Unusual 
opportunity. Send 60c in 
stamps for membership, supplies, etc. 
National Literary Association 
1230 Ton Si N. W., Wash.. D. C 
Founded 1899 Incorporated 1904 
OPPORTUNIT Y 
Helpfulness Our Object Efficiency Our Aim 
BEREAN MANUAL TRAINING AND 
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
1926-30 S. COLLEGE AVE., Philadelphia, Pa. 
Principally a Trade School 
Fall Term Opening Tuesday, October 4. 1921 
Day and Night Classes 
Introduction Day Commercial Course 
VISITORS WELCOME WRITE NOW 
MATTHEW ANDERSON, 
Principal and Founder 
Cleota Collins, 
Lyric Soprano 
"She combines an excellent voice with artistic finish of the most mature kind. Her singing proved as 
charming as anything the concert programs will offer 
this season."—Detroit Daily News. 
GEORGE LACY, Manager, 
156 Hamilton Avenue Columbus, Ohio 
LULA ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
Available for Concert! 
Telephone 6393 Morningiide 
174 W. 136th Street New York, N. Y. 
E. ALDAMA JACKSON 
Graduate of Institute of Musical Art 
Orfanist-Director of Mueic of St. Marks M. E. 
Church; Concert Accompanist; Piano, Voice, 
Theory, Instruction, Conducting, Coaching. 
Harmony taught from beginning to completion. Private or correspondence. 
Geothius system, 
itudlo: 250 W. 138th St., New York, N. Y. 
Telephone Morningside 1708. 
The Colored Teachers'Bureau 
Will Help Yon Get a Better Plying Position. 
XEGIITKm NOW REASONABLE TERMf 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Jo i 22. Wllberforce, 0. 
A MONE Y GETTE R becam e It la A CROW D SETTE R 
Churche s am! Club s lookin g fo r a pla y tha t will affor d an 
evenin g o f Sid e Splittin g Fun , should bar e 
The Slabtown Convention 
Am entertainmen t In on e act : full o f wit 
an d goo d humor . Score s o f cburcbe a bar e cleare d fro m 
On e to Tw o Hundre d Dollars In On e Nigh t PRICE , BOe. 
MIS S NANNI E H . BURROUGHS , Autho r 
Lincol n Height*. Washington . D . C. 
For the most valuable books 
dealing with the Negro Problem 
see the inside back cover. 
MANASSAS INDUSTRIAL SCHOO L 
MANASSAS, VIRGINIA 
Beautiful location, 191 acres, fourteen buildings. Direct railroad connections. 
The only school of Its kind In historic Northerrn 
Virginia. 
State standard Four-Year HLgh School Course. 
Advanced Grade School. Business and Trade 
Courses. 
nitrh moral standards. Prepares boys and ftrls to 
become useful men and women; terms reasonable. 
Fo r informatio n address 
EDWARD D. HOWE . Principa l 
Mention T .IE CRISIS . 18 6 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
STORAGE BATTERY REPAIRING 
has been added to the Course in 
AUTO MECHANICS 
At The Prairie View State Normal & Industrial College 
which has turned out more 
ENGINE REPAIRMEN, TRACTOR OPERATORS, CHAUFFEURS, 
MECHANICS & AUTO ELECTRICIANS and VULCANIZERS 
than any other Automobile School for Negroes 
ADDRESS : Division of Mechanic Arts, Prairie View, Tex. 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
1227 Sooth 17th Street - - - Philadelphia, Pa. 
The above picture shows only a few of the students. Graduates ami teachers. Counting from right to left, (seated) 
is Mrs. Ilatlie .1 Abrams, Typist and Bookkeeper, instructor (jf English and Commercial Arithmetic: Mrs Gladys 
Hvinan I'avli.r. Bookkeeper, cue of the efficient bookkeeper! of Brown & Stevens' Bank, instructor of bookkeepingiticliard Hill, Jr., world war stenographer, Instructor of shorthand and bookkeeping: Mrs Emma M Johnson' 
stenographer, instructor of shurthand. typewriting and hookkeeping: Edward T. Duncan President, instructor o f 
advanced shorthand and other subjects. 
In 1901, twenty years ago. Rev. Edward T. Duncan started this school with one student in the home of 
the late Mrs. F. E. \V. Harper. 1008 Bainbridgc St., Philadelphia, Pa. 240 students are on the 1920-21 
Roster. 150 enrolled for summer work. We expect 500 students to begin when the Fall Term opens 
Oct. 3, 1031. They arc matriculating now from Florida. Texas, Alabama, Mississippi. Oklahoma and 
other nearby Mates. We .1., not graduate a student just for the tuition he pays nor the time he spends 
in -chcol. lie must show, by a practical test, that he has the ability to do the work he matriculated to 
-tudy. That is the reason for the many applications we receive, for teachers, stenographers and clerks 
from schools. V. M. C. fV's an.l business men. In white and colored offices where our students arcplaced, others come and go; but ours remain. 
The Popular School of Business Efficiency 
(MRS.) EMMELINE J. DUNCAN, Supt. and Instructor of Typewriting 
M jmi> n TH E CRISIS , THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 187 
ENROLL NOW! 
DERRIC K BUSINES S SCHOO L
 1 
SHORTHAND, 
PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
ONLY SCHOOL OF ITS KIND 
TYPEWRITING, BOOKKEEPING, OFFICE PRACTICE, FILING. 
SAVE TIME AND MONEY DORMITORIES. $2.50 PER WEEK BOYD'S 30-DAY SYSTEM 
M. J. DERRICK, Principal and Manager 
CRETONNE SLIP COVERS 
Will protect your varnished and upholstered 
furniture from dust and moths. Cut and 
sewed for $2.50 each. Hair and felt mattresses renovated and sterilized $5.00. New 
tick $4.00 extra. Box spring made over $8.50 
returned same day. Cushions and draperies, 
Furniture repairing, polishing and upholstering. Carpets and rugs cleaned, repaired, 
made and laid. 
Telephone Audubon 8198. or write and representative will call to estimate. 
ART CRAFT UPHOLSTERING CO. 
301 WEST 110TH STREET, NEW YORK, N. Y. 
THE 
J-R- W 
SULPHUR CREAM 
Especially compounded for the 
treatment of Eczema, Dandruff and 
all scalp and skin troubles. 
Price 50 Cent s per Ja r 
J. R. WIGGINS 
Manufacturing Chemist 
1919 BROADWAY, NEW YORK, N. Y. 
AGENT S EAR N $75.00 A WEEK 
Sellin g ou r Enlarge d Phot o MEdallions, Phot o Cuff Button , 
Phot o Lockets, Phot o WATCH 
Charms, Phot o Breast Pins, 
Phot o Clock s an d 
Lif e Siz e Por ­
traits (1 0 x 20). 
W e cop y fro m 
an y Photograp h 
an d Retur n You r 
Origi n al Photo . 
Agents ' EN JAR T" 
Sample s 60C. 
Negr o Books , Picture s an d POST 
Cards. Promp t Shipments. 1000 
Agents an d Dealers Wanted . Pre© Catalog . Bethe l Art 
Co. , 9 7 Sout h St. . Jamaica , N . Y . 
HOTE L DAL E 
CAPE MAY, N. J. 
Comfort and Elegance Without Extravagance 
THIS MAGNIFICENT HOTEL, LOCATED IN THE 
HEART OF THE MOST BEAUTIFUL SEASHORE 
RESORT IN THE WORLD, 
is replete with every modern improvement, superlative in construction, appointments, service and refined patronage. Orchestra daily, garage, bath houses, 
tennis, etc., on premises. Special attention given to 
ladies and children. 
Send for booklet. Sanitarium added with Dr. C. A. 
Lewis of the University of Penn. in attendance. 
STUDENTS! PUBLIC SPEAKERS! 
LITERARY CRITICISM AND REVISION FOR WRITERS AND SPEAKERS. 
WE ALSO ASSIST IN THE WRITING OF MATERIAL FOR SPECIAL ARTICLES 
MANUSCRIP'S. THESES, SERMONS, ESSAYS. ORATIONS AND ONE ACT 
PLAYS. THESE ARE EXPERTLY PREPARED (TYPEWRITTEN) PAPERS. 
PROFICIENT, SCHOLARLY SERVICE. 
Address: John A. Martin, Secretary, 
2220 SIXTH ST., N. W. WASHINGTON, D. C. 
SOCIETY PRINTING 
P>est qualities and most fashionable styles. Our 
line includes Calling Cards, Business Cards, 
Mourning Cards, Wedding and Party Invitations, Sympathy Acknowledgment Cards, Monogrammed Stationery, etc. Agents wanted. Good 
pay. Big demand everywhere. All orders filled 
promptly and sent prepaid. Write for samples 
and terms. 
The House of Chownlng, Indianapolis, Ind. 
RERESFOR D GAL E CORPORATIO N 
FINANCIERS 
"Investments of the Better Kind" 
INVESTMENT S SECURITIE S 
Branches in Principal Cities 
Home Office 413 South Broad St. Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mention TH E CBISIS . 18 8 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
BLACK SWAN RECORDS 
Are Made by 
The Only Phonograph Company in the World 
Owned and Ooerated bv Colored People 
FOURTH RELEASES 
MACUSHL A Harry A. Delmor e 
MORNING Harry A Delmor e 
WIT H TH E COMING OF TOMORRO W Revell a E . Hughe s 
AH ! WONDROU S MORN Revell a E. Hughe s 
SINCE YO U WEN T AWA Y J . Arthur Gaines 
WH O KNOW S J . Arthur Gaines 
DOW N HOM E BLUES by Ethe l Waters 
OH DADD Y by Ethe l Waters 
I LIKE YO U "Because You Have Such Lovin' Ways 
by Eddi e Gra y 
WH Y DID YO U MAK E A PLAYTHIN G OF M E 
by Eddi e Gra y 
I'M WIL D ABOU T MOONSHINE ... . by Creame r & Layto n 
It's Gettin' So You Can't Trust Nobody..by Creame r & Layto n 
BRIGHT EYES—Voca l Chorus by Jua n Harrison 
Black Swa n Danc e Orchestr a 
M Y MAMMY —(Danc e Record") Black Swa n Danc e Orchestr a 
Sung by Jua n Harrison 
FOR AL L ETERNIT Y by C. Carroll Clark 
DEA R LITTLE BOY OF MIN E by C. Carroll Clark 
A T DAWNIN G by Revell a E . Hughe s 
THAN K GOD FOR A GARDEN by Revell a E . Hughe s 
STRUT MISS LIZZIE by Lul a Whidb y 
HOM E AGAI N BLUES by Lul a Whidb y 
BLIND MAN'S BLUES bv Kati e Crippen 
PLA Y 'EM FOR MAMMA . SING 'EM FOR M E 
by Kati e Crippen 
BY TH E WATER S OF MINNETONKA . .bv C. Carroll Clark 
NOBOD Y KNOW S DE TROUBLE I'VE SEEN 
bv C. Carroll Clark 
Buy from Your Dealer or Order Direct from 
Pace Phonograph Corp., 257 w. i38thst., New York, N.Y. 
Agents Who Will Work Wanted in Every Community. Liberal Commissions. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 189 
A SPECIA L OFFE R O F 
ORCHARDVILL E LOT S 
$29.50 
$3.00 DOWN AND $1.50 A MONTH PER LOT 
AT EACH 
These lots are the same kind and in 
the same locality as those we sold 
under the development plan at 
$56.00 each. That offer met with 
great success and indications already point to even greater success for this offer. 
Th e lots are size 30 x 144 feet each and 
have plenty of room for a house, garden, chicken yard, shed, etc., besides a 
few fruit trees which can be planted 
later on. Eac h lot is sold under a 
money-back guarantee and the title to 
the property is absolutely clear. 
DO NOT DELA Y BECAUSE THE 
Orchardvillc is located in a high grade 
fruit growin g region where the climate 
is wonderful, living conditions ideal and 
where all good people are welcome regardless of race, creed, color or nationality. Tha t is wh y everybod y wh o 
has been up there wa s so well pleased 
with everything. 
If you want all the details of this attractive offer, simply write your name 
and address on the coupon below and 
mail it to us RIGH T AWAY . We will 
then send you booklets telling you all 
about it. 
LOTS ARE GOING FAST, Address 
ARENSON REALTY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
19 S. La Salle Street CHICAGO, ILL. 
WRITE PLAINLY 
Date 132. 
ARENSON REALTY DEV'PT CORP. 
CHICAGO, ILL. 
Gentlemen: — 
I would like to receive all the details regarding your new lot offer, without any obliga 
tion on my part. 
Name 
Address Town and State. 
CRI—New Offer—8-21. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 10 0 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
BRAZIL 
D O YO U WAN T 
LIBERTY AND WEALTH 
IN A LAND OF PLENTY? 
UNLIMITED OPPORTUNITY AND 
EQUALITY? 
Then Buy 
Land in Brazil 
South America 
Kindly Send 25c in Stamps for Our 
Booklet 
BRAZILIAN AMERICAN 
COLONIZATION SYNDICATE 
American Office 3539'A South State Street, 
Chicago, 111. 
MISS 
MADELINE 
ALLISON 
Shopper 
From Pelham Manor, N. Y. 
I thank you so very much for the kindness 
you have done for me. Especially "being- a 
stranger in the East, and I found your ad in 
The Crisis quite a relief to my need of this 
hook, I hope to he able to call on you again 
for a shopping favor through the mail. 
Albertine Gossitt. 
From Hardwick, Ga. 
Am certainly delighted with the traveling 
bag and hope that the order for the handkerchiefs will be as acceptable on arrival. 
With many thanks for your kind thoughtfulness, 
William Oscar Murphy. 
Address : Roo m 622 
70 FIFTH AVENUE 
NEW YORK, N. Y. 
(Refers by permission to the Kdltor of the "Crisis.") 
Books Worth Reading 
V AT BARGAIN PRICES) 
THE BRASS CHECK, by Upton Sinclair. 
True stories of newspaper prostitution. 
Paper cover, 55c. Cloth $1.10 
PROFITS OF RELIGION. Sinclair. Paper. 
55c. Cloth ; 11 0 
STORIES OF ORE AT RAILROADS (an.I 
sr:ift). by Russell. Cloth
 12 » 
GREAT CONSPIRACY OF HOUSE OF 
MORGAN. H. L. Loucks. Paper, 70c. 
Cloth !•« » 
OCR DAILY BREAD. Loucks. Paper 50 
THE BOMB by Frank Harris. Wonderfully 
realistic novel of Chicago riots, 1888; very 
significant todav. Cloth 2.25 
WHA T EVERY GIRL SHOULD KNOW. 
Marcaret Sanger. Paper 30 
SEX FORCE, by a physician. (For those 
contemplating matrinjony). Cloth 1-40 
NEWSPAPER FRAUDS. IL G. Creel 10 
THE SUBSIDIZED PRESS, by lark Prnsy .10 
TRUTH ABOUT THE FOOD TRL'ST, 
Pansv 10 
DANGER OF AUTOCRACY, Pansy 10 
SIX-HOUR DAY, Pansy 10 
Sent POSTPAID without delay on receipt of 
price. And your MONEY BACK if not completely satisfied. Address: 
A. J. BOOK CO. 
"Books Worth Reading" 
111 W. 35tb Street, New York, N. Y. 
HOME S 
I am in a position to sell you a 
beautiful home in CORONA, L. I. 
Attractive one and two family 
homes in the most delightful section of New York City. All city 
improvements, best of schools 
and very convenient to any section of New York City for 5 
cents. 
Or will build to suit the demands 
of any one. 
Full information cheerfully given 
L. S REE D 
46 East Jackson Ave. 
CORONA, N. Y . CIT Y 
i
 1 i. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 191 
MADE TO MEASURE 
EXPRESS SB POSTAGE PREP
Thi s offer is one o f the biggest, most generous ever made by any tailoring house. It's 
your one big opportunity to get a finely tailored-to-measure 2-piece suit with box back, 
superbly trimmed and cut in the latest city 
style for only $12.45. WE'RE OUT TO BEA
HIGH TAILORING PRICES 
You r ow n local tailor couldn't and wouldn't 
mak e you a suit for $12.45, let alone supply 
the cloth, linings and trimmings. Wh y not 
sav e 50 % on your nex t suit? W e have such 
a tremendous business, buy all our materials 
in such large quantities and have such a perfect organization that we can make these wonderful prices—and 
remember we guarantee style, fit and workmanship or 
your money back. 
You Save ft io$|| 
This suit for $12.45 clearly proves our supremacy in the tailoring field. We offer 
dozens of equally good values. Let's tell Q J ©-.M.»|J » Anlf U CDC C 
youaboutthem. We would rather you did ||| g OdliiPI G UUTTE l rilC C 
not send us any money until we send our g I 
Write us today and we will mail you ABSOLUTELY FREE our beautifully illustrated 
pattern book showing dozens of the latest city styles and designs, also many large 
size cloth samples to choose from. You will be simply thunderstruck at the exceptional values we are offering this year. Don't delay; we urge you to act quick; today! 
THE PROGRESS TAILORING CO. 
Dept . H-11 7 CHICAG Mentio O n TH E CRISIS . 192 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
OU R LATES T CATALO G WIL L B E 
MAILE D T O YO U UPO N REQUES T 
We are positively the only Manufacturers of HUMA N HAI R GOOD S who 
specialize and cater direct to the Colored People. 
Our Wigs, Switches, Transformations, Bobs and Braids are strictly handmade—of the finest qualities of real Human Hair Goods and manufactured 
under the supervision of MME. BAUM, by the most skillful artists in the 
trade. 
Try Mme. Baum'S Celebrated Scalp and Face Preparations which are made 
of the finest ingredients and are the most satisfying to the person using 
them. 
We carry the largest selection of Hairdressers' Tools and Accessories. MME. BAUM'S BOB 
GIVES THE APPEARANCE OF WEARING THE 
HAIR BOBBED, BUT 
MAKES CUTTING UNNECESSARY. MADE 
OT STRICTLY SUPREME 
QUALITY HUMAN 
HAIR, WITH NATURAL 
WAVE*, SEWED ON 
VELVET RIBBON, 
FITTED WITH THREE 
TUEK COMBT TO 
HOLD SECURE. IN 
ALL SHADES. PRLOE, 
15.50. 
MME. BAUM'S 
MAIL ORDER HOUSE 
Our Factory is Located at 
80 FOURTH AVE. NEW YORK, N. Y. 
WHEN WRITING, MENTION THIS PAPER. 
Agents Wanted 
I N EVERY 
TOW N AND 
LOCALITY. 
GOOD PA Y 
Catalog Free 
THE EAST INDIA 
TOILE T GOOD S 
MFG . CO . 
316 N. Central Dept. B 
OKLAHOMA CITY, OKLAHOMA 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
FOR ALL LODGE AND CHURCH SOCIETIES 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS. L. JONES, Pres. 
641 W. 3th St. Cincinnati, Ohio 
WANTE D WANTE D 
Live Agents At Onoe l o Sell 
DUDLEY'S FAMOUS AUTO POLISH 
FOR FURNITURE, PIANOS, CHURCH PEWS, HARDWOOD FLOORS 
AND HUNDREDS OF OTHER THINGS THAT HAVE A VARNISHED 
SURFACE. MAKES THEM LOOK LIKE NEW. AGENTS CAN 
MAKE $50.00 TO $75.00 PER WEEK SELLING DUDLEY'S 
POLISH TO FURNITURE DEALERS, DRUG STORES, HARDWARE 
STORES, CHURCHES, HOUSEKEEPERS, AUTO MO1 • I A STORES, PAINT 
STORES AND GROCERY STORES. SPECIAL OFFER: FOR 90 DAYS 
WE WILL SHIP TO ALL NEW AGENTS $10.00 WORTH OF DUDLEY'S POLISH FOR $5.00. TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THIS 
SPECIAL OFFER AT ONCE. 
DUDLEY MANUFACTURING CO. 
Formerly 
DUDLEY & PORTER MFG. CO. 
and 
DUDLEY LEATHER & CHEMICAL WOR *S, 
Box 542 
MUSKOGEE, OKLAHOMA 
$2 0 T O $3 0 PE R WEE K 
being made selling our new book "Progress 
md Achievements of the Colored People" by 
Prof. Kelly Miller, showing the wonderful 
doings and now opportunities of our race. 
Low prices, many pictures; lightning seller. 
As k for terms; write quick. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO., 9th St., Washington, D. C. 
LEI. 6117 FORT Hill cable ADDRESSTIPTAN 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
ATTO»NIY AND COUNSELLOB-AT-LAW 
Mention THE CIISIS. A Selected List of Books 
Dealing with the Negro Problem 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
TH E HEART OF A WOMA N AND OTHER POEMS. (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1.25 
NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY. (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
TH E SOUL OF JOHN BROWN. (Stephen Graham) 3.00 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W. E. B. DuBois) 2.0 0 
A CENTURY OF NEGRO MIGRATION. (Carter G. Woodson) 1.10 
TH E CURSE OF RACE PREJUDICE. (James F . Morton) 2 5 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO MIGRANT IN PITTSBURGH. (Abraham Epstein).. . .5 0 
GRANNY MAUMEE AND OTHER PLAYS FOR A NEGRO THEATRE. 
(Ridgely Torrence) 2.2 5 
HALF A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.20 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIFE AND WORK. (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 
UNSUNG HEROES. (Elizabeth Ross Haynes) 2.5 0 
TH E SHADOW. (Mary White Ovington) 2.0 0 
JOHN BROWN. (W. E. B. DuBois) 2.0 0 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 2.0 0 
PRINCE HALL AND HIS FOLLOWERS. (George W . Crawford).. 1.00 
TH E VOICE OF THE NEGRO. (Robert T. Kerlin) 2.5 0 
NEGRO CULTURE IN WES T AFRICA. (George W. Ellis) 3.00 
TH E NEGRO. (W. E. B. Du Bois) 9 0 
TH E EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO FACES AMERICA. (Herbert J. Seligmann) 1.75 
DARKWATER. (W . E. B. DuBois) 2.2 5 
POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.5 0 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H. E. Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address: TH E CRISIS , : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y. Beautifu l 
whit e teet h 
MADAM C. J. WALKER' S 
ANTISEPTI C DENTA L CREA M ^ © 
IS THE SECRET 
W 
A delicious, 
effective germicide 
and mouth wash for 
Cleansing, Polishing and Pre 
serving the teeth. 
of Agents and at Drug Stores 
Mouth acids and a slimy film are the great contributions to decay. Your Dentist will tell you that 
it is not enough to merely clean the teeth 
and ordinary dentrifices will not preserve 
them from decay. Madam C. J.Walker's 
Antiseptic Dental Cream keeps the 
saliva alkaline, which counteracts acid-mouth, prevents 
slimy film, the formation of tarter and 
the 
th. 
& 64 0 NORT H WES T STREE T 
INDIANAPOLIS.IND., U.S.A. 
Makers of Mme. C. J. Walker's Wonderful Hair Grower. 