The CRISIS 
NOVEMBER , 1922 FIFTEE N CENTS A COPY Another Lighthouse to Help 
Chart Negro Business into 
The Right Channel. 
The Southern Aid Society's 
New Modern 3 story and 
basement building located 
at 106 and 106A South Ave., 
Petersburg, Va 
Petersburg's firs£ colored 
bank and its leading professional and business interests now have modern 
quarters within which to 
display thei r talents and 
wares. The Society's District Office is located on 3rd 
floor. 
In addition to providing a superior policy of protection to 
its policyholders—the Society renders a threefold service to 
the race: 
It gives employment to hundreds of young women and 
men—It provides ready cash to its policyholders in times of 
sickness, accident and death—It provides, in the largest cities 
in its field of operation, modern office facilities to the colored 
professional and business interests. It is indeed a Servant of 
the People. 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, INC. 
Home Office: 527 N. Second Street, RICHMOND, VA. 
District Offices and Agencies in Virginia and 
the District of Columbia 
J. T. CARTER, Pres. and Gen'l Counsel B. L. JORDAN, Secty. 
W. A. JORDAN, Asst. Secty. THE CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY AND COPYRIGHTED B Y THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOB TH E 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFT H AVENUE , HEW YOR K CITY. CONDUCTED B Y W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS; JESSIE REDMON FAUSET, LITERAR Y EDITOR; 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILL E DILL, BUSINESS MANAGER. 
Vol. 25 No. 1 NOVEMBER, 1922 Whole No. 145 
COVER Page 
Photograph of a Haitienne born in Paris. 
OPINION 
Truth and Beauty, The Anti-Lynching Crusaders, Liberia, James Madison French, Co-operation, Siki, The Elaine Peons, K. K. K., Thanks. . 7 
EAST LONG STREET. Nimrod B. Allen. Illustrated 12 
LEROY BUNDY. W. E. B. Du Bois 16 
NEGRO INSURANCE. Phil H. Brown 21 
SONG FOR A LOST COMRADE. Jessie Fauset; For a Rose, Yetta Kay 
Stoddard. Poems 22 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED 
PEOPLE 23 
DAD. A Poem. Countee P. Cullen 26 
TH E HORIZON. Illustrated 27 
TH E LOOKING GLASS 34 
TH E CHRISTMA S CRISIS 
The December CRISIS will have a cover drawn especially for us by the great artist, 
Henry Ossawa Tanner. It will print an article on "The Negro Theatre," by Alain 
Locke, and the Christmas editorial, "The Great Surgeon." 
FIFTEE N CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLA R AND A HAL F A YEA R 
FOREfG N SUBSCRIPTIO N TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Th e date of expiration of ^ach subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New 
York, under the Act of March 3, 1879. 
. A . National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Tkougk It is young In history, tfct Institution feels a jnst pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Science! The Commercial Department 
The Department of Mask The Department of Home Economic! 
The Department of Social Service 
For farther information and Catalog, address 
r 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manual Training & Industrial School 
FOR COLORED YOUTH 
BORDENTOWN, N. i. 
A Mill Inttltutlea tor U» training •! altered 
num. Excellent equlpaeat, tbereugh laitruetlaa. 
wholesome surroundings. Aeademlo training (of ill 
students. 
Cu m li carpentry, agriculture aid trades tor beys. 
Including auto repairing. 
Count* la dsmestls HIM H and domeetls art far 
•Irli. 
A new tradw bulldlaf. therougbly equipped. 
New girls' dormitory tnareughly aad aiadaraly 
equipped. 
Terms reaiaaabl*. 
Far lateralatlaa address 
W. R. VALENTINE, Principal 
LINCOLN UNIVERSITY 
Pioneer in Collegiate and 
Theological Education 
Lincoln Men are Leaders in the various 
professions in Forty States. 
The College is ranked in Class I. by the 
American Medical Association. 
Addraea: 
Joii B. Randall, D.D., Llneola TTilTeralty, 
Chester County, Penna. 
Wiley University 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas. Louisiana. Arkansas and Oklahoma State Boards of Education. Har ­
vard, _ Boston University. University of 
. Illinois and University of Chicago represented on its faculty. One hundred 
[ twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1020. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
'* M . W. DOGAN, President 
The Cheyney Training 
School for Teachers 
Cheyney, Pa. 
A Pennsylvania State Normal School offering. In addition 
to the regular Normal Course of two years, professional 
three year courses In Home Economics and Shop Work. A 
diploma from any of these courses makes a graduate 
eligible to teach In the public schools of Pennsylvania. 
A three-year High School Course Is offered to all whe 
have completed the eighth grammar grade. 
Next term began September 20, 1922. 
For further particulars and catalog, write 
Leslie Plnckney Hill, Principal 
Cheyney. Pa, Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located In the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High School, 
Normal School and College. Special emphasis 
la laid upon the training of teachers. Students 
come from all parts of the South. Graduates 
have a fine record for successful work. 
For further information address 
Th e President 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga. 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Institution offers courses in the following departments. College, Normal. High School, 
Grammar School, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training and Industrial. 
Expenses very reasonable. 
Fall Term began Wednesday, Sept. 13, 1922. 
For catalog and other information address 
PRESIDENT J . KELL Y G1FFEN 
Knoxville, Tenn. 
187 0 192 2 
CLARK UNIVERSITY 
ATLANTA , GEORGIA 
Over 100 acres of beautiful campus. Twelve buildings, with 
new $215,000 Administration Building with modern chapel, 
gymnasium and laboratories ready for use in September. 
Strong faculty—religious atmosphere—Athletics—Co-educational. 
Admission by application only. 
Junior High School—7 th, 8th, 9th and 10 th grades with 
certificate. 
Junior College—3rd and 4th years High School with Freshman and Sophomore years of College work, with Diploma. 
College—Four years above High School or two years above 
Junior College course, with degree of A. B. 
Liberal Arts — Normal — Pre-Medical — Commercial — Domestic Science. 
54th year of nine months opened September 19, 1922. 
$150.00 per year pays tuition, board, room and laundry. 
JOH N WESLE Y SIMMONS , President. 
The Florida Agricultural 
and jMechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahasee, Florida 
SIMMON S UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. 
Founded 187S. 
The only Institution in trie State baring for Its object 
Collegiate, Ministerial. Medical, and Legal training fez Colored citizens in Kentucky. 
Special training In Insurance. Social Herrlce, Naretas and 
Hospital Work. 
Normal, Commercial, Mule , Domestic Science, MIssierjary 
training elaa* 
•taolaa ilsssis. aenesgendaaae aw n Dsgreas eflared. 
Presiden t C . H . Parrie s 
1 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , G A 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address. 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and (rounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER'S McKENZIE , President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE, N. C. 
Blddle University, operated tinder the aeaad.oes of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Deportments—High School, Art* and Sciences, Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course la the requirement for entrance to the first year 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the 
scientific, German is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely English, 
Greek and Hebrew are taught In the others. 
Al l students in the High School Dept. are required 
u take trades in the Industrial Dept 
For further Information, address 
President H. L. MoCrerey. 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of special 
ists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, High School, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Sewing. 
Printing and Tailoring. 
For further information address 
JOHN H . LEWIS, President 
BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Coalman Trustee Board Howard University 
Washington, D . C. 
Founded by GENERA L O. O. HOWAR D 
J. STANLE Y DURKEE , A.M. , Ph.D., D.D., President 
EMMET T J. SCOTT, A.M. , LL.D. , Secretary-Treasurer 
COLLEGIATE AND PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS 
/Autumn Quarter.. Friday, Sept. 29, and Saturday, Sept. 30, 1922 
REGISTRATIO N <J Winter Quarter .. . Tuesday, January 2, 1923 
(.Spring Quarter Saturday, March 17, 1923 
FOR CATALOG AND INFORMATION WRITE 
F. D. WILKINSON, Registrar 
HOWARD UNIVERSITY WASHINGTON, D. C 
Founded 1899 Incorporated 1904 
BEREA N 
Manual Training and 
Industrial School 
(2fon-Bectarian) 
S. College Ave. & N. 19th St 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Fall Term Opening 
Tuesday, October 3rd, 1922. 
DA Y AN D NIGHT SESSIONS 
Write for Bulletin to the Principal 
MATTHEW ANDERSON, D.D. 
1926 S. College Avenue, Philadelphia, Pa. 
The Colored Teachers'Bureau 
Will Help Yon Get a Better Paying Position. 
BEGISTE* MOW SEASONABLE TZXMI 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box it, Wilberforee, 0. 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincoln Hospital and Home 
New York, N.Y. 
Talladega College 
Talladega, Alabama 
Founded in 1I67 for the Education ol 
Negro Leaders 
Beautiful and Healthful Location. 
Literary, Scientific, Educational, Social Service, Theological, Musical, 
Business Administration, Journalism, 
Nurse Training Courses. 
High Standards of Christian Manhood and Womanhood. 
Fo r further information addresi 
P. A. SUMNER , President 
ROGER WILLIAMS UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE 
Founded 1866 Location Ideal 
It offers courses in the Liberal Arts, Normal, Academic and Musical departments. 
For further information write 
- SAMUEL A. OWEN, President 
COLEMA N COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND, LA. 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Mom* 
Miision Society of Chicago and Boaton and 
A. B, E . Society of Mew York. Student! 
from aiz dUferent eta tea. Graduates exempted on lrat grade by Louisiana, Arkaaiai 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN, Prnidmnt 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding school for girls, under the 
direction of the aiatera of St. Mary, Addreaa: TEX 
BISTEB-IN-CHABGZ, 61SS German town Avenue, 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FOR YOU R GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNF , - . Printed. THE CRISIS 
Vol. 25. No. 1 NOVEMBER, 1922 Whole No. 145 
Opinion 
"Not those who inflict most but 
those who suffer most will conquer." 
—Terrence McSwiney. 
TRUTH AND BEAUT Y 
I N November, 1910, TH E CRISIS 
was born. With this issue, 
November, 1922, we are completing our twelfth year and 
we pause to thank all those who have 
made our long and fairly successful 
career possible. We have for the future both promises and apologies. 
First, we want to apologize to the 
large number of people who subscribe 
indirectly to TH E CRISIS and either 
do not get their subscriptions or 
have them delayed. It can be 
easily seen that this is not wholly 
the fault of TH E CRISIS: TH E 
CRISIS cannot fulfil a subscription 
until it receives it or at least receives notice that it has been paid. 
On the other hand, many subscriptions are taken in the drives for memberships of the N.A.A.C.P . and this 
has always been a great and valuable 
source of support for TH E CRISIS. 
When, however, subscriptions are 
paid thus indirectly, first to a solicitor, then handed to a captain, then 
slowly collected by a local secretary, 
then forwarded to the national secretary, and finally handed to TH E 
CRISIS business manager,—all this involves much delay and several possibilities of mistake. Anyone thus subscribing for TH E CRISIS indirectly 
should always and simultaneously notify TH E CRISIS office of the facts. If 
there is anyone who having thus subscribed has not received TH E CRISIS, 
we shall be only too glad to learn tne 
facts and make all reparation. 
So much for apology. Now to our 
muttons. TH E CRISIS has always 
stood for Truth,—for the Truth when 
it is bitter, because we believe this is 
the only path to reform; for the 
Truth when it is sweet, for that 
heartens all. We shall continue to 
stand thus for the Truth. In addition to this we want to increase that 
part of our mission which, while not 
neglected, has had too little attention 
in the past, and that is the work of 
propagating and encouraging Beauty. 
We Negroes have gone fast forward 
in economic development, in political 
and social agitation; and we are likely to forget that the great mission of 
the Negro to America and the modern world is the development of Art 
and the appreciation of the Beautiful. The esthetic life of black folk 
is likely to be choked—not by toil, for 
they are gifted with that divine laziness that will rest and dream in spite 
of laws and lash and silly money; but 
with the over-emphasis of ethics to 
meet the Puritans round about who 
conceal their little joys and deny 
them with crass utilitarianism. 
Why even our song — that vivid 
burst of sorrow burnt with joy—our 
love of life, the wild and beautiful desire of our women and men for each 
other—all, all this sinks to being 
"good" and being "useful" and being 
"white." 
TH E CRISIS wishes by picture and 
drawing, by fiction, essays, poetry, by 
the organization of a Negro Institute 
of Literature and Art, to increase, 
nourish and encourage the Beautiful among Negroes and among Americans. As a beginning of this work 
for our New Year, we have the honor 
to announce a Christmas cover by 
Henry 0. Tanner. And as a second 
step the Delta Omega Chapter of the 
Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority at Virginia Normal and Industrial Institute, Petersburg, Va., offers through 
TH E CRISIS a prize of fifty dollars for 
the best short story written by a 
Negro student. 
TH E ANTI-LYNCHIN G CRUSADER S 
UNDE R the leadership of Mrs. 
Mar y B - Talber t o f Buffal ° 
and an executive committee 
of 15 supported by over 700 
state workers, there has been started 
the "Anti-Lynching Crusade," the object of which is to "unite a million 
women to stop lynching." These crusaders are planning a short, sharp 
campaign beginning immediately and 
ending January 1, 1923. They seek 
to arouse the conscience of the 
women of America, both white and 
black. They are in deadly earnest 
and they put forward as the first fact 
in the lynching campaign the horrid 
truth that 83 American women have 
been lynched by mobs in the last 30 
years in addition to 3,353 men. This, 
in part, is the prayer which the AntiLynching Crusaders have sent out: 
"We are slain all the day long in the 
land of our nativity, which is the land of 
our loyalty and of our love. The vials of 
race vengeance are wreaked upon our defenceless heads. The inhuman thirst for 
human blood takes little heed of innocence or guilt. An y convenient victim identified with our race suffices to slake the 
accursed thirst. We are beaten with many 
stripes. Our bodies are bruised, burned and 
tortured and torn asunder for the ghoulish 
mirth of the blood-lusty multitude. When-: 
ever such atrocity is perpetrated upon any 
one of our number, because of his race, it 
is done unto us all. Vengeance and wrath 
are not invoked for the fit atonement of 
committed crime, nor yet for the just punishment of evil doer; but the sinister aim is 
to cow our spirit, enslave our soul and 
to give our name an evil repute in the eyes 
of the world. 
"Lawlessness is weakening the pillars of 
the temple of liberty. Laxity of law is 
speeding this people to the abyss of moral 
anarchy and social ruin. Thou didst set 
apart this nation in the wilderness of the 
new world to be an example unto all people 
of the blessings of liberty and law. May 
our nation measure up to the fulfillment 
of this high privilege. The land of lynchers 
can not long remain in the land of liberty. 
The nation that fails to destroy lawlessness 
will be destroyed by it. Save us from this 
evil fate. 
"We pray Thee to enlighten the understanding and nerve the hearts of our lawmakers with the political wisdom and the 
moral courage to pass the Dyer Bill, now 
hanging on the balance of doubt and uncertainty. 
"Have mercy upon any of our legislators 
who may be so embittered with the gall of 
race hatred and fettered by the bonds of 
political iniquity as to advocate or apologize 
for lynching, rapine and murder. 
"Quicken the conscience of the people 
with the moral firmness and determination 
to demand and to uphold the effective enforcement of this measure and of all righteous laws. 
"May liberty and law, peace and good 
will, prevail through the length and breadth 
of our beloved land, and may equity and 
justice be meted out with equal and impartial hand, unto the least even as unto the 
greatest. 
"Amen." 
At the meeting of the executive 
committee of the National Council of 
Women held at Fort Des Moines Hotel, Des Moines, Iowa, a body representing thirteen million American 
women, the following resolution was 
unanimously adopted: "Resolved, 
That the National Council of Women 
endorse the Anti-Lynching Crusade 
recently launched by the colored 
women of this country." 
Persons interested in this crusade 
should write to Mrs. M . B. Talbert, 
521 Michigan Avenue, Buffalo, New 
York. 
LIBERI A 
THE Republic of Liberia has 
opened in connection with 
the State Department a Bureau that has for its object 
the collection and dissemination of 
all information of a kind from 
abroad, that will prove of value to 
Liberia; and such information from 
Liberia that will be of service to interested friends and well wishers 
abroad. 
This Bureau was organized in May of this year and I am now opening 
up a correspondence all through Li ­
beria, and elsewhere in the world, i n 
order to come i n touch wit h men, 
measures, movements and events that 
wil l have some bearing upon the 
country and the work we are strivin g to do here i n Liberi a by way of 
exemplifying and demonstrating the 
fact that the Negro is capable, capacitated, and qualified for self-government and self-determination. 
Ma y we not ask you to render us 
all assistance i n putting us i n touch 
with such of our people on your side 
as would like to secure first-hand in ­
formation about this country? 
We need i n this country new accessions from abroad. Some of the 
people who have come to Liberi a and 
returned to the United States have 
tried to create an impression that 
the people of Liberi a are inimica l to, 
and do not want America n Negroes 
to settle here. Bu t this is not so; I 
think the trouble is that such persons 
came wit h wron g impressions of the 
country. They either expected a 
Paradise, or they expected just the 
opposite. Man y expected to see a 
country highly developed and equipped wit h all the implements of modern civilization, a country ready 
made. Of course, these were disappointed, for Liberi a i n spite of her 
100 years is yet a Pioneer State. On 
the contrary, those who came feeling that everybody i n Liberi a were 
illiterates and would take a backward 
seat and exalt them without having 
first tried them, they too were disappointed when they found that their 
surmises were il l founded. 
Bu t there are plenty of avenues 
and much room for the right kind of 
men i n Liberia . They need not necessarily be men of high intellectual 
qualifications but they must be men 
and women fully imbued wit h the 
national and racial idea and spirit.. . 
G . W . GIBSO N 
JAMES MADISON FRENCH 
JAME S MADISO N FRENC H 
of Sandusky, Ohio, a colored 
real estate dealer whom we 
mentioned i n the September 
CRISIS , is dead. He has left a considerable estate. His wil l says: 
"Al l of the remaining portion of my estate, both real and personal [amounting to 
about $100,000] I wish converted into money 
as soon as expedient and practicable after 
my death. When this is done I desire my 
executors to invest said money in a prudent, 
safe and businesslike manner where it will 
be productive of a substantial and profitable income. This income I desire given 
annually to the Trustees or other proper 
officers of Oberlin College, Oberlin, Lorain 
County, Ohio, for the sole purpose of aiding deserving Afro-American students in 
obtaining an education in said institution. 
Or if said gift is not accepted by said 
Trustees or other proper officers of said 
college for such purpose, or if so accepted 
but not so used or if there is any abuse or 
misuse of said funds on the part of said 
College, or its officers, then and in that 
event I desire said income paid by my executors to the Trustees or other proper officers of Wilberforce College, Wilberforce, 
Ohio, for a similar benefit for deserving 
Afro-American students. The College last 
referred to being now especially for such 
students. Or if said latter College does 
not accept said bequest or accepting the 
same there is any abuse or misuse of said 
funds by it or its officers, then and in that 
case I desire said income expended for a 
similar purpose at some other good College 
or institution of learning and education in 
the United States of America, for deserving Afro-American youth. I leave the selection of such institution to the discretion and 
wisdom of my said executors, with all and 
singular the conditions attaching said bequest as hereinbefore described. If, perchance said executors cannot agree in such 
selection, I desiro and empower the Probate 
Court of this County of Eri e to decide the 
matter, but such decision must be consistent with my wishes as herein expressed. 
I wish the principal and income 
of my estate, as aforesaid, invested and 
expended, respectively, in the manner described for a period of fifty years from and 
after my death, at the expiration of which 
time the institution last using the income 
shall have the principal for the sole purpose and object named." 
The president of Oberlin writes us 
that he knows "no reason why Oberli n should refuse to do what Mr . 
French asks." CO-OPERATION 
IN January, 1922, we said the 
Co-operative Society of America was a gigantic fraud. Constantine A . Morga n of Springfield, Ohio, questions the fact and refers us to Harriso n Parke r of Chicago for "information. " We do not 
require any information from Harrison Parker, who is at the head of 
this fraud. We subjoin this additional statement from the Co-operative League : 
"The 'Co-operative Society of America' 
is not co-operative in any sense in which 
that word is employed by the Co-operative 
Movement in this country or abroad. The 
Society has been condemned as a 'co-operative fraud' by the following reputable organizations: The Co-operative League (the 
national educational federation of the U . S. 
consumers' societies), the Federation of 
Greater New Yor k Co-operatives, the New 
York Central Trades & Labor Council, the 
Chicago Central Labor Union, the Bloomington (111.) Central Labor Union, the 
Catholic National Welfare Council, and 
many other such organizations whose integrity cannot be questioned. The Chairman of the Committee on Co-operative 
Wholesale Society has actively fought Harrison Parker's spurious society. 
"Agents of the C . S. 0. A . have been arrested in many states for violating the Blue 
Sky Laws. The Society has been barred 
from selling its securities in Michigan, Wisconsin, Illinois, and other states. The Michigan Securities Commission, which passed 
upon an application of the Michigan branch 
of the C . S. 0. A . to endorse their securities, refused to permit them to do business 
in that state, and characterized their scheme 
of operation as a 'fraud on the public ' 
"TH E CRISIS is to be commended for 
printing the editorial in question. In our 
opinion, it would be well to publish at this 
time an emphatic warning to the Negroes 
of the Harlem district. A drive is being 
conducted to sell as many 'certificates' as 
possible to the Negro population of Harlem, 
and as a result, many people will undoubtedly tie up their money in dubious securities, unless publications such as yours take 
vigorous action. We would appreciate any 
publicity you could give to the facts in this 
matter." 
SIKI 
We have a feeling, a sort of 
dim premonition, that boxing is going to become immora l again. Yo u know 
that before the wa r it fell from its 
high estate because Jack Johnson did 
not have the grace to be whipped by 
Ji m Jeffries. Eve n the late Lor d 
Northcliffe, that delicious impersonation of the Anglo-Saxon bounder, 
who had made world-wide arrangements to picture the victory of the 
white man i n his Daily Mirror all 
over the earth, rose to heights of selfabnegation when Johnson won. He 
said, said he, wit h ponderous seriousness, " I do not think it is wise to 
glorify the victory of a Negro over a 
white man, and, besides, the pictures 
themselves are likely to prove offensive to our decent women readers." 
An d now we have Mr . Jack Dempsey 
carefully avoiding the fists of Harr y 
Wills and on top of this comes Sik i 
and Carpentier! This is too much. We 
are expecting the Christian Endeavor 
to mobilize its forces as it did i n 1910. 
TH E ELAINE PEONS 
TWELV E black men were unjustly sentenced to death for 
alleged "rioting " at Elaine , 
Arkansas, in October, 1919. 
A t a total cost of over $40,000, of 
which the N . A . A . C. P . has raised 
and expended to date, $12,795 and 
local colored folk over $30,000, the 
cases have been brought to the followin g status: 
None of the twelve has been 
hanged, but they are still i n jai l under 
sentence of death. 
Six of these men have been tried, 
their cases appealed and death sentence affirmed by the Supreme Court 
of Arkansas. These cases have been 
carried to the Supreme Court of the 
United States on a wri t of certiorari. 
They wil l probably come up for tria l 
i n January, 1923. 
The other six men have twice been 
sentenced to death, their convictions 
twice reversed by the Arkansa s Supreme Court and a new tria l ordered. 
A change of venue to Lee County has 
been secured and the cases wil l probably be retried in October. If the 
Prosecuting Attorney does not bring up the cases then, they wil l lapse, because untried for two years, and the 
men wil l go free. 
Attorneys' fees of $10,000 are still 
due. Of this sum $7,000 has been 
raised i n Arkansa s and the N . A . A . 
C. P . has promised $2,250. Wil l the 
reader help by sending a contribution 
of any amount to J. E . Spingarn, 70 
Fift h Avenue, New Yor k City ? 
K. K. K. 
Sept. 15, 1922. 
P LEAS E enter subscription to 
your magazine TH E CRISI S 
for one year, mailing same 
to address given below. Post 
Office Money Order for $1.50 enclosed. Yours truly, 
J. J. Murphy, 
Kleagle, Knights of the Ku Klux 
Klan, P. O. Box 612, Birmingham, 
Ala. 
We have received few subscriptions wit h more pleasure than this. 
We have perhaps neglected our offer 
to comment upon the K . K . K . because it has always seemed to us so 
ridiculous an organization. Bu t now 
that we may speak to them, as it 
were, face to face, we would like to 
say plain words from time to time. 
First, the Kla n is ridiculous; it is 
Mumbo Jumbo, child's play, silly parading,: calculated to attract idiots 
and criminals. Secondly, it is cowardly ; it hides and masks and sneaks 
by night; it does not dare to stand 
out i n the open; it is afraid and 
ashamed of itself; and there seems 
to be no connection between what it 
does and what it says, between what 
it professes and what it supports. 
Thirdly, it is powerful. Its very appeal and methods give it power in 
that part of the land where ignorance 
is most deep seated. It has triumphed i n elections, sweeping Texas, 
electing a governor i n Georgia, showing its fangs elsewhere ; but notwithstanding all this, it is, for the better 
South, the most hopeful mob i n years. 
It is going to drive the "best friends 
of the Negro" , the pussyfooters and 
compromisers, the sincere well-wishers, out into the open. Fo r 50 years 
the South has tried to build up a civilization on lawlessness and "nigger " 
hating, and at the same time it has 
tried by excuses and smooth words 
to hide its deeds from its own better 
self, and from the outer world. Today the K u Klu x Kla n comes as an 
open, clear avowal that the Worse 
South proposes to set up a government ruled by secret midnight marauders whose object is to murder, in ­
sult and disfranchise Negroes, Jews, 
Catholics and anybody else whom any 
clansman hates or fears. Against 
this organization, sooner or later, the 
decent white South must take a stand. 
It must take it not simply i n words 
wit h "ifs " and "ands" but wit h 
straight-out, manly determination 
backed, by word and deed, publicly to 
unmask the cowards, to stop lynching, lawlessness and mobs, and to defend the rights of America n citizens. 
THANKS 
Au x Cayes, 
Rep. D'Haiti , 
27th Aug. , 1922. 
SIR, I beg to acknowledge the 
receipt of your esteemed favor dated August 10, 1922, 
bearing checks for $19.50 . . . 
I thank you very much, sir, but I 
wil l never be able to be grateful 
enough for the splendid help TH E 
CRISI S has given me. I have received 
$10 otherwise from unknown people 
who have read my letter i n TH E CRI ­
SIS and there is another who has 
written makin g inquiries . . . 
A long life to TH E CRISI S and the 
recognition of all of its great and 
splendid works, wil l be my prayer 
ever. Yours obediently, 
JOH N FRANCIQUE . ALPH A HOSPITAL, COLUMBUS , OHIO 
EAST LON G STREE T 
NIMEO D B . ALLE N 
L
ENO X AVENU E is in New York ; in 
Chicago is State Street; Louisville has 
its Walnut Avenue; Cleveland its Central 
Avenue and Columbus its East Long Street. 
Columbus estimates its population at 250,-
000, of whom 25,000 are Negroes. Columbus composes the greater portion of Franklin County and has the unique distinction 
of having been created to be the capital of 
Ohio. Neither Zanesville nor Chillicothe, 
where the legislature has sat, was suitable. 
Thus Columbus was settled by no special 
group of immigrants but by statesmen and 
politicians of the state. 
On coming to Columbus one is impressed 
by the many state institutions within its 
borders. We find there hospitals for feebleminded and for imbeciles, the Ohio State 
Penitentiary, and institutions for the blind 
and deaf. The Ohio State University and 
the capital with its various departments are 
located in Columbus. This has had its effect upon the constituent part of our population, especially upon the Negro. 
Until quite recently the Negro population 
of Columbus was considered the most backward of that of the four largest cities in 
the state. Mr. Quillin (white), i n his "Color Line in Ohio," published i n 1913, states: 
"Columbus, the capital of Ohio, has a feeling toward the Negroes all its own. In all 
my travels in the state, I found nothing just 
like it. It is not so much a rabid feeling of 
prejudice against the Negroes simply because their skin is black as it is a bitter 
hatred for them because they are what they 
are, character and habits. The Negroes are 
almost completely outside the pale of the 
white people's sympathy in this city, but 
the latter justify themselves and in fact 
many of the better class of Negroes agree 
with them, on the ground that so many of 
the Negroes are proving themselves by their 
attitude and conduct unworthy of the respect of decent people. This condition of 
affairs has been growing by leaps and bounds 
during the last five or ten years. Most of 
the colored people say that it is only since 
the coming of a large number of disreputable southern Negroes that affairs have 
grown worse. The white people seem to 
think that the late comers are prone to assert 'their rights' a little too freely. What 
ever the cause may be, this much is evi12 dent—the feeling against the Negroes is 
bitter in the extreme." 
Prior to the migration Negroes were engaged principally in domestic and personal 
service while a few held political jobs handed out by the politicians for service rendered. 
The Negro center of Columbus has always 
been Long Street. It is reputed that 30 
years ago the Negroes owned practically 
all the property between 3rd and High 
streets, including the land where one of the 
largest banks now stands. They did not 
live farther east than 4th Street. During 
that time there were separate schools in 
Columbus and on the corner of Long and 
3rd Streets was the Loving Hig h School and 
just west was the elementary school. Negroes 
conducted restaurants, barber shops and 
saloons, of which there were nine within 
four blocks. On the north side of the street 
between 3rd and High Streets was the St. 
Paul A . M . E . Church, yet standing. The 
Second Baptist Church was located just one 
block away from St. Paul's Church, on Gay 
Street. From Hig h to 3rd on Long Street 
was always a seething mass of Negroes who 
lived in hovels and alleys along Gay, 4th and 
3rd Streets. There were not 75 Negro families in the city of Columbus living outside 
of this section in those days. 
If you were to imagine in your mind's 
eye a river coursing its way straight to the 
sea, being fed by tributaries from its northern boundaries that were directly opposite those of the southern boundaries, you 
would have an idea of East Long Street 
from the point of view of Negroes 
and white people. East Long Street is the 
river that is fed by all of the cross-section 
streets, from Long Street to Mt. Vernon 
Avenue, by Negroes, and the social, political 
and business life of this section is largely 
influenced by what happens on Long Street, 
which receives its white people from the 
southern tributaries. 
In 1904 the officers of St. Paul A . M . E . 
Church purchased a site on East Long 
Street, near Jefferson Avenue, upon which 
the church now stands. It was the moving 
of this congregation and the erection of an 
Odd Fellows' Hall by Negroes some time 
previous, on the corner of Garfield Avenue 
and Long Street, together with the increased 
value of property on Long Street, near High, 
that caused the exodus of Negroes farther 
east on Long. In this vicinity, there are 
today 10 Negro physicians, 6 dentists, 10 
churches, 2 drug stores, 2 undertakers, and 
over one hundred Negro owners of homes. 
These are scattered all the way from Ninth 
Street to Taylor Avenue, and it is 'predicted 
that Long Street from Jefferson to Woodlin Avenues will be owned in the not distant 
future by Negroes. 
The white people receding from Long 
Street refuse to rent to Negroes but will 
sell; consequently the homes are being purchased and not rented. Be it remembered 
that high prices are paid for the homes and 
the desire of the white people, with means, 
to live in the fashionable, suburban sections, causes sales of homes to Negroes over 
the protest of their white neighbors who 
object to living next to Negroes. 
The Long Street Improvement Association, composed of white business men on 
Long Street, interests itself in the development of Long Street property and in the 
meantime uses its influence to keep colored 
people from purchasing property on this 
street. This organization recently submitted a proposal to the City Council, that 
the name of East Long Street be changed 
from East Long Street to Commerce Street, 
from High to Jefferson; be it'remembered 
also that Jefferson Avenue is where the 
Negro business enterprises'of East Long 
Street begin. The more enthusiastic supporters of East Long Street have asked that 
this section of East Long Street be named 
Golden Lane. The proposals are yet before 
the City Council. They are meeting the 
opposition of Negro business and professional men of East Long Street. 
There are some unique features on East 
Long Street that should be mentioned. The 
Williams Building, a photograph of which 
is here published, is owned exclusively by a 
young Negro who came to Columbus from 
Virgini a ten years ago. This is an office 
building in which is located the Supreme 
Life & Casualty Insurance Company, the 
National Benefit Lif e Insurance Company, 
the Fireside Mutua l Ai d Association, the 
Columbus Industrial Mortgage & Security 
Company, the American Woodmen, the Columbus Urban League, the Williams' Real 
Estate & Rentals, two physicians, one dentist, a modiste, two real estate concerns and 
one attorney. This building is located on 
the corner of Long Street and Lexington 
Avenue, and is one of the most outstanding buildings east of High Street. Just east 
of this building on the opposite side of the 
street is located the Empress Theatre and 
office building, owned by Messrs. J. E . Williams* and Albert Jackson, and erected at a 
cost of $50,000. The theatre has a pipe organ that cost $10,000, and no motion picture house in the city is better equipped nor 
runs finer pictures than does the Empress. 
On the corner of Long and 17th Streets 
is the Alpha Hospital. This was erected by 
Drs. W. A . Method and R. M . Tribbitt.at 
a cost of $23,000 as a private institution, 
but later developments proved that there 
was a larger opportunity for service by 
making Alph a Hospital a social agency; so 
the Alpha Hospital Association was formed 
recently with Dr. W. A . Method as Chief 
of Staff. The Alpha Hospital Association 
conducts a nurses' training school which is 
the only place in the city where any girl 
of good moral character and education may 
complete a course in nurses' training. 
On the corner of Garfield Avenue and 
Long Street is the Colored Odd Fellows' 
Hall Building, which has three floors and a 
business annex. The entire building is 
easily worth $50,000. This is one of the 
first buildings owned by Negroes to be erected on East Long Street. There are nearly 
one hundred business enterprises on East 
Long Street and vicinity, embracing haberdasheries, photographers, optometrists, 
music shops, music studios, beauty parlors, 
printing establishments, corporations, tail : 
ors, etc. These enterprises are without the 
ear mark common to many Negro undertakings. 
This progress is not without its problems. 
To the south of Long Street are found some 
of the wealthiest and most influential white 
citizens. To the north of Long Street, toward Mt. Vernon Avenue, and on Lexington Avenue toward Taylor Avenue, going 
east, are to be found fully 75 'percent of 
Columbus' Negro population. Both the 
whites and black people use principally the 
Long Street car and occasionally there has 
been race friction on this car which if sober 
judgment had not come into play might 
have caused serious embarrassments to the 
city. This race tension is being relieved 
by automobile busses that are operated on 
a parallel street and are patronized by a 
large 'proportion of white people who live 
*Mr. Williams has died, since the writing of this 
article. 
east. The busses do not discriminate against 
Negroes. 
Another problem on East Long Street is 
the proposed erection of the Centenary M. 
E . Church for Negroes on the corner of 
18th and Long Streets, which is within a 
stone's throw of the Welch Presbyterian 
Church (white), dedicated less than six 
months ago. The erection of the Welch 
Presbyterian Church cost, we understand, 
about $90,000. There are being put forth 
strong efforts by the white people interested 
to prevent the erection of this church for 
Negroes. The change of pastors of the congregation at a recent conference of the 
M . E . Church has been interpreted by some 
as an indication that the Negro Centenary 
Church will not be erected on this site. On 
19th and Long Streets the Negro Masons 
have purchased a site upon which to erect 
a temple. . 
Franklin Park, the most beautiful and 
spacious park in Columbus and one of the 
best in the state, is located at the end of 
the Long Street car line, just one square 
south of Long Street. It is bounded on four 
sides by select white citizens of Columbus. 
This park has become the rendezvous for 
Negro youths. It is used during the week 
days mostly by white people but on Sundays mostly by Negroes. Some few months 
ago an effort was made to have the city 
purchase another park which would be located about three squares north of Long 
Street. This proposition was opposed by 
Negro leaders. They feared that the purpose was to induce Negroes from Franklin 
Park to this smaller, and less attractive 
park. 
The Champion Avenue School, the only 
school exclusively for Negroes i n Columbus, 
is one square and a half from East Long 
Street. Being in a Negro district it is theoretically not a Negro school but is officered 
entirely by Negro teachers, with the exception of a manual training teacher, and all 
of the pupils are Negroes. An y white child 
who lives in that section may attend another 
school if he wishes. This school has a Junior High School Department. A n additional building to be used by this Junior 
High is being bitterly opposed by groups of 
Negroes. 
Columbus' Negro citizens have made very 
noticeable and rapid progress within the 
last few years. The citizens credit this 
progress to the influx of Southern Negroes ST. PAU L A . M . E . CHURC H STOCKHOLDERS , SUPREM E LIF E & CASUALT Y COMPAN Y 
WILLIAMSON BUILDING 
EMPRES S THEATR E AN D OFFIC E BUILDING ODD FELLOWS ' BUILDING who refused to live in alleys and who were 
used to being in business for themselves 
and to the getting together of the Negro citizens to "put over" the campaign for the 
erection of the Spring Street Y. M . C. A . 
The campaign for the Y. M . C. A . was started in 1916; the building was erected in 1918. 
This Y. M . C. A . has a unique feature— 
the Business and Professional Men's Club 
which meets every Tuesday noon and is to 
the Negro business men of Columbus what 
the Rotary, The Kiwanis and such clubs 
are to the white people. It is addressed by 
men of affairs in and out of Columbus and 
from this has co.Te the inspiration acknowledged through testimony.- which has caused 
the great changes that have taken place in 
Columbus. The Y. M . C. A . has mcjs^ ? 
a standard program—educational, social; 
religious, physical, with a boys' department. 
From the Business Men's Club come directly the1
 Columbus Industrial Mortgage 
& Security Company, the Adelphi Loan & 
Savings Company, and the Favorite Shop. 
The Credential Mortgage Company is composed of men of the Business Men's Club of 
the Spring Street Y. M . C. A . and has its 
regular meetings there. Practically all the 
stock of the Supreme Lif e & Casualty Company that was sold in Columbus went 
through men of this club. 
There is this danger on East Long Street. 
The block between Hamilton and Garfield 
Avenues, where the greatest number of Negro business enterprises are located, has become the rendezvous for "hangers-out" both 
night and day. The passersby are forced at 
times to walk off the sidewalk by the group 
of Negroes who apparently have no place 
to go. They are purchasing nothing, and 
spend their time loitering, gazing and passing remarks concerning pedestrians. This 
is done to such an extent that some of the 
most thoughtful citizens are wondering if 
it might not cause serious trouble in the future. This and other racial problems in 
Columbus are being studied by the Race Relations Committee of the Columbus Urban 
League of which Dr. W. J. Woodlin, one of 
the physicians who practices on East Long 
Street, is . s prime mover. This committee, througha process of education, hr~cc~io 
better the race relations in Columbus. 
The receding families of white people on 
East Long Street are being fast replaced 
by 'progressive Negro citizens and it is no 
wild fancy to predict that the next generation will find a score or more of Negroes of 
real wealth from business accumulations on 
East Long Street; even now we. have those 
who count their monthly incomes i n the 
thousands. 
LEROY BUNDY 
W. E . B. Du Bois 
A T the "court" ceremony held by Marcus 
Garvey in Harlem, August 10, among 
those who kneeled to the "Hig h Potentate" 
and received the accolade was Dr. Bundy, of 
East St. Louis fame, who rose to his feet 
as "Sir " Leroy Bundy, "Knight Commander 
of the Distinguished Service Order of Ethiopia." On August 25, "Sir " Leroy was 
elected "First Assistant" of Marcus Garvey 
by a vote of approximately 104 to 76 for his 
opponent, these being all the voting delegates present out of "150,000" advertised to 
ati^ id Mr. Garvey's convention. The Negro 
Wo.Id immediately celebrated Bundy's accession to high place among the Garveyites 
by this editorial squib: 
"The Editor of TH E CRISIS and other representatives of the N . A . A . C. P. have frequently asked about the balance sheet of the 
U . N . I. A. , but we would like to make inquiry about the balance sheet of the N . A . 
A . C . P. In the Fal l of 1917 and winter 
of 1918 the N A . A . C . P. collected $50,000 
to defend Dr. Leroy Bundy of East St. 
Louis riot fame. One hundred and fifty 
dollars was spent of this $50,000, and the 
balance sheet has never been published to 
show what was done with the remaining 
$48,500. Where did this money go?" 
From the beginning the N . A . A . C . P. 
and TH E CRISIS have determined to fritter 
away as little time and space as possible in 
personal controversy or in internal bickering. For that reason we hesitated nearly 
two years in commenting on the Garvey 
movement even when we were being subjected to insult and innuendo uncalled for an d unmerited . So too, despite the fac t tha t 
fo r nearl y fou r years we have been accused 
publicl y b y Dr . Bundy , first of unjust treatmen t an d neglect i n his case an d now of 
theft, we have onl y replie d briefly to the 
first charg e i n the Septembe r CRISIS, 1918. 
W e have , of course, published a n accountin g 
of al l funds pu t i n ou r hands fo r al l purposes i n our annua l reports. W e have kept 
silent concernin g Dr . Bund y simpl y because 
we di d not wis h to publis h the whol e un ­
savor y truth . Evidentl y the time has now 
come to speak plainly . 
WH O does not remembe r the Second of 
July , 1917? O n tha t re d da y i n East 
St. Louis, Illinois, a mob destroyed $400,000 
wort h of property , drove out 6,000 Negr o 
laborers an d murdere d between one an d two 
hundre d Negroes. Ou r hearts wer e sick 
withi n us. Th e N . A . A . C . P . immediatel y 
took its usua l steps: First, to ascertai n the 
truth ; second, to lear n wha t could be done 
to relieve an d punish . 
Thre e traine d investigators, two whit e an d 
one colored, iwera rushe d to the cit y before 
the embers wer e cold an d the corpses removed. A n investigatio n wa s organized , so 
thoroug h an d so careful, tha t it wa s used b y 
loca l courts an d the Congress of the Unite d 
States as one of the mai n bases of fact. It 
wa s publishe d i n part i n TH E CRISI S fo r 
September, 1917. 
Meantime the St. Louis branc h of the 
N . A . A . C. P. , togethe r wit h variou s 
churche s an d loca l organization s undertook 
relie f an d lega l defense. Mone y wa s raise d 
an d expended an d emergency wor k done. 
Th e St. Louis branch , whic h is a careful, 
business-like organization , arrange d to have 
al l funds carefull y accounted for. This 
caused some loca l frictio n at first wit h some 
who though t the N . A . A . C . P . too meticu ­
lous, bu t this graduall y disappeared an d al l 
worked together. 
A s soon as i t wa s apparen t tha t i n the 
lega l proceedings the Negr o wa s to be made 
the "goat, " an d a dozen Negroe s wer e convicted as "rioters, " Jame s Weldo n Johnson, 
then Fiel d Secretary , wire d the St. Louis 
branch : "Th e nationa l office wil l bac k the 
St. Louis branc h to the limi t i n the fight fo r 
the me n yo u believe to be innocent. Send to 
this office at you r earliest convenience opinio n of counsel as to grounds fo r appeal. " 
Meantime the case of Dr . Lero y Bund y 
leaped to the fore. Her e w e understood wa s 
a successful professiona l man , a leade r of 
his loca l grou p i n East St. Louis, who, whe n 
rio t wa s threatened, advised the colored peopl e to ar m themselves an d tha t because of 
this he wa s arrested, throw n into jai l an d 
accused of murde r an d incitin g to riot. This 
seemed to us a n idea l case. W e wer e determine d to leave no stone unturne d to secur e vindicatio n fo r Dr . Bund y and , wit h 
this, the grea t an d sacred righ t of selfdefense fo r America n Negroe s i n the face 
of mobs. W e determined to appea l to the 
colored people throughou t the Unit? d States 
fo r a Bund y defense fund ; bu t withou t waitin g fo r this, we used our anti-lynchin g fun d 
an d the genera l fun d of the organizatio n to 
prepar e fo r Dr . Bundy's defense. 
I n a case of this sort, much , i f not everything , depends upo n the standin g an d repu ­
tatio n of the lawyers whic h the defense can 
secure. It is fata l to go int o court wit h 
obscure, inexperienced, o r unlearne d counsel. 
Th e success of the N . A . A . C. P . hitherto 
i n the courts has been their abilit y to secur e as counsel, me n who m mon? y could not 
bu y an d whose fees fo r ordinar y wor k woul d 
be beyond anythin g tha t w a could raise . 
Thu s the prestige of Moorfiel d Storey, who 
charge d us nothing , helpe d wi n the segregatio n case. An d thus i n the Bund y case we 
wer e able to secure Charle s Nagel , forme r 
Secretar y of Commerc e an d Labo r i n the 
Cabine t of Presiden t Taf t an d one of the 
most distinguishe d lawyers i n the Stat e of 
Missouri . Mr . Nage l gave his services free. 
Late r we wer e able to have the services of 
Edwar d O. Brown , Justic e of the Appellat e 
Court of the First Distric t of Illinois, an d a 
widel y know n lawyer. Judg e Brow n charge d 
no fee. I n additio n to this we hire d the 
services of Web b & Zerwic k an d Thoma s N . 
Webb , well-know n crimina l lawyers of St. 
Louis, an d wit h these wer e associated Mr . 
Phillips, a colored attorney. Thus, as Mr . 
Charle s Nage l wrot e us afterward , "Ever y 
reasonable provisio n ha d been made fo r the 
prope r defense of Dr . Bundy. " 
Whil e we wer e raisin g money an d securin g counsel, ther e came ou r first an d most 
heart-breakin g trouble . Bund y wa s i n jail . 
Properl y defended an d wit h a change of 
venue fo r his trial , he ha d a good chance 
of bein g cleared. Bu t he wa s worrie d an d 
frightened . H e wa s led to believe tha t politica l influence wa s mor e importan t tha n 
lega l defense. H e feared tha t the Demo ­
crati c administratio n of East St. Louis, wit h whic h he ha d been identified, wa s goin g to 
betra y hi m an d tha t his onl y chance la y i n 
makin g a bargai n of some sort wit h the 
Republica n Attorney-Genera l who wa s prosecutin g him . 
This ma y have been true but surel y Bun -
dy's first dut y as a n honest ma n wa s to take 
up this matte r wit h his counsel an d wit h 
the N . A . A . C. P . H e says tha t he di d discuss it wit h his colored attorney, Home r G. 
Phillips. This ma y be true , bu t i t is certainl y tru e tha t no officer of the N . A . A . 
C. P. , an d neithe r Mr . Nage l no r Web b an l 
Zerwic k no r Thoma s N . Web b dreamed of 
an y suc h move b y Bundy , unti l suddenly they 
wer e faced wit h the report tha t Bund y ha d 
"confessed" to the States Attorney ! A 
meetin g wa s hurriedl y called i n Mr . Nagel's 
office to lear n wha t statements Bund y ha d 
made. 
To understan d the enormit y of Bundy's 
deed, we must remembe r wha t East St. 
Louis was. It wa s a center of manufacturin g 
an d bi g business wher e the lif e of the town 
wa s give n over to politician s of the most 
corrup t sort. It wa s a "wide-open " town , 
wit h liquor, gambling , prostitution , and 
crime of al l sorts. Girls wer e ruined , boy , 
wer e drunk , murde r wa s common, gambli n •; 
wa s open. Ther e ar e few centers i n the 
Unite d States tha t ha d a wors e reputat :o n 
tha n East St. Louis. Indeed it wa s al l this 
filth an d lawlessness tha t made the rio t 
possible because wit h an y kin d of a cit y governmen t the mob could have been quelled 
i n a few hours. Who , now, wa s responsibl e 
fo r this condition? It was the same old 
story : a grou p of politician s of the lowest 
sort held the cit y i n a vise b y the simpl e 
metho d of buyin g votes, colonizin g illega l 
voters an d then collecting graft from saloons, gamblers and prostitute s to pa y fo r 
al l this and make themselves rich . So lon g 
as they di d not molest or ta x the factorie s 
an d "bi g business, " they wer e supreme and 
the decent elements i n the cit y wer e helpless an d almost voiceless. 
Leroy Bundy in the face of these disgraceful facts, and without consulting his benefactors or main counsel, called in the Attorney-General and confessed that he was one 
of the tools and go-betweens who herded 
and bought Negro votes by the wholesale to 
keep the East St. Louis political scoundrels 
in power. 
I gran t Bund y every legitimat e excuse : 
he wa s i n jail . H e was scared blue. H e 
wa s afrai d his politica l cronies ha d betrayed 
him. H e wa s told b y some friend s tha t his 
only chance of escape wa s to "double-cross " 
the Democrati c "gang " and mak e a bargai n 
wit h the Republica n Attorne y General . I 
gran t al l this. Bu t I maintai n tha t even i f 
ever y wor d of this ha d been true, the least 
tha t anybod y wit h a spar k of manhood or 
decency could do wa s to tell the N . A . A . C. 
P. , Mr . Nage l an d his attorneys, Web b & 
Zerwick , an d Thoma s Webb , wha t he proposed to do. Bund y di d nothin g of the kind . 
H e called i n the Republica n Attorney-Gen ­
era l of the Stat e of Illinois an d confessed to 
hi m tha t he wa s one of the tools an d gobetweens of the corrup t Democrati c admin ­
istratio n i n East St. Louis. H e di d this 
withou t the knowledge of his leadin g attorney, Charle s Nagel , and afterwar d whe n it 
came to Mr . Nagel's ears i t wa s publishe d 
against Mr . Nagel's advice . H e di d i t with ­
out the knowledge of Web b & Zerwic k and 
withou t the knowledge o f Mr . Thoma s Webb . 
H e di d it solely upon his ow n initiativ e an d 
possibly wit h the advic e of Mr . Phillips. It 
wa s an outrageous action an d i t pu t his attorneys an d especially the Nationa l Asso ­
ciation fo r the Advancemen t of Colore d People i n a most difficult position. 
One can see this by notin g the comment of 
the newspapers. Th e St. Louis Post Dispatch said Novembe r 25, 1917, "Bundy tells 
of vast vote frauds in East St. Louis." 
"The affidavit containing more than 9,000 
ivords tells of alleged ivholesale frauds." 
"Bundy admitted that he supported those 
who practiced this scheme." "Bundy was a 
leader in a Negro political organization 
which supported this faction." 
Th e St. Louis Globe Democrat, Novembe r 
27, says i n a n editorial : 
"Ther e is seemingly no end to the political corruptio n openly practiced i n East St. 
Louis. Attorney-Genera l Brundag e is i n possession of the detailed confession of politica l 
offenses made by a Negr o leader charged 
wit h participatio n i n the murde r o f cit y 
officials whic h furnishe d part of the provocation fo r the race massacr e i n July . This 
confession deals wit h wholesal e vote-buyin g 
i n thre e elections practice d directl y and 
throug h the easy device of "hirin g workers. " 
Ther e is verisimilitud e to the 
story but the reputatio n of the witness and 
the characte r of the testimony itself require d corroborative evidence whic h is said 
to be available. " 
Th e East St. Louis Star, Novembe r 25, 
says: "Bundy's confession is being investigated by the Federal District Attorney." Th e Chicag o Herald, Novembe r 26, said : 
"Bundy said $300 wa s paid to him by a 
campaign manager in the last municipal 
election for the expense of handling the 
Negro vote." Th e Chicag o Daily News, No ­
vembe r 26, says: "Bundy's confession startled Illinois." 
Imagin e ou r situation . W e wer e makin g 
a hero of Bundy . W e wer e holdin g hi m up 
a s a brav e an d persecuted man , wh o i n the 
midst of crime an d lawlessness, ha d told 
the people to ar m i n self-defense. I n the 
midst of al l this Mr . Bund y comes out an d 
confesses tha t he is han d an d glove wit h 
the me n an d is part o f the system whic h 
made East St. Louis a cit y of corruptio n 
an d made it possible fo r suc h a horribl e rio t 
to go on withou t interferenc e b y the au ­
thorities. 
W e went into lon g an d carefu l conferences. Wha t wer e we to do? Mr . Nage l 
voiced ou r fina l decision. Bundy's confession "wa s quite sufficient to justify , i f not 
to necessitate, m y withdrawa l fro m furthe r 
activit y i n the case; bu t whe n a man's lif e 
an d libert y ar e a t stake, a good man y concessions must be made, an d I wa s at pains 
to mak e sure tha t Dr . Bund y woul d at least 
be competently represented, as you r Associa ­
tio n ha d directed. " 
Ou r fina l positio n wa s then tha t whil e 
Bund y wa s not the ma n who m we could 
have muc h to do with , yet tha t technicall y 
so fa r as the actua l charge s of incitin g to 
rio t wer e concerned he wa s withou t doubt 
innocent. It wa s ou r duty , therefore, to 
continue his defense an d this we did . Be ­
tween July , 1917 an d May , 1918, the na ­
tiona l office of the N . A . A . C. P . received 
fo r "East St. Louis relie f an d lega l defense" 
$1,726.19. Th e money wa s expended as 
follows: 
Traveling and investigating expenses $873.60 
Printing of East St. Louis pamphlets 497.04 
News cuts of riot 19.50 
Miscellaneous 7.11 
Remitted to St. Louis Branch: 
For general relief and legal defense 381.18 
For Dr. Bundy 570.82 
Total $2,349.25 
Th e deficit o f $623.06 wa s take n from our 
Anti-Lynchin g an d Mo b Violenc e Fun d 
raise d before the East St. Louis riots. 
Th e St. Louis branc h of the N.A.A.C.P . 
expended i n al l $4,312.95 fo r relie f an d lega l 
defense i n connection wit h the East St. 
Louis riot. This mone y wa s received from 
the nationa l office of the N.A.A.C.P . and 
fro m fraterna l orders, churches, N.A.A.C.P . 
branches, women's clubs, arm y posts an d in ­
dividuals. O f this amoun t $1,632 wa s speciall y designated fo r the lega l defense of 
Dr . Bund y an d wa s received fro m the followin g sources: 
Lodges $10.00 
Churches 84.28 
Individuals: 
Rev. Charles Bundy 355.00 
Thomas Crawford and wife 101.00 
Subscription lists: 
Earle Williams 35.00 
Benjamin Lucas 122.25 
Chicago "Defender" 353.65 
National Office, N. A. A. C. P 570.82 
Total $1,632.00 
Th e disbursements wer e as follows: 
Nov. 7, 1917, Thos. M . Webb, attorney fee.... $500.00 
Nov. 20, 1917, filing of affidavits, H. G. Phillips 132.00 
Jan. 20, 1918, Thos. M . Webb, attorney fee... 250.00 
Mar. 18, 1918, Thos. M. Webb, attorney fee.... 250.00 
Mar. 18, 1918, Webb & Zerwick, attorney fee 500.00 
Total $1,632.00 
I n additio n to this Mr . Bundy , together 
wit h the othe r colored defendants charge d 
wit h rioting , benefited fro m the followin g 
additiona l expenditure s fro m fund s designated as "fo r genera l lega l defense" : 
Lawyers' fees : 
Mr. Phillips $804.35 
Webb & Zerwick 914.00 
$1,718.35 
Th e balanc e of the $4,312.95 received b y 
the East St. Louis branch , $962.60, wa s expended fo r genera l relief. 
Wit h the monies thus collected an d expended the lega l defense fun d admin ­
istered b y the nationa l office of the N . A . A . 
C. P . an d the St. Louis branc h secured a 
change o f venue fo r Dr . Bund y an d his release on bai l an d carrie d the cases of eleven 
other defendants to the Supreme Court of 
Illinois. 
W e had, however, littl e time fo r self-congratulation . Apri l 5, 1918, we received a 
lette r fro m the Chairma n of the Executiv e 
Committe e of ou r St. Louis branc h whic h 
said : 
"This St. Louis branch , N . A . A . C. P. , 
is of the dispositio n to terminat e its activities i n the defense of Dr . L . N . Bund y i n so 
fa r as such defense ma y be set up independent o f the defense of Bundy's co-defendants, now imprisone d and awaitin g decision 
on a n appeal. 
"Dr . Bund y is now at libert y on bond an d 
confidently asserts his ability , and desire, to 
personall y rais e al l require d funds an d do 
al l else tha t is necessary to assur e his best 
defense. H e is intoleran t of the fiscal pla n 
of this branch , whic h wa s devised to forestall money scandals; and, althoug h he requests this branc h to pa y a larg e volume of 
bills of his making , i t ha s not been possible to get hi m to conference wit h our executive 
committee. 
"Whil e we have no detailed informatio n 
of his contemplated adventures, we foresee 
the possibilit y of situations therewit h 
aboundin g tha t wil l embarrass an d discredit 
our organizatio n i f i t be associated wit h 
them. 
"W e do not believe the vast fun d tha t Dr . 
Bund y essays to rais e [$50,000] is a necessit y to his defense and , consequently, we regar d his proposed nation-coverin g tou r fo r 
funds a n impositio n o n a publi c tha t has 
been sympatheti c with , an d generous to, hi m 
an d as a junke t tha t wil l demoraliz e man y 
worth y Negr o causes i n the future . Indeed, 
we believe Dr . Bundy's defense is, i n the 
main , perfected fo r trial. " 
O n Jun e 1 the secretary of the St. Louis 
branc h wrote : 
"Sinc e our lette r of Apri l 5 we hel d a 
conference wit h Dr . Bund y an d friends on 
Apri l 11, 1918. H e stated tha t he desired 
tha t we support hi m an d wif e unti l his trial ; 
tha t we pa y bills tha t amoun t to two thou ­
san d dollars ($2,000.00) whic h he ha d in ­
curred , an d tha t he wante d to go out on a 
lectur e tou r to secure funds wit h the endorsement of the Association . W e could not 
accept the latte r plan . H e became ver y in ­
dignan t because we faile d to endorse his 
suggestions an d left the conference afte r 
accusin g the branc h of dishonest dealings 
wit h hi m an d negligence. 
"A t a subsequent meetin g o f ou r Execu ­
tiv e Committe e of this branc h the followin g 
motio n prevailed : 'Tha t we withdra w from 
the Bund y case an d tha t histor y of case 
wit h collections an d expenditure s be sent 
to the nationa l office so tha t the publi c ma y 
be informe d of the same.' " 
O n Apri l 11 Mr . Bund y telegraphed us to 
send a representative a t once to St. Louis 
because he wa s "grossl y misrepresented and 
to a larg e degree embarrasse d by the loca l 
branch. " I n the absence of the secretary, 
I immediatel y replie d tha t the Fiel d Secretar y woul d be i n St. Louis soon. I added 
these words: 
" I ma y say frankl y tha t I have been disappointed a t you r attitude an d the attitude 
of Mrs. Bundy . . . . 
"FIRST , withou t the consent of our attor-
'neys, yo u gave a newspape r interview whic h 
"practicall y convicted yo u of bribery . SEC ­
ONDLY , Mrs . Bund y has continuall y made 
appeals i n whic h she has asserted tha t nothin g wa s bein g done fo r yo u an d no funds 
bein g provided. This, o f course, wa s absolutel y false. THIRDLY, " i n the matte r of 
raisin g money, this Associatio n has take n 
the onl y honest an d defensible stand : Al l 
monies pass throug h its properl y constituted 
officers. The y ar e accounted fo r an d the 
books audited. If, now, yo u ar e goin g to 
collect funds it must be thoroughl y understood b y the publi c tha t we have absolutely 
no responsibilit y therefor, an d do not and 
wil l not guarante e their prope r expenditure . 
Furthermore , i f yo u ar e goin g to undertak e 
you r own defense, it is unnecessary tha t 
w a should tak e furthe r action i n you r behalf. I n tha t case it woul d be necessary 
fo r us to state to the publi c an d state plain ­
l y the reasons of the withdrawa l of this As ­
sociation fro m you r case. 
"Ou r representative s i n St. Louis are Mr . 
Charle s Nagel , one of our Nationa l Direc ­
tors, an d the officers of the loca l branc h o f 
our Associatio n headed b y Mr . Pitman . Wit h 
these, and these only, arrangements must 
be made an d they must be satisfied before 
this Associatio n wil l be willin g to continue 
its ai d i n you r defense." 
Mr . Bund y answered b y a series of telegrams demandin g "immediat e investigatio n 
of conditions here, " sayin g tha t he ha d 
"neve r been at varianc e wit h you r powerfu l organization. " O n Jun e 20 he wrot e us: 
"/ have never felt that the National Association was not in deep sympathy with me 
in my extremity. I am deeply grateful for 
all that has been done and consider that 
my trouble is entirely of a local nature 
and I feel if given an opportunity before 
impartial judges to present my case, I am 
sure that the said differences can be amicably adjusted." 
Th e Boar d finall y wrot e Mr . Bundy , Jun e 
28, 1918: "Th e Lega l Committe e of the 
Boar d of Directors wil l be prepare d to hea r 
wha t you desire to sa y i n regar d to you r 
relations wit h the St. Louis branc h an d the 
Associatio n on Friday , Jul y 5, at 2.30 P.M. , 
i n the office of the Chairma n of the Com ­
mittee, Mr . Charle s H . Studin , 55 Libert y 
Street, Ne w Yor k City. " 
Th e interview wa s a painfu l fiasco. Mr . 
Bundy , instead of makin g a frank , clea r 
statement of conditions an d his complaints, 
reasons and wishes, began b y demanding; 
counsel to represent him ; he denied tha t he 
ha d come to present his case, but insisted 
tha t he wa s ther e to hea r "charges" . H e 
refused an y informatio n concernin g the 
money he ha d collected fo r his defense, or 
even concernin g the items i n the $2,000 
wort h of bills presented to the St. Louis 
branch . This colloquy followed : 
Dr . Bundy : Th e thin g tha t I came to 
Ne w Yor k fo r is to find out wha t the Asso ­
ciatio n intended to do fo r me. 
Mr . Studin : Tha t is precisel y wha t we 
ar e tryin g to get at. W e cannot exert ourselves i n you r defense i f yo u are not goin g 
to be fran k wit h us. 
Dr . Bundy : Th e thin g I am goin g to do— 
an d onl y this—is whe n the y tell me wha t 
they have against me tha t caused them to break wit h me, I a m goin g to answe r them, 
an d unti l tha t time I have sai d al l I intend 
to say. 
Mr . Studin : I shoul d sa y this—tha t i f 
yo u have not tol d them wha t money has 
been spent fo r lawyers o n you r account, 
the y woul d have a justifiabl e grievanc e 
against you . 
Dr . Bundy : The y have it. 
Mr . Studin : I f yo u have tol d them, wh y 
not tell us fo r ou r benefit? 
Dr . Bundy : No t unti l m y attorneys are 
present. 
Mr . Studin : Hav e yo u been raisin g 
money i n you r own defense? 
Dr . Bundy : Ha w does tha t concern the 
Association ? 
Mr . Studin : Di d yo u understan d tha t an y 
money whic h wa s raise d b y yo u fo r the purpose of defense shoul d be accounted fo r by 
yo u to the N . A . A . C. P. ? 
Dr . Bundy : I di d not. I don't intend t} 
answe r an y mor e questions unti l m y attorneys ar e here. Unless I ca n have a n 
understandin g this tri p u p here has heen 
throw n away . 
Mr . Studin : Ho w have yo u live d since 
Marc h to the present time ? 
Dr . Bundy : Ver y nicely . 
Mr . Studin : Wha t is you r source of in ­
come? 
Dr . Bundy : I n an y wa y I could get it. 
Mr . Studin : Hav e yo u worked ? 
Dr . Bundy : I don't thin k tha t concerns 
you . 
Mr . Studin : Hav e yo u incurre d an y bills 
tha t yo u thin k the Nationa l Associatio n is 
responsible for ? 
Dr . Bundy : Yes. 
Mr . Studin : Wha t bills ? 
Dr . Bundy : Al l bills. 
Mr . Studin : Wil l yo u name them? 
Dr . Bundy : No . 
Mr . Studin : Ho w muc h do they amount 
to? 
Dr . Bundy : I don't recall. 
Mr . Studin : I n roun d numbers. 
Dr . Bundy : I don't know. 
Mr . Studin : Wha t wer e they for ? 
Dr . Bundy : I a m throug h wit h this conversation . 
Mr . Studin : Wa s i t you r ide a tha t yo u 
should go out an d rais e money to pa y you r 
persona l livin g expenses? 
Dr . Bundy : Yes. 
Mr . Studin : Tha t is you r present idea? 
Dr . Bundy : Yes, tha t is m y ide a now. 
Ther e was, of course, bu t one conclusion 
fo r the N . A . A . C. P . afte r this interview 
an d the Septembe r CRISIS, 1918 , contained 
this announcement. 
"Th e Nationa l Associatio n fo r the Ad ­
vancement of Colore d Peopl e is no longe r 
connected i n an y wa y wit h the furthe r defense of Dr . Lero y N . Bundy , of East St. 
Louis, wit h whos e defense against the 
charg e of complicit y i n the East St. Louis 
riots o f July , 1917 , the Associatio n has heretofore heen associated. " 
A t the same time the N . A . A . C. P . has 
u p to the present sedulously avoided an y 
statement o r publi c controvers y such as 
migh t prejudic e Bundy's case i n court. Sinc e 
Mr . Bundyno w feels safe an d is gratuitousl y attackin g us, we publis h the facts. 
NEGRO INSURANCE 
PHI L H . BROW N 
(Commissione r of Conciliation , U . S. Departmen t of Labor.) 
MEETIN G a growin g reluctanc e on the 
part of certai n old established insurance companie s and the refusa l of others 
i n the matte r of acceptin g colored people 
as risks, twenty-five companie s wit h a tota l 
capita l of $1,256,000 , have been started b y 
colored people fo r colored people i n this 
countr y durin g the last ten years. These 
figures ar e take n fro m a surve y just completed b y the U . S. Departmen t o f Labor. 
Th e insuranc e sold b y these companie s 
covers principally , life , health , accidents, 
and fou r home offices are i n Nort h Carolina , 
fou r i n Georgia , two i n Kentucky , two 
i n Pennsylvania , two i n Louisiana , tw o 
i n Florida , two i n Virgini a an d one 
each i n the Distric t of Columbia , Ar ­
kansas, Ohio , Illinois, Tennessee, Mary ­
lan d an d Sout h Carolina . Th e tota l value 
of the assets of these companie s is give n 
at $6,339,198.59 . Durin g the last fiscal 
yea r these organization s pai d claims of 
policy-holders and othe r beneficiaries a tota l 
of $3,072,189 . The y employed 6,54 5 colored 
persons, divide d thus: 52 7 clerica l employees, 3,96 8 field agents, 1,52 3 medica l 
examiners an d 52 7 miscellaneous employees, 
to who m wa s pai d a n average monthl y 
amoun t of $259,728.10 , eithe r i n salarie s or 
commissions. 
Whil e the majorit y of these organization s 
deal primaril y i n industria l insurance , thre e 
of the olde r ones have branched out into 
the old-line classification, takin g risk s on straigh t lif e wit h the usua l rul e and limita ­
tions practice d b y the whit e companies. 
Surplusag e has gone largel y int o rea l estate, 
flat purchase s an d first mortgages, whil e 
three of the organization s have fostered 
bankin g institutions, whic h they have caused 
TO be established i n severa l centers of Ne ­
gr o population , wher e the Stat e bankin g 
laws admi t of smal l capitalization . 
Th e success of these companie s an d their 
apparen t abilit y to operate upo n a n economica l basis suggests the development of 
this business upon purel y racia l line s unti l 
eventuall y the Negr o wil l writ e al l o f his 
ow n insurance , openin g a new an d fertil e 
field fo r employmen t of his own people an d 
a n earnin g opportunit y fo r his savings. 
A s the foregoin g figures indicate , the surface is merel y scratched, fo r whe n it is considered tha t one whit e compan y alone carries upwar d of 2,000,000 policy-holders 
amon g the colored people i n the industrial , 
endowment an d straight-lif e classifications, 
it wil l readil y be seen tha t the sequestering 
of this insuranc e to racia l companie s is yet 
a n infan t enterprise . However, i f the in ­
difference of the whit e companie s increases 
i t is presume d tha t the colored companie s 
wil l profit upon the compensatory basis of 
the ol d adage tha t "It is a n il l win d tha t 
blows nobody good. " 
Th e Governmen t surve y wa s mad e amon g 
regula r companies, whose capita l is supplie d 
b y colored people an d whic h ar e operated 
unde r the surveillanc e of the insuranc e departments of the variou s states whenc e they 
take their charters. This surve y does not refe r to fraterna l insurance , whic h is main ­
taine d i n nineteen secret orders of nationa l 
scope wit h a membershi p of 2,817,135 amon g 
the colored people i n this country . It has 
been suggested tha t i t is not a remote possibilit y tha t al l of these orders migh t merge 
int o a centra l body fo r the purpose of underwritin g the insuranc e of the tota l membership. Tentativ e specifications fo r this pro ­
jected "Fraternit y of Fraternities " follow 
closely the organizatio n plan s of the Ameri ­
ca n Federatio n of Labor, whic h centralize s 
man y labo r bodies, but allows each to retai n 
its autonomy. 
SON G FO R A LOS T COMRAD E 
(To O. B . J.) 
JESSI E FAUSE T 
OH the fields glin t gol d an d the trees flare 
red, 
An d the sk y is as blue as a sk y ma y be ; 
An d the Past is past and the Dea d ar e dead, 
An d Lif e laughs i n fron t of us fai r an d 
free ! 
So it's, H o Friends, a toast! 
Le t us drin k hig h together, 
Pledging , Life , Lov e an d Laughter, i n the 
gay, gol d weather! 
True , alas, there is One tha t is gone from 
ou r throng , 
A Comrad e to al l an d a good Frien d wa s 
she; 
An d clea r came he r laughte r an d sweat ran g 
he r song— 
Bu t now she lies hushed b y the bent birc h 
tree. 
She'd be first, Friend s to cry : 
"Le t us drin k hig h together, 
"Pledging , Life , Lov e an d Laughter, i n the 
gay, gold weather! " 
A h she raise d Life's cup an d dran k of it, 
too, 
An d Pain , lik e Joy , foun d a smil e i n he r 
eye ; 
A t al l time s most tender; to al l trusts most 
true , 
She ha d learned how to live , so she kn3w 
how to die. 
Nay , no tears, Friends. A Toast : 
Le t us drin k deep together, 
Pledging , Life-lon g Remembrance , i n the 
gay, gol d weather! 
FO R A ROS E 
YETT A KA Y STODDARD 
R
OS E of the dusk, m y mus k rose, 
Perfume d bloom of fire an d dream 
an d dew, 
Singing , I'm bringin g the quietude of nigh t 
to you . 
God's han d an d m y han d 
Enfol d yo u an d hol d yo u close. Repose 
I n His care an d m y prayer. Fair , yo u understand ? National Association for the 
Advancement Colored.-People. 
TWELFT H ANNUA L REPOR T 
E
VER Y membe r of the N . A . A . C . 
P. , ever y reade r of TH E CRISIS, 
every person wh o is interested i n the 
race problem, should have a copy of 
the Twelft h Annua l Report of the N . 
A . A . C. P.— A Summar y an d a n Ac ­
counting , whic h ca n be obtained from 
the Nationa l Office of the Associatio n 
a t 70 Fift h Avenue , Ne w York , fo r 
twenty-five cents. 
Th e report gives a detailed account 
of ever y importan t accomplishmelnt 
durin g 1921 . It tells of the wor k on 
nationa l legislation , particularl y on 
the Dye r Bill ; of the man y cases of 
lega l defense includin g the Arkansa s 
Cases, the Tuls a Rio t Cases, the nu ­
merous extraditio n cases an d other 
notable lega l work ; of lynchin g an d 
race riots an d wha t wa s done on them 
b y the N . A . A . C . P. ; of peonage ; of 
discriminatio n i n labo r an d hospitals; 
of the fight against the infamou s K u 
Klu x Kla n an d the pernicious film, 
"Th e Birt h of a Nation" ; of investiga ­
tions of riots an d lynchings; of the An ­
nua l Conferenc e at Detroit ; of the 
Pan-Africa n Congress; of publicity ; 
of TH E CRISIS ; of wor k fo r Hait i an d 
the Twenty-fourt h Infantr y martyrs; 
of the interesting- wor k of the 
branches; an d the usua l complete financia l accountin g fo r the year. 
Th e N . A . A . C. P . has placed the 
law pric e of twenty-five cents, whic h is 
less tha n the cost of printin g an d mail ­
ing , i n orde r tha t as man y copies as 
possible ma y be distributed . N o person wh o wishe s to be informe d on the 
rac e problem should be withou t a copy 
of this report. 
DYE R ANTI-LYNCHIN G BIL L 
' I ''H E Colorado, West Virginia , Indiana , 
A
 Ohio , Missouri , Massachusetts, Cali ­
forni a an d Ne w Yor k Stat e Republica n Con ­
ventions ar d the Massachusetts Stat e Democrati c Conventio n have passed recently 
stron g resolutions endorsin g the Dye r Anti -
Lynchin g Bil l by name, an d the Delawar e 
Stat e Republica n Conventio n include d i n its 
platform a somewha t wishy-wash y condemnatio n of mob violence , due to the vote 
against the Dye r Bil l i n the Hous e b y Caleb 
R. Layton , wh o wa s endorsed b y re-election. 
Al l of these resolutions wer e secured 
throug h the efforts of the N . A . A . C. P. , 
whic h wishe s to tak e this opportunit y of 
expressin g its appreciatio n to the individ ­
uals responsible fo r them an d to those others 
wh o aided. Th e persons wh o acted at the 
request of the Associatio n i n the variou s 
states are : 
Colorado, George W . Gross, Denve r 
West Virginia , T. Gillis Nutter, Charlesto n 
Ohio , Harr y E . Davis, Clevelan d 
Missouri , B . F . Bowles, St. Louis 
Massachusetts,Butle r R. Wilson , Bosto n 
California , E . Burto n Ceruti , Lo s Angele s 
Ne w York , Chas. W . Anderson , Ne w Yor k 
Naturally , credit is due also to those me n 
an d wome n wh o aided the above name d i n 
securin g the introductio n an d adoption of 
these resolutions an d to them the N . A . A . 
C. P . likewis e extends its appreciation . 
Th e Indian a resolution , adopted throug h 
the initiativ e of Mr . Gilchrist Stewart, of 
Ne w York , o n Ma y 25, read i n part : 
W e urg e an d favo r the immediat e passage 
b y the Unite d States Senat e of the Dye r 
Bill , alread y passed b y the Hous e of Rep ­
resentatives, makin g lynchin g an d burnin g 
a Federa l crime . 
Th e Colorad o resolution, passed on Aug ­
ust 9, read : 
W e urg e the Senat e of the Unite d State? 
to pass withou t delay the Dye r Anti-Lynch -
in g Bill . 
O n August 15 the West Virgini a Stat e 
Republica n Conventio n passed a resolution 
reading : 
W e urge the Congress of the Unite d 
States to pass, withou t delay, the Dye r 
Anti-Lynchin g Bill . 
Th e statement of the Ohi o Republica n 
Conventio n whic h wa s adopted withou t a 
dissenting, vote on August 22, said : 
W e favo r the immediat e passage of the 
Dye r Anti-Lynchin g Bill . 
Th e Missour i resolution passed on September 14 read : 
Th e pledge of the Republica n Nationa l 
Conventio n to anti-lync h legislatio n has 
found expression i n the Dye r Anti-Lynchin g 
Bil l no w pendin g i n the Unite d States Senate. We , therefore, endorse this measur e an d urg e its passage by the present Con ­
gress. 
Th e resolution of the Massachusetts Stat e 
Republica n Conventio n not onl y endorsed the 
Dye r Bil l an d urge d its passage immediate ­
ly , but also attached disfranchisement an d 
discriminatio n b y the Civi l Service . 
Th e Massachusetts Democrati c Conven ­
tion's resolution demanded: 
Bot h legislatio n an d executive action 
should put a stop a t once an d fo r al l to the 
disgrac e of mob-law. Th e constitutiona l 
guarante e of life , libert y an d the pursui t of 
happiness is a heritag e tha t should be safeguarded , i f necessary wit h Federa l legisla ­
tion . 
Th e Californi a Stat e Republica n Conven ­
tio n adopted as a part of its platfor m a deman d fo r immediat e passage of the Dye r 
Bill . 
Th e Ne w Yor k Republica n Conventio n i n 
a length y progra m made bu t one deman d on 
Congress an d tha t one read : 
W e urg e the Senat e to pass a t the earliest 
possible date the Anti-Lynchin g Bil l adopted 
b y the Hous e of Representative s at the last 
session. 
Th e above splendid results ar e one part 
of the efforts of the N . A . A . C. P . to so 
solidif y sentiment throughou t the countr y 
behin d the Dye r Bil l tha t ther e ca n be no 
wa y fo r the Senat e to evade passin g it. I n 
othe r states, wher e conventions ar e to be 
hel d durin g the nex t few weeks, simila r efforts ar e bein g put fort h to get the state 
politica l organization s behind the bill . 
IN spite of earnest efforts by certai n Re 
publica n leaders to secure consideration 
of and a vote upo n the Dye r Bil l befor e the 
adjournmen t of Congress on Septembe r 22, 
an d because of determined an d wel l organ ­
ized opposition b y the Democrati c minority , 
the measur e wa s not acted upon an d now 
goes over unti l Congress reconvenes i n De ­
cember. A numbe r of newspapers have 
spread the statement tha t this failur e to secure fina l action at tha t time means tha t the 
bil l is dead fo r all time . That is not true! The 
bill will not be dead unless the Senate refuses to vote upon it before March 3, 1923, 
when the present session of Congress ends! 
Th e N . A . A . C. P . is disappointed tha t 
the efforts to get the bil l enacted into la w 
before the Novembe r elections wer e unsuc ­
cessful. Tha t the colored people of the countr y and al l othe r persons so vitall y interested i n the passage of the bil l ma y kno w 
just wha t took plac e at Washington , the 
N . A . A . C. P . is publishin g below the ful l 
report of Jame s Weldo n Johnso n wh o acted 
for the Associatio n a t Washingto n through ­
out the lon g an d arduous fight. Th e re ­
port reads: 
"O n August 28. I wen t to Washingto n i n 
orde r to do whateve r wa s possible to speed 
the action on the Dye r Anti-Lynehin g Bill . 
I wa s assured b y Senato r McCormic k and 
also b y Senators Curtis, Watso n of Indiana , 
an d Lodge , tha t the Senat e Steerin g Com ­
mitte e woul d meet withi n a da y or two an d 
tha t the Anti-Lynchin g Bil l woul d be placed 
on the progra m of measure s to be take n u p 
fo r consideration before Congress adjourned. 
"O n August 30 the Steerin g Committe e 
me t an d 'placed the Dye r Anti-Lynchin g Bil l 
on the program. 
"O n Septembe r 14 I wen t agai n to Wash ­
ingto n to urg e the consideration of the Bil l 
an d remaine d ther e unti l afte r Congress adjourned . Republica n leaders i n the Senat e 
repeatedly expressed their intentio n an d determinatio n to brin g the Bil l u p fo r consideratio n before the adjournmen t of Congress. 
Non e of them felt tha t the Bil l could be 
finall y disposed of withi n tha t time . The y 
al l expected tha t the Democrats woul d not 
onl y deman d the fullest time possibl e fo r 
discussion of the measur e bu t tha t they 
woul d use filibusterin g tactic s to impede its 
progress. 
"It wa s finall y decided tha t the effort to 
brin g up the Bil l fo r consideration woul d 
be made on Thursday , Septembe r 21. Ac ­
cordingl y it wa s arrange d tha t Senator 
Shortridg e woul d at the prope r momen t be 
recognized fo r tha t purpose. Whe n two 
o'clock arrived , the Presiden t pro tempore 
of the Senate, Senato r Cummins, i n accordance wit h the rule , announced tha t the un ­
finished business became the order. A t tha t 
moment, Senator Underwood , Democrati c 
leader, wa s discussin g the Commissio n on 
Mixe d Claims of America n Citizen s Against 
Germany . Senato r Curtis arose an d asked 
fo r unanimou s consent tha t the unfinished 
business be temporaril y lai d aside. Naturally , ther e wa s no objection, as the request made b y Senato r Curtis enabled the 
Democrati c leade r to continue his speech. 
Senator Curtis' request also ha d strategi c 
value because i t cleared the wa y fo r the 
takin g u p of the Anti-Lynchin g Bill . "As soon as Senator Underwood concluded. 
Senator Shortridge arose and secured the 
recognition of the Chair. Immediately the 
Democrats were alive to the situation. I 
do not think they anticipated the move, but 
as soon as Senator Shortridge arose they at 
once knew that it meant an effort to take 
up the Anti-Lynching Bill . 
"Before Senator Shortridge proceeded he 
yielded, following the rule of courtesy in the 
Senate, to Senator McNary, to allow him to 
ask the Chair to lay before the Senate 
House amendments to a certain joint resolution; and again he yielded to Senator Warren to allow him to report from the Committee on Appropriations a joint resolution. 
Senator Pat Harrison of Mississippi immediately raised the point of order that the 
resolution reported by Senator Warren was 
debatable. This point of order gave rise to 
a long and complicated parliamentary wrangle which finally ended in President protempore Cummins ruling that Senator Harrison and not Senator Shortridge iwas entitled to the floor. Senator Harrison took 
the floor and proceeded to hold it for nearly 
two hours; and the Democratic filibuster 
was on. 
"In the midst of the parliamentary wrangle, in which Senator Shortridge lost the 
floor, Senator Harrison suggested the absence of a quorum. The President pro tempore instructed the Secretary to call the roll, 
and the following Senators answered to 
their names: 
Ashurst Fieteher McLean Shortridge 
Borah France McNary Simmons 
Brandegee Gooding Moses Smoot 
Broussard Haireld Nelson Stanfield 
Bursuin Harrison Nicholson Sterling 
Calder Heflir Norbeck Sutherland 
Cameron Hitchcock Oddie Swanson 
Capper Jones, Wash. Owen Townsend 
Culberson Keyes Pepper Trammell 
Cummins La Follettc Phipps Underwood 
Curtis Lenroot Rawson Walsh, Mass. 
Dial Lodge Reed, Pa. Warren 
Dillingham McCormick Robinson Watson, Tnd. 
du Pont McCumber Sheppard 
Ernst McKellar Shields 
"The Senators who answered the roll call 
at the convening of the Senate at 12 o'clock 
but did not answer the roll call during the 
parliamentary fight to sustain Senator 
Shortridge's right to the floor were the following : 
Colt Glass King Ransdull 
Frelinghuysen Hale New Williams 
Gerry Kellogg Newberry 
"It was then near the usual hour of adjournment, and before taking his seat Senator Harrison again suggested the absence 
of a quorum. But Senator Shortridge was 
promptly on his feet and again secured the 
recognition of the Chair. Senator Shortridge addressed the Chair and said—'I move 
that the Senate proceed to the consideration 
of House Bil l 13, being Calendar No. 822—.' 
Before he could proceed to give the title of 
the bill Senator Harrison again pressed his 
suggestion that a quorum was not present. 
The roll was called and showed a quorum. 
Senator Heflin of Alabama then made a 
motion that the Senata adjourn. This motion was rejected. Finally Senator Shortridge was allowed to proceed. 
"Senator Shortridge, in presenting the Bil l 
to the Senate, made a very strong and at 
the same time an exceedingly skilful speech. 
He was interrupted a number of times by 
questions and objections, particularly from 
Senator Shields (Democrat) of Tennessee 
who, as a member of the Judiciary Committee, had greatly opposed the reporting out 
of the Bill . The manner in which Senator 
Shortridge met this opposition was so convincing and yet so tactful that it could be 
felt that the Democratic Senators present 
realized it would be exceedingly embarrassing for them to vote against taking the Bil l 
up for consideration, at least. 
"The conclusion of Senator Shortridge's 
remarks is as follows, with interruptions by 
Senator Shields: 
"' I also realize that we have been in session for some time, a great many days, 
weeks, and months; but, so far as I am concerned, I am willing to stay right here until 
this bill, if taken up, is disposed of, however anxious I am to breathe again the airs 
of California, from which State I have been 
absent until I fear that even my dogs there 
have forgotten me, though the faithful dog 
is the last thing on this earth to forget his 
friend. 
"'I am anxious, indeed, to get home; but 
it seems to me that if we should agree to 
take up this bill, and Senators would enter 
into a gentleman's agreement to discuss it 
for two or three days, each side, if there be 
sides, could advance their arguments, not to 
curtail argument, but could give their views, 
and that we could come to a vote on the 
measure certainly within a week. I respect 
the wishes of the House of Representatives, 
and what is perhaps the wish of others.' 
Mr. Shields: "'The Senator knows the 
bill was discussed five weeks in the House, 
does he not?' 
Mr. Shortridge: "'I think it was discussed 
for a long time; quite unnecessarily, however.' Mr. Shields: "'Wit h the Senator's intelligence and comprehension of the condition of 
affairs in the Senate, when he moved to take 
this bill up he did not expect it to be taken 
up and disposed of at this session, did he?' 
Mr. Shortridge: "'Things change rapidly. 
I answer the Senator, if it is necessary, that 
I was very fearful that it would not be disposed of if taken up; that is true. I had 
hoped to have it taken up fully ten days 
ago, but there <were other bills and conference reports, the bonus bill, and the tariff 
bill, which delayed my asking that the bill 
be taken up. But this is the first time I 
have felt I had the right to the floor since 
I came here from California, and I do not 
want to abuse that right. I am willing to 
be guided by the wisdom of others. I have 
made the motion that this bill be taken 
up, and that we proceed immediately with 
its consideration, and I have said all I can 
say, perhaps, in favor of taking it up.' 
"Afte r Senator Shortridge concluded his 
remarks, the question of voting upon the 
consideration of the Bil l was discussed. 
While the vote, was pending the question of 
no quorum was raised again. The roll was 
called and the following Senators answered 
to their names: 
Brandegee France Pepper Sutherland 
Bursum Jones, Wash. Rawson Swanson 
Calder McCormick Reed, Pa. Townsend 
Cameron McKellar Robinson Underwood 
Capper McNary Sheppard Warren 
Cummins Moses Shortridge Watson, Ind. 
Curtis Owen Simmons 
"There being no quorum present, the vote 
was not taken and the Bil l automatically 
went over for consideration to the next session of Congress. 
"From the roll call just above, it may be 
seen that those Republican Senators who 
stayed through to the end of the fight for 
immediate consideration of the Bil l were: 
Bursum, N. Mex. 
Calder, N. Y. 
Cameron, Ariz. 
Capper, Kans. 
Curtis, Kans. 
France, Md. 
Jones, Wash. 
McCormick, 111. 
McNary, Ore. 
Moses, N. H . 
Pepper, Pa. 
Rawson, la. 
Reed, Pa. 
Shortridge, Cal. 
Sutherland, W. Va. 
Townsend, Mich. 
Warren, Wyo. 
Watson, Ind. 
"The Republican leaders in the Senate 
state that the only unfinished business on the 
program of the Steering Committee are the 
Liberian Loan Bil l and the Anti-Lynching 
Bill . They have given definite promises that 
these two measures will be taken up and 
finally disposed of at the opening of the 
next session and before any other legislation is considered. 
"This is the first fundamental issue of 
national import to the colored people of the 
United States that has been put squarely 
before the Republican Party since the Civil 
Rights Bill . We have the pledge to enact 
this legislation in the Republican platform. 
We have it recommended by the President 
and we have the promise of its enactment 
by the leaders of the majority, in Congress. 
We must hold the Party and hold the President and hold the Republican majority in 
the Senate strictly to these promises, and 
if the enactment of Anti-Lynching legislation is not fulfilled before the passing of 
this Congress, we should consider all of 
these promises as broken." 
DA D 
COUNTE E P. CULLE N 
HIS ways are circumspect and bound 
With trite simplicities; 
His is the grace of comforts found 
In homely hearthside ease. 
His words are sage and fall with care, 
Because he loves me so; 
And being his, he knows, I fear, 
The dizzy path I go. 
For he was once as young as I, 
As prone to take the trail, 
To find delight in the sea's low cry, 
An d a lone wind's lonely wail. 
It is his eyes that tell me most 
How full his life has been; 
There lingers there the faintest ghost 
Of some still sacred sin. 
So I must quaff Life's crazy wine, 
An d taste the gall and dregs; 
An d I must spend this (wealth of mine, 
Of vagrant wistful legs; 
An d I must follow, follow, follow 
The lure of a silver horn, 
That echoes from a leafy hollow, 
Where the dreams of youth are born. 
Then when the star has shed its gleam, 
The rose its crimson coat; 
When Beauty flees the hidden dream, 
An d Pan's pipes blow no note; 
When both my shoes are worn too thin, 
My weight of fire to bear, 
I'll turn like dad, and like him win 
The peace of a snug arm-chair. The Horizon 
Crogman Hal l of Clark University, Atlanta, Ga., has been dedicated. It is named 
in honor of Dr. W. H . Crogman, a Negro 
who served as professor of Lati n and Greek 
and as president during 45 years. It cost 
$200,000. 
The Union University Club, composed of 
40 Negro students in New Yor k City, has 
awarded a 4-year scholarship to William 
Ledbetter. This entitles Mr. Ledbetter to 
a full course at Virgini a Union University. 
The president of the club is Mr. Travis E . 
Freeman, a student at Columbia. 
The following lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: 
Winder, Ga., September 2, Jim Reed Long; 
robbery and striking white woman. 
Newton, Tex., September 7, O. J. Johnson; murder. 
Sandersville, Ga., September 28, Jim Johnston; attacking white woman. 
The Lott Carey Baptist Foreign Mission 
Convention held its 25th annual session in 
Charlotte, N . C. There were 300 delegates 
present. This organization supports 29 missionaries in Afric a and 12 in Haiti. Last 
year it paid out $60,000 in salaries to missionaries. The white American Baptist 
Home Mission Society of the North recently 
decided to contribute $35,000 toward the 
erection, under Lott Carey auspices, of a 
school in Haiti. Revs. Dr. C. S. Brown, A . 
W. Pegues, A . A . Graham and J. H . Hughes 
were elected officers of the convention; Mrs 
A- B. Randolph, Mrs. D. J. Avery, Mrs. 
Veola L . Coleman, Mrs. A . E . Blackwell 
and Mrs. Ora B. Stokes were elected officers 
of the woman's auxiliary. 
CROGMA N HAL L TH E GOOD NEIGHBOR CLU B 
Charities; Captain Frye of the Y . M . C. A. ; 
Miss Howell, Probate Court; Jane Hunter,, 
executive secretary Phyllis Wheatley Association; Evelyn Simmons, Christian Community Center; (front row, left to right), 
In Cleveland, Ohio, there has been organized the Good Neighbor Club. The persons 
in the picture are: (back row, left to right), 
Mattie P. Anderson, director Christian Community Center; Helen Howard, Associated 
KAPP A PSI FRATERNIT Y A T ITS ELEVENT H GRAN D CHAPTE R TH E CAST O F "TH E CHEVALIE R D E ST. GEORGE " 
James H . Kerns, Christian Community Center; Juanita Pollard, Outdoor Relief; Delia 
M . Stewart and Miss Thompson, Associated Charities; Mrs. Juli a Lythe, Christian 
Community Center. The president is Miss 
Stewart. The aim of the club is to make 
the members more intelligent in their respective fields by relating experiences, discussing methods and through lectures. 
The Red Domino Dramatic Club of St. 
Louis, Mo., recently dramatized "The Chevalier De St. George". In the cast are (left 
PROM IN TH E CHAMBE R OF COMMERCE , CLEVELAND , OHIO to right, sitting), Corrine Allen, a lady; 
Herman Dreer, director; Edna Levy, a 
lady; (standing), Elmer Fowler, as Plato; 
Chauncey Elain , as Morliere; Marie Spotts, 
a maid; Irma Wilson, wife of Julien; Marcus Perkins, a Baron; Turner Dickerson, 
the Chevalier; Lucile Randall, a Countess; 
Clifford Boyd, as Julien; Willar d Thornton 
as DeBoulogne. 
The Negro ministry comes in for endless 
criticism. It is, therefore, a great pleasure 
to note the career of a black minister which 
calls for universal praise and appreciation. 
In Portsmouth, Va., last spring was celebrated the 40th anniversary of the pastorate 
of John Maurice Armistead. The whole community did honor to this pastor of Zion 
Baptist Church, the oldest pastor i n Tidewater in point of service. Dr. Armistead 
was born in 1852, in Lynchburg, and became 
a shoemaker. A t the age of 17 he began to 
prepare for the ministry and studied at 
what is now Virgini a Union University and 
at Roger Williams College. He was ordained i n 1879 and began his work at Knoxville, Tenn. Eventually he came to Portsmouth, to succeed the Rev. E . G. Corprew, 
who had begun the first Negro Baptist 
church. Here for a generation he has done 
his work as pastor, as teacher and as public servant. 
Most people have heard that in Mississippi 
there is a Negro town, Mound Bayou. Its 
founder and Mayor is Isaiah T. Montgomery, and recently he and his wife celebrated 
their 50th wedding anniversary. Al l the 
town and countryside, with many of the 
white people, joined in the services and 
were received in their new home. Mr. Montgomery was a member of the Mississippi 
Constitutional Convention which disfranchised the-Negro, and State Receiver of Public Monies under Roosevelt. 
One of the best known manufacturers of 
gas engines in Brooklyn, N . Y. , has long 
been Matthew A . Welmon, who died recently, leaving an estate valued at over $120,000. 
Mr. Welmon was born in North Carolina in 
1876. He came to Newark, N . J. , when a 
boy, went home on a visit and walked back. 
He began to work for a gas engine concern 
at $4.00 a week and eventually opened business under the name of Welmon & Carr, in 
Brooklyn. He was a modest, genial man, a 
member of various societies, and a deacon 
in Concord Baptist Church. His funeral 
was one of the most memorable gatherings 
of genuine friends, colored and white, that 
has taken place in Brooklyn. Mr. Welmon 
leaves a widow and two daughters. 
CI The visitor to Indianapolis will find two 
unusually well-equipped chiropody parlors, 
in the center of the city, owned by a colored 
man, Dr. E . N . Perkins. He employs 10 assistants, has beautiful and completely furnished offices, and has recently built a beautiful home. Mr. Perkins was born in Indianapolis, in 1873, and became a shoe-black, a 
newsboy, a jockey, and afterward a barber. 
Then, in Indianapolis, he started a small 
chiropody enterprise, struggled with it for 
5 years, until success came. Mr. Perkins is 
married and has one daughter. 
For a long time it looked as though President Harding was going to be completely 
captured by the "Lil y Whites" of the South 
and was not 'planning to appoint any colored men to important positions, no matter 
what their qualifications. He has not appointed many, but his nomination of Arthu r 
G. Froe, as Recorder of Deeds in the District 
of Columbia, is a beginning. Mr. Froe for 
20 years has been prominent in Republican 
politics in West Virginia , and is a member 
of the Bar. 
It would be unfortunate if in the current 
of criticism of some of our West Indian fellow-citizens we were not mindful of the 
great contributions that the West Indies 
are continually making to colored America. 
Recently Alv a L . Bates, a naturalized Barbadian, was appointed Assistant U . S. Attorney at Chicago, 111. Mr. Bates was born 
in 1888 and came to America in 1906. He 
was graduated from the Howard University 
Law School in 1914 and the following year 
began practice in Chicago. 
The Great Southern Fir e Insurance Company, of Atlanta, Ga., has merged with the 
Bankers' Fir e Insurance Company of Durham, N . C. The latter company reinsures 
the entire outstanding business of the Great 
Southern, which amounts to three million 
dollars, and takes over assets amounting to 
$150,000. The merger represents a transaction of seven and one-half million dollars 
worth of business and assets of $325,000. It 
wag brought about largely through the efforts of Mr. L . E . Williams, of the Wage 
Earners' Savings Bank in Savannah; Mr. 
W. Gomez, of the Bankers'; and Mr. John 
E . Nail, of the real estate firm of Nai l & 
Parker, New York. The Bankers' operate? 
in North Carolina, Maryland, the District of MR. AN D MRS. I. T. MONTGOMER Y TH E LAT E MR WELMO N DR. J . M . ARMISTEA D 
DR. E. N. PERKINS ATTORNE Y A. L . BATES TH E HOM E OF DR. PERKINS 
TH E HOM E OF MR. AN D MRS. MONTGOMER Y ARTHU R G. FRO E DEHAR T HUBBAR D 
Columbia, Georgia, and Tennessee, and has 
as its officers: Messrs. W. G. Pearson, president; C. C. Spaulding, A . M . Moore, A . J. 
Strong, vice-presidents; J. M . Avery, treasurer; W. Gomez, secretary-manager; M . A . 
Goins, assistant secretary. These officers, 
including Messrs. E . R. Merrick and R. L. 
McDougald, comprise the Executive Committee. 
A t the A . A . U . junior national track and 
field championship tournament held in Newark, N . J.., DeHart Hubbard, of the Cincinnati A . C , broke the running broad jump 
record by a leap of 24 feet, three and onehalf inches. The record set in 1914 was 23 
feet, 1 inch. Mr. Hubbard is a student of 
the University of Michigan. Of 8 Negroes 
entered in the meet, 7 received medals: Hubbard, 3 firsts; Johnson and Rogers, first; 
Gourdin and Figuers, second; Brookins and 
Butler, third. 
To correct an error in our September issue, we beg to say that Mr. F . A . Harris was 
formerly secretary of the Paseo Department 
of the Y . M . C. A . i n Kansas City, Mo. He 
resigned, and Mr. G. A . Gregg has held this 
position since September, 1921. 
A t its last commencement, Morgan College in Baltimore, Md., graduated 17 Bachelors of Art . 
Alic e M . Pettyjohn, a soprano singer of 
Amherst, Mass., won the Silver Gray Medal 
in a contest for trained singers. She was 
the only Negro among 5 contestants. The 
selection that won the prize was H . T. Burleigh's "Deep River. " 
(I In a first grade Civil Service examination, 
held in 34 of the largest cities of Oklahoma, 
Arkansas, Kansas, Missouri and Illinois, 
Miss Maggie B. Coffey, of Muskogee, Okla., 
made a rating which placed her second on 
the eligible list for the 9th district. 
A dedicatory organ recital has been held 
at Berean Presbyterian Church in Philadelphia. The set of chimes in the organ was 
presented to the congregation by the pastor, 
the Rev. Mr. Matthew Anderson, as a memorial to his late wife, Dr. Caroline V . An ­
derson. 
The Supreme Life & Casualty Company, 
SIKI KNIGHTS TEMPLA R IN WASHINGTON , D. C. 
of Columbus, Ohio , wa s organize d a littl e 
over a yea r ago. It has qualified an d begun 
active operations i n Ohio , West Virginia , 
Arkansas, an d recentl y entered the Distric t 
of Columbia . It is the first Negr o enterpris e 
to produc e a standar d casualt y insuranc e 
policy. Truma n K . Gibso n is president. 
I n Paris, Battlin g Siki , a Senegalese 
fighter, has wo n the heavyweigh t championship of Europ e b y defeatin g George s 
Carpentie r i n the 6th roun d of a scheduled 
20-round bout. 
Colore d Knights Templa r at their convention i n Washington , D . C , lai d the cornerstone fo r a $300,000 Masoni c Temple . 
It wil l be located on the southwest corne r 
of Tent h an d Yo u Streets, Northwest . Mor e 
tha n 15,000 colored Knights an d Shriners 
fro m al l parts of the Unite d States attended the conventions. 
"Shad y Rest" , the Negr o countr y club a t 
Westfield, N . J. , is one yea r old an d has 
200 members. It has a nine hole golf 
course. 
A T "SHAD Y REST" The Lookin g Glas s 
LITERATURE 
HER E has the new yea r come ! Precede 
us, yo u gods, an d eat the first fruits, 
so that, fo r us also, Kaffir cor n shal l help 
our body, tha t we ma y become fat, not thin , 
tha t the witche s ma y increas e the corn , 
make it to be plentiful , so that, even i f ther e 
is onl y a smal l field, the baskets ma y be 
filled .. . 
Toda y m y chil d is leavin g me. She enters 
the wedded life . Loo k a t her, accompan y 
he r wher e she wil l live . Ma y she also foun d 
a village ! Ma y ehe have man y children ! 
Ma y she be happy , good, just! Ma y she be 
on good terms wit h those wit h -whom she 
wil l be . 
—Prayers of the Bant u Peopl e 
i n Africa . 
W e have received Le Christianisme Social 
containin g a n articl e b y Willia m S. Nelso n 
on the blac k rac e i n the Unite d Statas; 
The Psychic Life of Insects b y the Frenc h 
scientist E . L . Bouvier, wh o allude s repeatedly i n the text to the investigation s of Dr . 
C. H . Turner, colored, a membe r of the 
America n Academ y of Science ; and Day -
rell's Folk Stories From Southern Nigeria, 
West Africa. This last is not a new book 
but as i t give s an insigh t into the customs 
an d menta l processes of a n importan t Afri ­
can grou p we shal l speak o f it at lengt h i n 
our semi-annua l book review. 
Walte r F . Whit e write s i n the curren t 
World Tomorrow on "Mo b Justice " i n a symposium of article s groupe d unde r the titl e 
"Wher e Freedom is Denied. " 
Benjami n Brawle y write s i n The Bookman of "Th e Negr o i n America n Litera ­
ture. " Unde r this innocuous titl e he contrive s to get across some trenchan t remarks. "Cynicis m since the war, " he says, 
"ha s been developed almost to a cult. " Later ^ 
he speaks of the "strang e prominenc e of the 
Negro " i n America n lif e an d development: 
I n the colonia l er a i t wa s the economic 
advantage of slaver y over servitude tha t 
caused it to displac e this institutio n as a 
system of labor. Tw o o f the thre e compromises tha t entered into the makin g of the 
Constitutio n wer e prompte d b y the presence 
of the Negr o i n the country ; the expansio n 
of the southwest depended on his labor; an d 
the question or the excuse of fugitive s wa s 
the rea l ke y to the Seminol e Wars. Th e 
Civi l Wa r wa s siinpl y to determine the 
status of the Negr o i n the Republic , an d the 
legislatio n afte r the wa r determined fo r a 
generatio n the histor y not onl y of the South 
bu t ver y largel y of the natio n as well . Th e 
late r disfranchisin g acts have ha d overwhelmin g importance , the unfair system o f 
nationa l representatio n controllin g the electio n of 1916 an d thus the attitude of Amer ­
ic a i n the Worl d War . 
Louis Morpeau , membe r of the Society of 
Frenc h Me n of Letters an d of the Society 
of Frenc h Poets, write s us: 
Th e flattering reception whic h the grea t 
Paris newspapers an d reviews continue to 
offer to the "Haitia n Antholog y of Con ­
temporar y Poets (1904-1920) " has induced 
the ver y importan t publishin g house, J . 
Povolozk y & Company , i n Paris, to ask me 
to writ e a book fo r its Universa l Collectio n 
of Anthologies, whic h woul d afford a n account of Haitia n poetry fro m its first origins. I have, therefore , started to wor k on 
the "Antholog y of a Centur y of Haitia n 
Poetr y (1820-1920) "— a thic k book, beautifull y gotten up ; it wil l be read y fo r the publi c b y the end of the year. I thin k tha t this 
wor k of criticism an d of histor y whic h I 
have labored upo n wit h love an d sympathy , 
circulate d as fa r as possible not onl y i n the 
Frenc h speakin g countrie s bu t also i n the 
three Americas, wil l rende r a ver y grea t 
servic e to ou r country , whic h is, I must con ­
fess, too muc h ignored , forgotte n or misun ­
derstood. 
I should be ver y gratefu l to you , m y dea r 
colleague, i f yo u woul d publis h this lette r 
i n orde r to brin g the facts before the knowl ­
edge of ou r friends an d of the publi c whos e 
assistanc e I greatl y need, the cost of 'printin g bein g enormous just now. Th e subscrip ­
tio n fo r a volume printe d i n Hait i wil l cost 
onl y one dollar. 
"SEE WHA T GARVEY HAS DONE" 
IN a circula r recentl y throw n about Har -
lem, Messrs. Pickens, Bagnal l an d Owens 
an d others wer e severely criticize d fo r attackin g a grea t ma n an d afte r assertin g 
tha t none of these me n ha d done anything , 
the circula r ended wit h "Se e Wha t Garve y 
Ha s Done! " 
Well , let us see. 
In a supplementary proceedings examination of Marcus Garvey held in the Supreme Court of Bronx County, New York City, 
August 19, Mr. Garvey made the following 
statements under oath: 
(Italic s ar e ours.) 
Q. Ca n yo u tell me at this time whethe r 
or not the Blac k Sta r Lin e owns an d operates an y boats? A . It has interest i n one 
boat that is floundered at Antilla, Cuba. 
Q. B y floundered, do yo u mea n it is 
wrecked ? A . Yes. It is no use. It cannot 
be reached fro m wher e it is. 
Q. Wh o controls tha t boat ? A . Th e 
Blac k Sta r Line , but othe r 'people hav e in ­
terest i n it. Our interest is mortgaged. Th e 
Nationa l Drydoc k has interest i n the boat 
an d the Massachusetts Bondin g Company . 
Q. Wha t is the extent of the interest of 
the Nationa l Drydoc k Company ? A . I believe $4,000 or $5,000. 
Q. An d the extent of the Massachusetts 
Bondin g Company ? A . I believe it is $15,-
000 or $20,000, I a m not sure. 
Q. Wha t is the valu e of the boat ? A . 
Well , the appraise d valu e on the last statement give n to me wa s $5,000. 
Q. Wha t is the name of this boat ? A . 
S.S. Kanawha. 
Q. Does the Company own any other 
boats at the present time? A . No. 
Q. Di d vo u own the S.S . Yarmouth''. A . 
Yes. 
Q. Wha t happened to it ? A . It wa s 
libeled b y the Nationa l Drydoc k Compan y 
an d hel d b y the Unite d States Marshal l fo r 
about $1,800. 
Q. An d do yo u ow n an d operate an y other 
boat at the present time ? A . No . W e have 
interest i n a boat called the Shady Side, 
which is a wreck. 
Q. Wher e is this wreck ? A . It is somewher e i n Ne w Yor k Harbor ; I do not kno w 
the exac t location now 
A . Yo u see, we purchased the boat off 
Leon Swift for $35,000, on which we paid, 
1 believe, $16,000. Our interest in it has 
been mortgaged to a bondin g compan y an d 
individuals. 
Q. Wha t is the extent of the mortgage , 
Mr . Garvey? . A . Th e extent of the mortgage is $16,000 . . . 
Q. Shoul d this matte r be settled, how 
muc h money woul d the Blac k Sta r Lin e receive individually ? A . Th e Blac k Sta r Lin e 
woul d not receive anything , because its in ­
terest is mortgage d to others to cover lia ­
bilities. 
Q. Ha s the Blac k Sta r Lin e an y accounts 
outstanding ? A . No, it has no outstanding 
accounts. 
Q. Does anybody owe any money to the 
Black Star Line? A. No 
Q. Wha t wa s the capita l stock of the 
Blac k Sta r Line ? A . $10,000,000. 
Q. An y paid-u p stock? A . About $900,-
000 . . . 
Q. Is the Black Star Line doing any 
business at the present time? A. No, no 
business 
Q. Ha s the Blac k Sta r Lin e an y ban k 
account ? A . Yes, it has; but it is attached. 
Q. Wh o attached you r ban k account ? 
A . Th e Nationa l Drydoc k Company . 
Q. Di d yo u owe them an y money ? A . 
Yes, it is alleged tha t we owe them $45,000. 
Q. Ho w muc h di d they attach ? A . We 
only had $500 in the bank . 
Q. Th e Blac k Sta r Lin e has no funds at 
tha t ban k at the present time ? A . No, they 
haven't. 
Q. N o other money whatsoever ? A . No. 
Q. Ha s the Blac k Sta r Lin e an y money 
i n an y other bank ? A . N o othe r money i n 
an y other ban k 
Q. D o yo u kno w wher e the books of the 
corporatio n ar e a t the present time ? A . 
They are at the Department of Justice . . . 
Q. Ha s anybod y an y access to these 
books? A . I do not know. Th e Departmen t 
of Justic e controls them. 
Q. Has the Black Star Line at any time 
paid any dividends? A. No, never. 
Q. Do you know when the Insurance 
Company money had been assigned to the 
various creditors? A. No , I do not. 
Q. Ho w lon g ago ha d i t been assigned? 
A . Almost two years 
Q. Ha s the Blac k Sta r Lin e an y property whatsoeve r a t the present time ? A . It 
has propert y i n its name , but i t is al l mortgaged. 
Q. Wha t propert y is that ? A . A t 56 
West 135th Stree t . . . 
Q. Wha t do yo u mea n b y the propert y 
bein g al l mortgaged ? A . Well , there ar e 
three mortgage s on it, first, second an d third . 
Q. Wh o holds the first mortgage ? A . 
Some outside corporation . Th e secretary 
ca n give yo u the name of tha t corporation . 
Q. An d wh o owns the second mortgage ? 
A . Th e second mortgag e is owned b y the 
person we bought the propert y from. 
Q. An d wh o owns the third ? A . Th e 
Universa l Negr o Improvemen t Associa ­
tio n . 
Q. Fo r wha t consideration wa s this thir d 
mortgag e given ? A . Th e Universa l Negr o 
Improvemen t Associatio n loaned the Blac k 
Sta r Lin e money. 
Q. Ho w muc h mone y di d they loan ? A . 
$10,000. 
Q. Wa s tha t i n cash o r i n the form of 
services ? A . Cash . 
Q. Di d tha t money actuall y go into the 
treasur y of the Blac k Sta r Line ? A . Yes. 
Q. How long ago was this money borrowed? A. Within two years. 
Q. Ha s the Universa l Ne^r o Improve ­
ment Associatio n received an y of its money 
i n return ? A . No , it has not. 
Q. Ha s the Blac k Sta r Lin e pai d an y 
interest on tha t loan? A . N o . 
Q. Wha t is the present indebtedness of 
the Blac k Sta r Line ? A . Approximatel y 
$200,000. 
Q. An d wha t ar e the assets of the Blac k 
Sta r Line ? A . Ther e ar e no assets. 
Q. Wha t is the equity i n this buildin g at 
56 West 135th Street ? A . Well , we have 
no equity, because it is al l mortgaged . Even 
if the building were to be sold we would not get anything because the mortgage is out 
of our control 
Q. Ar e ther e an y othe r judgments outstandin g against the Blac k Sta r Line ? A. . 
Yes. 
Q. Nam e them. A . There are so many 
I cannot name them. There are judgments 
from the crew, aggregating about $40,000. 
Tha t is, I a m givin g yo u wha t I can remember. We have several wage cases aggregating about $20,000. Also the Green River Distilling Company libel for $52,000. 
Lu c Dorsinvill e of Port-au-Prince , Haiti , 
write s us: 
"I n you r articl e appearin g i n the September, 1922, issue of TH E CRISIS yo u sa y tha t 
there has been a grea t dea l of discussion 
as to wh o wa s responsibl e fo r the loss of 
the freigh t whic h I ha d prepare d fo r the 
S.S. Yarmouth of the Blac k Sta r Line ; 
freigh t whos e valu e mounted u p to aroun d 
$30,000. 
" I a m i n a positio n to assure yo u tha t al l 
the blame i n this affair falls upo n the man ­
agement of the Blac k Sta r Line , whic h wa s 
ver y bad , an d upo n the ship's crew, whic h 
wa s the most undiscipline d tha t I have eve r 
seen i n m y life . 
"Th e Tribunal de Paix [la w court] i n the 
norther n section of Port-au-Princ e condemned last yea r the Blac k Sta r Lin e i n a n 
actio n whic h a passenger, Malval , ha d 
brough t against the Line ; the judg e i n 
Chambers of the Lowe r Court of Port-au -
Princ e rendered judgmen t against the 
Blac k Sta r Line ; the Lowe r Court itself of 
Port-au-Princ e likewis e condemned the man ­
agement of the Blac k Sta r Lin e an d al l 
three judgments particularl y pointed out 
tha t I personall y wa s absolved from an y 
fault. " 
T o this we ventur e to add this tidbit : 
Geneva, Sept. 8 (B y Associate d Press).— 
Hait i took the fron t ran k i n today's debates 
of the Assembl y of the Leagme of Nation s 
whe n Delegat e Bellegard e of tha t countr y 
made the most eloquent speech of the session. H e demanded a n investigatio n o f the 
operations of a punitiv e expeditio n sent b y 
the Sout h Africa n Governmen t sometime ago 
against the native s of Southwest Africa n 
territor y fo r 'which Sout h Afric a has the 
league mandate . 
Th e Haitia n impressed the Assembl y as 
no othe r orato r has done whe n he asked i f 
it wer e possible tha t wome n an d childre n 
could be slaughtered b y airplanes, bombs 
an d machin e guns operated b y mandatorie s 
unde r the authorit y of the Leagu e of Na ­
tions. 
[M . Bellegard e is Haitia n Ministe r to 
Prance , wa s Honorar y Presiden t of the Second Pan-Africa n Congress an d presented its 
resolutions on the floor of the Assembl y o f 
the Leagu e of Nation s i n 1921.] 
Geneva, Sept. 13.— A delegation of Ne ­
groes from the recent Negr o convention i n 
Ne w York , headed by Marcu s Garvey , has 
arrive d here to as k the Leagu e of Nation s 
to give the Negroe s a mandat e ove r forme r 
Germa n colonies i n Afric a wher e they migh t 
establish a racia l home.—New Yor k Call. 
Not e the dates above, an d then rea d the 
Negro World (Garvey's paper), September 16: 
It is wit h a grea t dea l of pleasur e tha t I 
have to report to yo u the safe arriva l of the 
delegation from the Thir d Internationa l 
Conventio n of the Negr o Peoples of the 
Worl d a t the Leagu e of Nation s Assembl y 
now i n session a t Geneva , Switzerland . No t 
only has the delegation arrive d safely, but 
we have succeeded i n makin g a wonderfu l 
impressio n on the Assembl y throug h the expose b y Delegat e Bellegarde , o f Haiti , of the 
atrocitie s committe d upo n the native s of the 
lat e Germa n colony of Southwest Afric a by 
the Britis h mandate . 
To this we ca n onl y append Willia m 
Pickens' delicious word : "Ther e ar e just 
two o f us, Marcu s Garve y an d Willia m Pick ­
ens. An d one of us is the Liar. " M . Belle ­
garde , delegate to the Assembl y of the 
Leagu e o f Nation s fro m Haiti , make s his 
speech o n Septembe r 8, the Garve y delegatio n arrive s Septembe r 13. Yet , says Mr . 
Garvey : "We have made an impression-on 
the Assembly by Delegate Bellegarde." "Backward , tur n backward , oh Tim e 
in you r flight!" 
"WHY SO HARD?" 
W E have read the followin g lette r wit h 
the deepest sympathy : 
I a m not old enough to have ha d a "Blac k 
Mammy, " bu t a m too old , I believe, fo r this 
lette r to seem an impertinence . I a m fro m 
Nort h Carolina . M y constituency numbers 
10,000. I a m seeking fo r us al l the best. I 
have just me t TH E CRISIS fo r the first time ! 
Wil l file you r 1922, so kindl y an d so promptl y sent i n answe r to m y request fo r copies. 
I have rea d them wit h grea t interest an d I 
believe 'with understanding , wit h sympathy , 
wit h admiration , but ther e comes the question , "Wh y so hard ? Wh y so intolerant? " 
I have no doubt but tha t yo u love littl e child ­
ren, ar e kin d to old ladies, admir e flowers 
an d ador e babies. I a m led to this opinio n 
i n part b y two editorials, "Socia l Equality, " 
whic h is a splendid, honest admissio n 
whethe r one agrees or not, an d "Th e Span ­
is h Fandango, " beautifu l i n its wordin g beyon d m y word s to express (Apri l an d Ma y 
numbers). Bu t wh y alway s sow seeds of 
Hat e and , I dar e to say, wis h tha t therefrom 
ma y gro w flowers of Love ! . 
I have live d a grea t deal i n m y nea r 60 
years; m y roa d has never been fo r lon g on 
the level. It has woun d upward s most of 
the way , and I "kno w tha t I know " tha t th e world ; 
needs you r gift 
less as a Bat-I 
ti e Ax e o f i 
Cleavage , more) 
as a Powe r fo r 
welding . I have 
live d i n Balti ­
more 15 years^ 
and by fac t of* 
official connec-; 
t i o n hav e 
served o n com-' 
mittees wit h 
Ne w Yorkers 
and Bostonian s 
and ma y be 
said, I believe, 
to kno w m y 
neighbors both 
Nort h an d 
South , an d i t is 
no true r tha n 
"Pig s is Pigs " 
tha n tha t 
"Folk s is Folks, " an d Hat e begets Hat e and 
'tis a seed wit h a grea t yield . Now , wh y so 
hard ? Wh y so intolerant ? 
ALLI E M . COPELAND , 
Baltimore , Md . 
W e tur n to ou r othe r mail . Ther e ar e 
two pictures, a clippin g an d thre e letters. 
Her e ar e the 'pictures an d the clippin g fro m 
a Texa s paper, the name of whic h wa s not 
sent: 
Th e burnin g of Jo e Winters i n the publi c 
squar e at Conroe , Texas, drew a large r 
crowd tha n the annua l visi t of the circus. 
Winters wa s accused of attackin g a 14-yearold whit e girl . Bloodhound s wer e used to 
captur e hi m an d he wa s chased throug h 
three counties. Newspapers advertise d the 
event and thousands of persons, includin g 
"A LARGE R CROWD THA N 
TH E BURNING BODY 
youn g women an d children , watche d hi m 
chained to a pe g i n the publi c squar e an d a 
matc h applie d to his clothin g saturate d wit h 
gasoline. * * * 
The n comes a lette r fro m Florida : 
It migh t be interestin g to kno w tha t on 
the nigh t of the 14th of July , Jak e Davis, 
of Colquit, Ga. , wa s lynched , charge d wit h 
bein g the fathe r of a chil d b y a whit e wo ­
man . It appears tha t the woma n gave birt h 
to a Negr o chil d and he r neighbors insisted 
tha t she tell the fathe r of the child , whic h 
she di d wit h the usua l result. Th e interestin g fac t is tha t the Stat e press took no notice of it. It wa s not i n the papers. 
The n a whit e ma n write s fro m Denton , 
Texas: 
Hav e yo u a few moments of leisur e to 
give you r attention to the following ? Re -
centl y th e 
whit e popula -
of this littl e 
town came to 
the conclusion 
tha t a par k is 
needed. Their 
eyes fell upon 
one of the Ne ­
gr o sections 
throug h whic h 
a creek line d 
wit h tree s 
flows. This sectio n iwas considered undesirable , bu t 
goo d enough 
fo r Negroes; 
ther e the y 
live d fo r years, 
buil t humbl e 
homes, no w 
TH E they have to CIRCUS" quit an d get ver y littl e fo r their property . 
Thei r humbl e homes made them happy , bu t 
the white s sa y tha t they ar e of no use now. 
Is this not a cryin g injustice ? Th e Negroe s 
ar e helpless. Othe r sections of the tow n wil l 
not have the Negroes. Wher e shal l they go? 
I n the water. Coul d yo u protest against this 
withou t mentionin g m y name ? 
Wh y so hard ? Wh y so intolerant ? " I 
came not to brin g Peac e bu t a Sword, " sai d 
the pitifu l Christ . 
Ther e ar e ray s of ligh t i n the nex t clip ­
ping . Th e Ho t Spring s Sentinel Record 
says Apri l 25, 1922, reportin g the word s of a 
Souther n whit e woman , Mrs . Luk e Johnson , 
a t the Y . W . C. A . Conference : 
Go d knows tha t I face these problems wit h 
sorrow. Thes e childre n of ours have been 
thrust out into darkness withou t the help 
o f a friendl y touch. A race has grow n up 
i n the Sout h tha t we do not know. Tw o 
years ago whe n I iwas called to this wor k o f 
makin g a stud y of the rac e question, I tol d 
those wh o made the cal l tha t there wa s nothin g to stud y about the Negro , tha t I ha d 
been bor n an d raise d i n the South , an d tha t 
I kne w the Negro . Late r I realize d tha t I 
di d not kno w the Negro . W e have ou r eyes 
closed to a grea t powe r of whic h we kno w 
nothing . I saw a t Tuskegee , writers an d 
physician s an d painters an d poets, an d 
women of exquisit e cultur e an d refinement. 
Th e best people of m y rac e do not kno w 
the best people of the Negr o race. W e kno w 
the cook an d the yar d man , an d we are told 
tha t trut h an d morals ar e not wit h the Ne ­
gro race. I see i n this audienc e sprinkle d 
about the dar k faces of wome n wh o are giv ­
in g an d suffering and endurin g because 
they ar e makin g example s fo r their race—• 
an d they ar e treated lik e wome n i n the 
streets. 
An d finally a lette r from a Souther n whit e 
woma n i n Washington , D . C , tellin g us o f a 
Negr o wh o throug h the efforts of herself 
an d of Mr . Thoma s H . Lio n wa s saved 
from lynching : 
I wrot e to severa l papers i n different parts 
of the Stat e and am told tha t they publishe d 
a n account of it al l and commended Mr . Lio n 
fo r protectin g a man from mob violence. I f 
the press everywher e woul d do this—the y 
could create the necessary publi c sentiment 
an d i n a short time such Blots of Shame on 
the Unite d States woul d neve r occur. I pra y 
tha t Go d ma y let me ( a Souther n woman ) 
liv e to see the da y whe n there wil l neve r be 
anothe r lynching . 
I n the Manassa s Journal, Jul y 28, yo u 
wil l find a good editorial, "La w an d Orde r 
Rule. " The y congratulat e the people of the 
county upon the fac t tha t a lynchin g wa s 
averted i n connection wit h the Harris case. 
I n the same pape r is a statement fro m Mr . 
Lion— I tel l yo u this i n case yo u ma y wis h 
to send fo r a copy of the pape r an d rea d it. 
I a m read y to do anythin g withi n m y 
powe r to prevent lynchin g an d I wan t to 
ask yo u i f yo u wil l be good enough to send 
me anythin g an d everything tha t the N . A . 
A . C. P . has publishe d on the subject. 
R. O. T. C. 
WE append the followin g lette r wit h its 
graphi c account of "the wa y tha t they 
do i n the Army" : 
M y home is i n Charle s Town , Jefferson 
County , W . Va . It is i n the 5t h Corp s are a 
of the Unite d States of America ; headquarters at Columbu s Barracks, Ohio . I'm formerl y a membe r of Compan y K , 372nd In ­
fantry , A . E . F . I received a n applicatio n 
blan k fo r admittanc e to the Citizens' Mili ­
tar y Trainin g Corp s whic h woul d be hel d at 
one of the cantonments designated b y the 
Corp s Are a Commander. Owin g to previous 
militar y experience, I'wa s entitled to Re ­
serve Officer's Trainin g an d m y applicatio n 
wa s accepted to tha t effect. I wa s ordered 
to report to Cam p Knox , Stithton , Kentucky , 
August 1, 1922. 
Upo n m y arriva l a t camp I wa s subjected 
to al l manne r of insults. I n a trainloa d of 
about 500 men, I wa s the onl y Negro . Th e 
first open insult I received wa s whe n we detraine d a t camp. Th e truck s tha t wer e detaile d to carr y the me n fro m the statio n to 
the section of the camp, wher e we ha d to 
undergo a medica l examination , refused to 
let me ride . I wa s forced to wal k the distanc e of about one an d one-half miles. I 
threatened to report m y il l treatmen t to the 
Wa r Departmen t i n Washington , D . C. Just 
then a n officer, a first lieutenan t (white ) 
came over an d trie d to camouflage his sentiment b y blamin g the inciden t on the "South ­
er n Hoodlums. " H e trie d to convinc e me 
tha t he wa s a Rea l American ; therefore, too 
broadminde d to stoop to such pett y offences 
simpl y because a man's ski n wa s of a darke r 
hue tha n his. 
Al l the officers talke d to me i n a friendl y 
manner, as di d the first, bu t a blin d ma n 
could see that! they wer e agitatin g prejudic e 
amon g the me n against me. 
O f course b y the time I walke d ove r to 
the medica l examiners, I wa s obliged to get 
on the tai l end of the line . I stood ther e 
fro m earl y i n the afternoon unti l about 
dark . B y tha t time I wa s about 30 me n 
from the entranc e of the Y . M .C. A. , i n 
whic h buildin g the me n wer e havin g their 
papers inspected before undergoin g the physica l examination . 
Just then a Majo r of Infantr y came alon g 
an d asked me i f I ha d ha d anythin g to eat, 
an d I tol d hi m "No" ; then he told me to 
follow him . W e wen t to a mess hal l a few 
building s away ; there I wa s issued a stale 
cheese sandwich . Whe n I returne d to the 
line about 250 men , wh o ha d just arrived , 
wer e alread y added to the line an d I wa s forced to go back to the rea r of this new 
line . B y an d b y i t began to rai n an d everybody ra n over to a n open air theatr e or 
shed. Th e whit e me n wer e al l give n mattresses an d told to mak e themselves a t home 
on the floor. I wa s take n out i n the rai n 
across camp i n search of a n empt y buildin g 
fo r me to spend the night. A t last we foun d 
a buildin g whose 2n d floor wa s unoccupied 
an d I proceeded to mak e myself as comfortable as possible wit h nothin g but a bunc h of 
dirt y mattresses. A s soon as the officer left 
me, al l the men i n the neighborhood seemed 
to kno w tha t I wa s there. 
The y cursed an d ordered me to pu t the 
ligh t out i f I knew wha t wa s good fo r me. 
Some became so angr y a t m y havin g the 
nerve to come down there to enter the R . 0 . 
T. C. tha t they made open threats to carr y 
me out of camp an d give me a good beating. 
Th e nex t morning , I wa s refused breakfast. 
Th e physica l examinatio n wa s a farce . 
The y passed me aroun d from one doctor to 
another. Th e last doctor made the mistak e 
of givin g me a whit e card , whic h signifies 
tha t I passed 0 . K . Anothe r officer came 
alon g an d asked me whic h doctor I received 
the car d from. Afte r I told him , they both 
ha d a whispere d conversation. Th e doctor 
came back, placed a test tube over m y heart, 
listened a few seconds, then took the whit e 
car d an d gave me a pin k one, whic h signified tha t I wa s physicall y unfit fo r service. 
Th e officer i n charge of the rejected me n 
took me over to the mess hal l and trie d to 
over-feed me, bu t I ha d no appetite. 
MORE LIGHT ON THE HAITIAN 
SITUATION 
THE Rev . S. E . Churchston e Lord , B.D. , 
a returne d missionar y fro m Haiti , tells 
i n the Voice of Missions, of the America n 
invasion . H e begins: 
I n the New York Journal of Ma y the 8, 
1922, ther e appeared a species of propa ­
gand a fro m a Washingto n correspondent, 
quotin g ex-Secretar y of Stat e Lansin g i n 
his lette r to Mr . Medil l McCormic k as to 
the causes of the America n invasio n of 
Haiti . I quote the correspondent: "Ameri ­
can marine s occupied Hait i afte r German y 
ha d landed a n arme d forc e a t Port-au -
Princ e to seize tha t republic's custom houses, accordin g to Robert Lansing , forme r 
Secretar y of State. " 
It is a n iniquitou s act on the part of an y 
statesman to declare tha t the Wilso n government caused America n marine s to be 
landed i n the republi c of Hait i to save the 
Haitian s from the Germans. 
I .write from knowledge and fro m love of 
the trut h an d fair-pla y i n the sigh t of GoS. 
Th e half of the evi l an d intrigu e an d du ­
plicit y an d murders an d debauchery of the 
youn g womanhoo d of ever y class i n Hait i 
perpetrated upo n the Haitian s b y the responsible and irresponsibl e forces of Amer ­
ica n marines, an d the streams of concessionarie s wh o pai d fo r an d foun d audience 
wit h Presiden t Dartiguenave , cannot be 
told i n this t\,o short rebutta l an d ple a foi 
Haiti . Ever y honest America n wh o does not 
believe i n lynchin g Negroe s an d deprivin g 
them of their politica l rights wil l urg e 
Presiden t Hardin g to tak e his militar y boys 
home, even as Englan d di d from Egypt . 
Th e marine s kille d the native s just as 
king s kil l tigers. Some fellow is found , his 
famii y perhaps made hostage, an d he in ­
gratiate s himself throug h some supposed 
grievanc e agami t ih e Americans, an d he 
leads a ban d of aggrieve d peasantr y to a 
designated spot, then a machin e gu n or 
a n aeroplane does the rest fo r them. Le t 
Cona n Doyl e cal l u p the ghosts of the ma ­
rin e boys wh o committe d suicide i n Hait i 
Le t hi m ask them wh y they di d commit 
suicide . The y wil l al l say : "Rotte n business; I wante d to come home awa y from it 
all , o r go to Europ e an d do honest fighting 
fo r a principle , but they woul d not let me. " 
As k Admira l Knap p wh y di d he pa y two 
visits to Haiti ? It wa s not to force the 
Haitian s to liv e u p to their contract; but 
those visits wer e to stop the pett y jealousie s 
between the Nava l an d Marin e heads, as to 
whic h force should have the precedence i n 
the plannin g an d governin g of Haitia n affairs; whic h littleness on the part of agents 
of a grea t republi c at one time threatened 
the prestige of Bailey-Blanchar d an d the 
Stat e Departmen t at Washingto n i n Haiti . 
Bailey-Blanchar d did not lik e to go to the 
militar y headquarters i n Hait i fo r orders 
to ru n his office. Ho w do I kno w this an d 
more ? Becaus e Hait i before the Wa r wa s 
a clearin g house fo r intrigu e an d instructio n 
affecting the whol e world . 
Eventually , German y sun k a Frenc h steame r i n whic h two Haitia n stewards wer e 
drowned . An d afte r muc h urgin g on the 
part o f America n advisers, the Presiden t 
of Hait i asked German y fo r damages. German y looked i n scorn at the quasi-Haitia n 
government, an d broke off diplomati c rela ­
tions. The n the Presidential-appointe d 
legislators declared tha t a "state of war " 
existed between Hait i an d Germany . Th e 
Haitian s ha d been promise d tha t i f they 
ha d declared wa r against Germany , the 
American s woul d make the Liberia n govern ­
ment a bi g loa n an d withdra w their mili ­
tar y forces. Afte r a "state of war " wa s declared, Americ a started to confiscate Germa n propert y runnin g into man y millions, 
impoverishe d man y Haitian-bor n widows of 
Germans; sold propert y and goods fo r cash, 
and ye t has not pai d an y of the foreig n 
debt o f Haiti . I do wis h Franc e could collect al l the money she wants from Gsrmar y 
an d pa y he r debt to America , then French ­
men wil l begin to brea k their silence about 
America n doings i n Haiti ; Spai n wil l also 
do some talking , an d Americ a wil l find an 
easy wa y to get out of Hait i an d Santo 
Domingo . Hampton Institute 
Hampton, Virginia 
Founded in 1868 by General Armstrong 
to train selected colored youth who should 
go out to teach and lead their people. In 
1878 Indians were first admitted. 
Hampton stands for "a sound body, a 
trained capacity, and an unselfish outlook 
on life." 
Hampton is an industrial village: 1,100 
acres; 140 buildings; 850 boarding students, 
500 day pupils in practice-school; GOO summer-school students; 200 teachers and 
workers. 
Hampton has over 2,000 graduates and 
8,000 former students; also numerous outgrowths, including Tuskegee, founded by 
Booker T. Washington. 
Hampton offers courses in four schools 
of normal and collegiate grade—Agricultural, Business, Home-Economics, Normal— 
and in two schools of secondary grade— 
Academy and Trade (11 four-year courses). 
Hampton needs annual scholarships at 
$100 each and endowed scholarships at $2,500 
each; also $135,000 annually above regular 
income. 
JAME S E . GREGG, Principal 
FRAN K K . ROGERS, Treasurer 
ROBERT HUNGERF0RD NORMAL 
AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
Incorporated 
(Non -Sectarian) 
Eatonville, Florida, The Only Incorporated Negro Town in Florida. A N IDEA L HOM E FOR 
YOU R BOY AN D GIRL. Near Maitland, 
Florida, which is our Railroad, Telegraph and 
Express Station. Summer School Began July 
3rd; Regular Fall Term Begins October 5th, 
1922; DA Y AN D NIGHT SESSIONS. 
Courses include Grammar, Normal and Vocational. Terms reasonable. Send for further 
information. 
S. G. BAKER, D.D. 
Principal 
VIRGINIA UNION 
UNIVERSITY 
RICHMOND , VIRGINIA 
is offering young men an excellent opportunity to secure a liberal education 
along a variety of lines. Every effort is 
made to stimulate a full, well-rounded 
development. High school, college and 
professional courses are offered. The 
faculty is strong, the rates are reasonable. 
For further information address 
The President 
1882 LANE COLLEGE 1922 
Jackson, Tennessee 
A growing College with a splendid history 
and a bright future. It offers modern courses 
in Collegiate, Theological, Musical, College 
Preparatory, Teachers Training, Home Economics, Agricultural and Pre-Medical subjects. 
Several vocational courses are also taught. 
Proper standards of conduct as well as 
scholarship are maintained. Registrations of 
students are now being made for the next 
session. Well equipped laboratories, dormitories with modern conveniences and facilities 
under positive Christian influences are supported. For further information address 
J . F. LANE , President, Jackson, Tennessee. 
St. Philip's 
Normal & Industrial School 
San Antonio, Texas. 
(FOR GIRLS) 
Normal, Academic, Junior and Musi® Courses, 
Teachers' Training, Domestic Sciences and 
Arts, Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring, Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookeeping and Spanish. 
Boarding facilities. Ideal location. 
Faculty from leading Universities. 
Write for Bulletin. 
Artemisia Bowden, Principal 
Edward Waters College 
JACKSONVILLE , FLORID A 
An Ideal Christian Home School 
In the Heart of Beautiful Florida 
For students unable to stand the rigors of 
a Northern winter. 
Grammar School, Junior High School, 
Senior High School, Normal School, School 
of Theology, Music, Commercial Courses, 
Manual Training, Domestic Science and 
Art, Band, Military training for men, 
Physical education for women. 
JOH N C. WRIGHT, President; 
BISHOP JOH N HURST, 
Chairman, Board of Trustees. 
WALDE N COLLEGE 
Large New Beautiful Site. College organized to suit advanced standards and to do well what is undertaken. 
COURSES—Junior College, emphasizing two years' standard 
college work above approved high school; Arts Course; Science 
or Pre-Medical; Teachers Training. 
High School; Music; Home Economics; Practice Scnool: 
Seventh Grade; Eighth Grade; Kindergarten. 
Fifty-sixth session begins October 3rd. For Information address T. R. Davis, President, Walden College, Nashville, Tenn. 
KINDERGARTE N DEPARTMEN T 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y 
In full operation since 1912 
Professional course of two years 
Address 
Kindergarten Department 
Atlant a University Atlanta , G a MEHARR Y MEDICA L COLLEG E 
with departments of 
Medicine , Dentistr y an d Pharmac y an d a Nurs e Trainin g Schoo l 
AL L DEPARTMENT S RECENTL Y REORGANIZE D 
Two years (Qass One) college work required for admission to the study of medicine. Graduation 
from a four years' High School or Normal School required for admission to the departments of dentistry and pharmacy and nurse training. For catalog and application blank address 
John J . Mullowney, M.D., President of Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Term. 
CflAIIT /^AfTnprC1 \ Typewriting 3 months 
Bookkeepino 3 months 
shorthand... 3 months 
Efficiency Course—Pitman shorthand typewritin g and hookkeeping—11 months. 80 lessons i n business—7 months. 
DUNCAN'S BUSINESS SCHOOL l2 % h n;™,M.. h la. 
Cleota Collins, 
Lyric Soprano 
"She combines an excellent voice with artistic finish of the most mature kind. Her singing proved as 
charming as anything the concert programs will offer 
this season."—Detroit Daily Nevit. 
GEORGE LACY , Manager, 
186 Hamilton Avenue Columbus. Ohio 
Agents Earn $60 a Week 
500 0 A 8
ent s 
Wanted 
Big Profits 
Photo Cult iiuttons. Photo Locketi, Breast Pins, Watch 
Charms, Photo Medallions and Novelties. 
vVe copy from any photo you send us. Negro Post Cards, 
Calendars, Pictures, Books, Negro Dolls and many other 
loveltles. Free Catalog. 
BEL L MFG . CO. 
3ox 103 Jamaica, N. Y. 
CHESTER A. SMITH 
Baritone 
Concerts and Recitals 
For terms and dates, 
address 
67 MOUNTFOR T STREET , 
BOSTON, MASS, 
"A T LAST W E HAV E IT" 
Just what you've been waiting for. Don't 
let his picture die i n your memory. Have 
i t put on a -
6 x 8 Hand Painted Arm* and Navy, 
American Legion Placque 
with the FLANDE R POPPIE S in BEAU ­
TIFU L COLORS . 
Something you can always keep. Send us his pic'ure , 
.vhich wil l be returned unharmed. $2.75 GUARANTEE D 
LIKENES S or MONE T BACK . Writ e for large circula r of 
different placques. 
TH E TALBER T PRESS & NOVELTY COMPAN Y 
299 Walnut Street Buffalo, N. Y. 
Mak e "Tour Holida y Selections Now 
TRAININ G SCHOO L FO R COLORE D 
WOME N NURSES 
in connection with Harlem Hospital, New York 
City, offers a two years and six months' course 
of instruction to colored women who meet the 
educational requirement of the New York State 
law and who desire to enter the nursing profession. 
Full maintenance and text books are furnished. 
Also an allowance of twenty dollars a month. 
The comprehensive service of the Hospital and 
the new Residence, with its complete equipment 
of class rooms and lecture hall, afford unusual 
facilities for theoretical and practical instruction. 
For further information apply to— 
Genera] Superintendent of Training Schools, 
BELLEVU E HOSPITAL, NE W YORK , N . YFRATERNAL HOSPITAL SCHOOL 
OF NURSING -
42 Dorsey Street MONTGOMERY, ALA . 
A scientific and professional course to women between 
19-35 years of age, wit h Hig h School education or its 
equivalent. 
Fo r information write Superintendent of Nurses 
A MONET GETTER because St it A CROWD GETTEF 
Churches and Clubs looking for a play that will afford u 
e.enikg of Sfide-Spllttlns Fun, should have 
The Slabtown Convention 
An entertainment li one aet; full •! wit 
and good humor. Scores of churches have cleared trn 
On* to Tws Hundred Dollars In One Night. PRICE, 10. 
MISS NANNIE H. BURROUGHS, Author 
' >»™in Height!. Washington. D. O 
The Negro in American History 
Its value indicated in public and secondary school 
libraries as an introduction to the study of American 
History from the American Negro viewpoint. 284 pages, 
32 chapters, 17 full page illustrations. Index and 
bibliography other features. Price $2.00; postage prepaid 
$2.15; sent on receipt of net price. Order through any 
bookseller; C. O. D. or postage remittance. For further 
information address the author. 
JOHN W. CROMWELL 
1439 Swann St., Washington. D. C. 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
JOS. L . JONES, Pres. 
641 W . 9th St. Ondnniti. Ohio 
LEAR N MECHANICA L DENTISTR Y 
This highly trained Professional and Profitable Trade taught in a very short time by expert instructors. 
BIG SALARIES , SHORT HOURS, EAS Y WORK . 
Salaries range from $25.00 to $125.00 per week. BIG DEMAN D FO R GRADUAT E MECHANICA L 
DENTISTS. Earn while learning. Easy Payment Plan. 
Write for particulars. 
PHILADELPHIA SCHOOL OF MECHANICAL DENTISTRY 
1143 SOUT H 19TH STREE T Dept. A . PHILADELPHIA , PA . TH E NEGR O I N OU R HISTOR Y 
B y 
Dr. CARTER GODWIN WOODSON 
$2.15 by mail 
Published in June, this book has already been adopted as a textbook for 
schools conducting courses in History and Sociology. The following desirable 
features make it the most useful book on the Negro: 
It contains 20 chapters, 126 illustrations, references for future study and important 
documents in the appendix. 
It is well-thought-out, logically developed, tersely written and beautifully illustrated. 
It has a. logical arrangement, accurate citations, a vigorous style and positive 
statements to avoid ambiguity and inspire clear thinking. 
It shows an admirable balance between the economic and the political, between 
the purely narrative and the material. 
It analyzes and discusses every phase of Negro life and history without the bias 
of many writers on social problems. 
It is the only textbook on the Negro written from the point of view of the 
student and in conformity with the requirements of the schoolroom. 
There is no better volume to recommend either to the man in the street or to 
the serious student. 
TH E ASSOCIATED PUBLISHERS, INC. 
1216 You Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 
Wha t o f th e Negro ? 
What solution is there for America's grave problem of race relations? 
What will prevent another race riot such as that in Chicago in July, 1919? 
Th e Negr o i n Chicag o 
By the CHICAG O COMMISSION O F RAC E RELATION S 
is an attempt by thirteen men (seven white and six Negro) to find a remedy 
for the race ills of Chicago and an answer to the Negro question throughout 
the United States. 
"Probably the biggest assemblage of facts of its kind ever collected with 
reference to the relations of whites and Negroes living in cities 
A cool, massive play of intelligence on a human problem of terrific proportions."—CARL SANDBUR G in the Chicago Daily News. 
Your dealer has this volume for sale at $6.00 net, as well as another important study on the Negro problem, 
The Negro Press in the United States 
B Y FREDERIC K G . DETWEILER . $3.00 net. 
TH E UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
5927 ELLI S AVENU E CHICAGO,,ILLINOI S 
Address: THE CRISIS 
70 Fifth Avenue New York, N. Y. 
Mention TH E CRISIS ORCHARDVILLE LOTS 
GOIN G FAS T A T 
$3 5 
$3.00 Down and $1.50 a Month. No Interest. 
Clear Title. Money-Back Guarantee 
Have you received a copy of our beautiful circular telling all 
about this attractive offer? If not, right now is 
the time to send for one. 
Thousands of people from all parts of the country have sent for 
the circular and are mighty glad they did so. Perhaps you will 
be just as glad as they are, after you find out all about Orchardville and the opportunity it offers you. 
The circular will cost you nothing and you place yourself under 
no obligation by sending for it. 
Simply write your name and address on the coupon below and 
mail it to us today, before you forget it. When we receive it we 
will send the circular promptly, together with a pamphlet containing letters from people who have been to Orchardville, as well 
as other interesting information. Then, when you look the pictures 
over and read everything thoroughly, you will know whether you 
want to secure any lots or not. 
Don't you think it a good idea to send for the circular immediately? 
By not doing so you may be unknowingly shutting yourself off from 
the very opportunity you have been waiting for. Remember, you 
place yourself under no obligation whatever. 
ARENSON REALTY DEVELOPMENT CORP. 
19 S. L A SALL E ST. , CHICAGO , ILL . 
WRITE PLAINLY 
Arenso n Realt y Dev'pt . Corp. , 
Chicago , 111. 
Gentlemen : 
Withou t an y obligatio n on m y part, yo u ma y send me a cop y o f you r 
circula r whic h tells al l abou t Orchardville . 
FUL L NAM E 
Address or Bo x N o 
Tow n an d Stat e 
CKI-ll-2 2 T O TH E 
INVESTING PUBLIC 
Ho w muc h mone y have yo u lost durin g the past five years i n you r en ­
deavors t o secure a n investmen t wit h you r savings tha t woul d giv e yo u a 
fair retur n an d a safe security ? 
If we are able to show yo u a n investmen t wher e ther e is securit y o f 
principa l an d interest wit h the practica l certaint y tha t the investmen t wil l 
doubl e itself i n valu e an d whic h ca n be converte d int o cash withou t difficulty 
wil l yo u no t be interested ? O f course , yo u will . 
W e have prepare d fo r distributio n a bookle t describin g the Blac k Swa n 
Phonograp h Compan y whic h has been organize d fo r the purpos e of increasin g 
the outpu t of Blac k Swa n Records, Blac k Swa n Needle s an d the "Swanola " 
talkin g machine , introduce d an d manufacture d b y the Pac e Phonograp h 
Corporation . 
This compan y is the first Rac e organizatio n to manufactur e o n a larg e 
scale a nationall y advertise d an d sold Produc t fo r whic h ther e has been a 
steady demand . It no w controls a larg e an d wel l equippe d factor y devoted 
exclusivel y to the manufactur e of its own goods. This issue of stock is fo r 
the purpos e of completin g paymen t o n this factor y an d the furthe r growt h 
an d expansio n of the business. 
Wit h mone y flowing freely , as it is beginnin g to do, a n investmen t i n 
BLAC K SWA N PHONOGRAP H COMPAN Y PREFERRE D appears to us to 
be a most desirabl e for m o f safe investmen t wit h ful l promis e o f larg e 
increas e i n value . 
This is the time to get i n o n a mone y makin g proposition . If yo u wan t a 
safe investmen t at a conservative , sure rat e of interest bu y five shares of 
Blac k Swa n Preferre d fo r $575.00 an d get a certai n retur n o f 6 % o n each 
share an d a n agreemen t tha t the stock wil l be redeeme d at $600.00, plus 
6 % dividend s i n thre e years. O r i f yo u prefe r to bu y five shares o f Commo n 
Stoc k at $300.00 an d gro w u p wit h the compan y int o a lifetime o f dividend s 
an d the practica l certaint y tha t you r investmen t wil l doubl e i n valu e i n 
five years. 
W e shall be gla d to send yo u ou r bookle t full y describin g this issue of 
stock. Sen d us, withou t obligatio n o n you r part, you r name an d address an d 
w e wil l send yo u ful l particulars. I f yo u ar e not i n positio n to pa y al l cash, 
we ca n arrang e terms tha t wil l be attractiv e to you . 
Th e Boar d of Directors ha s positivel y limite d the amoun t o f stock tha t 
ca n be sol d a t this time . Therefore , w e wan t yo u to ac t quickly . 
Ver y trul y yours, 
HARR Y H . PACE , PRESIDENT , 
2289 Sevent h Ave. , Ne w York , N . Y . THE SUPREME LIFE AND CASUALTY COMPANY 
Home Office—Columbus, Ohio. 
TH E FIFT Y DOLLA R PRIZE CONTEST 
T O DETERMIN E A NAM E FO R OU R FIRS T CASUALT Y POLIC Y 
COME S T O A N EN D THANKSGIVIN G DAY . TH E COMMITTE E 
O F AWAR D WIL L ANNOUNC E TH E WINNE R O F TH E FIFT Y 
DOLLA R PRIZ E I N TH E JANUAR Y CRISIS. SUGGESTION S FO R 
A NAM E HAV E COM E FRO M POINT S A S DISTAN T A S FLORID A 
AN D UTAH , NE W HAMPSHIR E AN D TEXAS . FUL L PARTICU ­
LAR S WIL L B E SEN T YO U UPO N REQUEST . 
OUR FIRST CASUALT Y POLICY 
HA S ALREAD Y WO N FO R ITSEL F AN D FO R SUPREM E LIF E A 
SUR E PLAC E WIT H TH E INSURIN G PUBLIC . OU R AGENT S 
FIN D THI S POLIC Y A WORTH Y SUPPLEMEN T T O OU R ESTAB ­
LISHE D OLD-LIN E LEGA L RESERV E LIF E BUSINESS . DESCRIP ­
TIV E CIRCULA R WIL L B E SEN T UPO N REQUEST . 
OPPORTUNITIES FOR AGENT S 
AR E AVAILABL E I N OHIO , WES T VIRGINIA , ARKANSAS , AN D 
TH E DISTRIC T O F COLUMBIA . STAT E AN D DISTRIC T MAN ­
AGERS , ORGANIZER S AN D CAPABL E REPRESENTATIVE S O N 
A PAR T O R FULL-TIM E BASI S CA N B E USE D I N AL L THI S 
TERRITORY . YOU R INQUIR Y WIL L RECEIV E PROMP T ATTEN ­
TIO N AN D B E TREATE D CONFIDENTIALLY . GIV E FUL L 
PARTICULARS . 
—T . K. GIBSON, PRESIDENT. 
"YOU WILL FIND OURS A GOOD POLICY" 
SOUTHER N SALESMA N WANTE D 
An established Northern Corporation doing a national business desires the services of a live, honest 
and trustworthy salesman (or woman) in the Southland. 
Only persons with ability and experience need apply. 
Salary and commission paid. Address 
BERESFOR D GAL E CORPORATION 
No. 413 S. Broad St. Philadelphia. Pa. 
You r Gol d Toot h Polishe d 
You r Whit e Teet h Bleache d 
By Using Dr. WELTERS ' Antiseptic 
—TOOTH POWDER— 
Asbolutely Free From Grit and Acid 
And Prevents Decay 
As k your druggist. If he hasn't got it, ask him to 
order it for you. Send 27 Cents in Stamps 
for a full size package. 
The E. A. Welters' Tooth Powder Co., Inc. 
410 BROAD ST. JACKSONVILLE, FLA. 
Agents and Distributors Wanted 
Extra Large Profit Guaranteed 
The Largest and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation 
Owned and Controlled by Negroes in the United States 
Not an Ordinary Dentifrice but a Scientific Preparation Specially Prepared for Polishing "GOLD" 
in the Mouth, "BLEACHING' the Teeth, Healing and Hardening Bleeding Gums. 
1923 Calendar Blotters 
Advertise and Success is yours i n any Business. One 
Hundre d 3 % x 9 inc h Blotters with your Advertisement 
and 1923 Calendar on i t for $4.00 postpaid. 
Remi t by Money Order or registered letter. 
Address 
CHARLE S STODGHILL 
1516 S. 12th St.. LOUISVILLE, KY. Agent s Wante d 
In Every 
Town and 
Locality. 
GOOD PAY 
Catalog Free 
TH E EAS T INDIA 
TOILET GOODS 
MFG . CO. 
316 N. Central Dept. B 
OKLAHOMA CITY, OKLAHOMA 
CHARLE S D . CAMPBELL . A . B . 
ANALYTICA L CHEMIST 
(Graduate University of Colorado 1921) 
Consultation by mai l and Analyses made. (Expert i n 
Technica l Commercial Analysis.) 
Formulas, Trade Secrets and best Manufacturing 
Processes for sale. 
Raw Materials and Essentia l Oils for Cosmetics, Frui t 
Flavors, Beverage Extracts and Certified Colors for 
sale. Laboratory Fully Equipped. 
ADDRES S BOX 204 DEPT. D. NEWPORT, R. I. 
PANTS AND SWEATER 
BARGAI N 
NO W 
\ Postage 
§k Paid 
SEND NO MONEY 
Here is one of the biggest values 
ever offered to readers of this paper. We'll send both these beautiful well made pants and this 
beautiful heavy warm sweater-— 
without asking for one cent with 
the order. . „ _ . 
PANTS are made of fine durable 
suiting in neat stripe effect, extra 
heavy pocketing and reinforced 
seams. Just the pants for every 
day wear. Color, Grey Stripe 
sizes, 30 to 44 waist, 30 to. 33 
-Sffrm-n — — inseam. Be sure to give 
waist and inseam measure when ordering. SWEATER is 
made of good merino yarn with large stylyish roll collar 
Two big pockets, very warm andserviceable. Color. Grey 
M Blue. Sizes 34 to 46. Just send your name and address 
giving color and sizes wanted. We'll send both by parcel 
nnVt nreijaid you pay mailman when package comes. 
fooneybaSif notpfeaWd. Positively a $7.50 value for 
$3 58 ORDER NOW BY NO. 191 C6 6 | 
HOWARD-UU X CO. , DEPT. 191 CLEVELAND. O. 
SEASHORE LOTS 
50 x 150 
$200.0 0 Upwar d 
EASY TERM S 
Positively the prettiest cottage and bungalow sites in the suburbs of Atlanti c 
Cit y on the Pleasantville, Atlanti c City 
Millio n Dolla r Boulevard opposite Doug ­
lass Park. 
Advance to builders, use of additional 
space for garden free. Fo r further particulars and prospectus, write, 
CRESCENT CORPORATION 
WM. B. SOUTHERN, PRES. 
Suite 404-5-6, Odd Fellows Building 
12th and Spruce Streets 
PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
RELIABLE AGENTS WANTED 
AUTOMOBIL E FRE E 
TO TAILORING AGENTS 
Make $75.00 a week and up and get an automobile free 
taking orders for our fine tailored-to-measure clothes. Our 
line shows big assortment of Virgin Wool Fabrics, all at 
the one low price of $29.75 for suit or overcoat. Every 
order pays you big cash profit- in advance. We supply 
finest selling outfit and give an automobile free to every 
man who qualifies. Write quick for our startling offer. 
PARK TAILORING COMPANY 
Dept. 561 CHICAGO, ILL. 
YO U CA N BAN K B T KAI L 
FIRST STANDARD BANK 
Louisville, Xy . 
Capital and Surplus (Paid) 
$110,000.00 
Wilso n Lovett , President 
Tailoring Salesmen 
Mak e $75.00 a week selling our strictly 
Ail-Wool , Made-to-Measure Suits at 
$26.50. Yo u collect profits in advance 
and keep them. W e supply finest Selling 
Outfit in America . Man y exclusive 
money-making features. Tailoring, raincoat and side-line men, part or full time, 
get in touch with us immediately. 
GOODWEAR, Chicago, Inc. 
Dept . 187 
843 W. Adams St., Chicago, 111. A Selected List of Books 
Dealin g wit h the Negr o Problem 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
Two COLORED WOME N WIT H TH E AMERICA N EXPEDITIONARY 
FORCES. (Hunton and Johnson) $2.50 
TH E HEAR T OF A WOMA N AN D OTHE R POEMS . (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) : 1.50 
TH E SOU L OP JOH N BROWN . (Stephen Graham) 2.00 
A NARRATIVE OF TH E NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLAC K FOLK . (W. E . B. DuBois) 2.00 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGRO MIGRATION. (Carter G. Woodson) 1.10 
TH E CURSE OF RAC E PREJUDICE. (James F . Morton) 25 
HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO. (Benjamin Brawley) 2.00 
TH E NEGRO MIGRAN T I N PITTSBURGH. (Abraham Epstein)... .50 
GRANN Y MAUME E AN D OTHE R PLAY S FOR A NEGRO THEATRE . 
(RidgeJy Torrence) 1.75 
UNSUN G HEROES. (Elizabeth Ross Haynes) 2.50 
TH E SHADOW. (Mary White Ovingtcr-). 2.00 
JOH N BROWN . (W. E . B. DuBois) 2.00 
NEGRO I N AMERICA N HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 2.00 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W. Crawford).. 1.00 
TH E VOIC E OF TH E NEGRO. (Robert T. Kerlin) 2.50 
TH E NEGRO. (W. E . B. D U Bois) 90 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861. (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.00 
TH E NEGRO FACE S AMERICA . (Herbert J . Seligmann) 1.75 
DARKWATER . (W. E . B. DuBois) 2.25 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.50 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H. E . Krehbiel) 2.00 
BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (Emmett J . Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) . 2.50 
A SOCIAL HISTORY OF TH E AMERICA N NEGRO. (Benjamin 
Brawley) 4.00 
TH E NEGRO I N LITERATUR E AN D ART . (Benjamin Brawley).. 1.50 
FIFT Y YEAR S AN D OTHE R POEMS . (James Weldon Johnson).. 1.50 
TH E HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO CHURCH . (Carter G. Woodson).. 2.15 
TH E UPWARD PATH . (Pritchard and Ovington) 1.35 
FIFT Y YEAR S IN TH E GOSPEL MINISTRY. (T. G. Steward)... 2.70 
HARLE M SHADOWS. (Claude McKay) 1.35 
TH E BOO K OF AMERICA N NEGRO POETRY. (James Weldon Johnson) 1.75 
AMERICA N CIVILIZATION AN D TH E NEGRO. (C. V . Roman) 3.00 
TH E NEGRO IN OU R HISTORY. (Carter G. Woodson) 2.00 
Address: TH E CRISIS , 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y. Soothing the 
after-smart of shaving 
Madam C. J. Walker's 
Witc h Haze l Jell y 
A Sharp razor and good lather are not enough 
to prevent a tingling smartness after the 
morning shave. 
An application of Madam C. J. Walk r's 
Witch Hazel Jelly closes the pores, soothes 
the skin, prevents chap and assures comfort 
after shaving. 
35 Cents of Agents and Dealers 
Made by the Mme.CJ.Walker Mfg. Co., 
640NorthWest St., Indianapolis. Ind. 