THE 
CRISIS 
TE N CENT S OCTOBE R 
191 9 
FRANK 
WALTS 
CHILDREN ' S NUMBER. NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE 
President 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y 
Chairman Board of Directors 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Acting Treasure r 
MAJO R J . E . SPINGAR N 
Secretary 
JOH N R. SHILLAD Y 
Director of Publications and Research 
DR . w. E . B . DUBOI S 
Field Secretary 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSO N 
Assistant Secretary 
WALTE R F . WHIT E 
During the last three days of August the daily press reported the following: 
August 28: El i Cooper, a Negro , was shot to death in a church at 
Ocmulgee , Ga., b y a mob. The church was then burned. Othe r 
churches and a lodge hall in the vicinit y were burned. 
August 30: A mob stormed the jail at Knoxville , Tenn. , i n search 
of Mauric e F . Mays, a Negro , wh o had been arrested on suspicion in 
connection wit h the murde r of a whit e woman . Th e mob looted the 
jail, released prisoners, captured large quantities of confiscated whiske y 
and raged through the streets of the city. Rac e riotin g developed. 
August 31: Luciu s McCarthy , a Negro , accused of an attack on a 
whit e woman , was lynched at Bogalusa , La. , his body dragged through 
the streets and then burned. 
The N. A. A. C. P. combats race rioting, mob violence and 
race discrimination. It has 2J0 branches and 79,500 members. 
Its strength should be doubled and quadrupled. If you want 
to form a branch in your community, write to the National Office, 70 Fifth Ave. But first join. Sign the blank below. 
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT 
OF COLORED PEOPLE National Office, 70 Fifth Ave., New York City 
Dat e 1919 
Th e CRISI S it sent without furthe r charge, to member s payin g two dollar s or more . 
Majo r J . E . Spingarn, Actin g Treasurer , 
70 Fift h Avenue , Ne w York . 
SIR : 
I enclose $ in payment of membership dues for one year in the Nationa l 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People , wit h the stipulation tha t one 
dollar of any amount remitted herewith in excess of one dolla r is for one year's subscription to TH E CRISIS . 
Nam e 
Street 
Cit y and State 
First hand information regarding the assault upon the secretary of 
the National Association at Austin, Texas, August 22 , can be obtained 
from the following three leaflets: 
The National Secretary in Texas and an Account of the Texas Branches, 
by John R. Shillady. 
Is Mob Violence Texas' Solution of the Race Problem? by Mary White 
Ovington, reprint from The Independent. 
In Texas, by James Weldon Johnson, reprint from the New York Age. 
These leaflets are five cents for the three. One Dollar for bunches of 25. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CON ­
DUCTE D B Y W . E . BURCHARD T D U BOIS i AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINES S 
MANAGE R 
Vol. 18—No. 6 OCTOBER, 1919 Whole No. 108 
PICTURES 
Page 
COVER . Portrait of Hazel Henley. Frank Walts. 
PICTURES of Seventy-four Colored Children. 
BUST OF A NEGRO CHILD After Paolo S. Abbate 30 5 
CARNEGIE. A Cartoon. Porter 30 6 
ARTICLES 
FATHE R LOVE . A Poem. Leslie Pinckney Hill 28 9 
A FAIRY STORY . Carry S. Bond 29 0 
CHICAG O AN D ITS EIGHT REASONS. With Illustrations. Walter F. 
White 29 3 
TH E RIOT A T LONGVIEW, TEXA S 29 7 
DEPARTMENTS 
OPINION 28 3 
TH E OUTE R POCKE T 28 7 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D 
PEOPLE 29 3 
TH E LOOKING GLASS 30 0 
TH E HORIZON 30 7 
COMING ISSUES OF THE CRISIS 
Th e November CRISI S will be sixty-eight paces in size and fifteen cents in price. It will be 
full of new interest. 
Th e December CRISI S will be our annual Christmas Number , with its cover in colors and 
holiday cheer. 
TE N CENTS A COPY ; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Th e date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
I n ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York New York 
under the Act of March 3, 1879. 280 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Science* The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
NEXT TER M OPENED SEPTEMBER 22, 1919 
For further information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
The Cheyney Training School for 
Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNA. 
A normal school of high grade for 
young colored men and women of good 
abilities, who desire to prepare themselves to be teachers. Courses include 
the regular academic and professional 
subjects, and special departments in domestic art, domestic science, manual 
training and agriculture. Board and 
tuition $125. Next regular term began 
Thursday, September 18, 1910. Summer 
school for teachers in active service, 
four weeks beginning July I. Board and 
tuition for the month $20.00. For further particulars and catalog write 
Leslie Pindoiey Hill, Principal. Cheyney, PennjL 
A. and T. COLLEG E 
GREENSBORO , N . C . 
Th e NEGR O AGRICULTURA L and TECH ­
NICA L COLLEG E offers to the Negr o youth 
of th e stat e opportunitie s tha t none can 
affor d to neglect . 
1. Th e Englis h Departmen t offers practica l 
course s i n Literar y Training . 
2. Mechanica l graduate s an d undergradu ­
ates take hig h ran k i n Mechanica l pursuits 
suc h as Carpentry , Bricklaying , Plastering , 
Blacksmithing , Auto-Mechanic s an d Broom -
making , etc. 
3. Th e Agricultura l Departmen t give s stu ­
dents carefull y a i range d wor k bot h i n theo ­
retica l an d practica l branche s o f agriculture , 
as Dairying , Greenhous e Work , Poultry , Be e 
Culture , Fiel d Crops, etc . 
4. Th e Teache r Trainin g Departmen t pre ­
pare s youn g me n t o mee t th e demand s fo r 
traine d industria l teachers. Graduate s wil l 
fin d a usefu l an d remunerativ e field . 
5. Th e Reserv e Officers' Trainin g Corps, 
unde r direc t supervisio n o f U . S. Officers give s 
Physica l an d Militar y Training . Fre e uni ­
form s i n fou r years (4 ) wort h abou t $160.00 , 
an d thos e wh o successfull y an d satisfactoril y 
complet e the first tw o years wor k cas h fees 
allowe d amountin g to ove r $100.0 0 annually . 
Graduate s fro m this divisio n wil l be eligibl e 
fo r a commissio n fro m the Presiden t o f the 
Unite d State s fo r positio n as Secon d Lieu ­
tenants i n th e U . S. Army . 
6. Nigh t Schoo l fo r thos e wh o canno t atten d the Da y Classes. 
Fal l Ter m bega n Septembe r 1st, 1019. 
Lodein g capacit y limite d to ISO students. 
Thos e preferrin g to roo m on campu s shoul d 
arrang e Lodgin g Reservation s at once . 
Fo r furthe r information , address 
J . B . DUDLEY . Presiden t 
Mention THE CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 281 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifull y located In the Cit y 01 Atlanta , Ga . 
Th e courses of atudy Include Hig h Bohvoi, Normall 
School and College , with Manua l trainin g and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are graduate 
o f Yale , Harvard , Dartmout h an d Wellesley . Fift y 
year s of successful work have been completed. 
Students come fro m al l parts of the south. Grad ­
uates ar e almost universall y successful. 
Fo r furthe r Information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND, VA . 
Three Departments, College, Theological and High School. Work 
of highest grade. Pre-medical 
course in College. Thoroughness 
and accuracy emphasized. New 
year began September 29th. For 
information address the President. 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1919 
ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Beautiful campus overlooking the city. Comfortable 
buildings with modem coo sentences. Talented faculty; 
vigorous, religious atmosphere; excellent library and 
laboratories; co-educational; athletics. Admission 
only by application. 
Course s of Study : 
Domestic So enee. Public Speaking, Mutlo; 
Pre-Academy, Seventh and Eighth Grades. 
Academy or Hfjrh. School, four years with diploma. 
Pre-Medical, two years above academy. 
Normal, two years above academy with diploma. 
College, four years with A B degree. 
Fiftiet h year opened September -4. 1919. 
Expenses, (15.00 per month will cover all necessary 
expanses, 
HARRY ANDREWS KING, President, 
The Florida Agricultural 
ana Mechanical College 
Offers courses to leading certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahassee, Florida 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL , TEXA S 
Recognized as a college of the First Class by Texas 
and Louisiana State Boards of Education. Harvard , 
Yal e and Columbia represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strong' it Music Department in the West 
K. W . D0OA2J , President 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the enly institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M . C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE . N . C 
Biddle University operated under the auspices of 
toe Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Departments—Limb School. Arts and Sciences Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course is the requirement for entrance to the first rear 
of the Hub SchooL 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific In the 
scientific. German is subsUtuted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class Is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first Is purely Knguah. 
Greek and Hebrew are taught in ude others. 
All students In the High School Dept. are required 
to take trades In the Industrial Dept. 
For further Information, address 
President H. L. MoCrerty, 
Chsrlotte, N. C 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta , Ga . 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Wel l equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College Preparatory, Nor ­
mal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurs e 
Training . Sewing. Printing and Tailoring . 
First Semester began September 10, 1919. 
Fo r further information address 
W. A. FOUNTAIN, President 
BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Board 
Mention THE CRISIS 282 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
MEDICAL COLLEGE OF HOWARD UNIVERSITY 
Next Session Opens October 1, 1919 
ADMISSIO N 
Candidates for admission must be graduates of approved Colleges or Scientific 
Schools with two years of instruction, including laboratory work, in physics, 
chemistry and biology, English, mathematics and French or German, or graduates 
of recognized high schools with two years of instruction, including laboratory 
work, in physics, chemistry and biology, English, mathematics and French or 
German. 
INSTRUCTIO N 
The course of instruction occupies four years, and especial emphasis is laid 
upon practical work in the laboratories, in the wards of the Freedman's Hospital 
and in the Dispensary. 
Full corps of instructors, well equipped laboratories, unexcelled hospital 
facilities. 
The Medical College is rated in Class A by the Council on Medical Education of the American Medical Association and is a member of the Association of 
American Medical Colleges. Recognized by the Conjoint Board of England. 
TH E DENTA L COLLEG E 
Requires for admission the completion of a recognized four-year high school 
course. The course of instruction occupies four years. Unexcelled facilities for 
practical work. 
TH E PHARMACEUTICA L COLLEG E 
Requires for admission the completion of a recognized four-year high school 
course. The course of instruction occupies three years and leads to the degree of 
Pharmaceutical Chemist. 
The annual announcement, application blanks and additional information concerning either course may be obtained by addressing 
WILLIAM C . McNEILL, Secretary 
Fifth and W Streets, N.W., Washington, D. C. 
1875 STATE 1919 
AGRICULTURA L AN D MECHANICA L 
COLLEG E FO R NEGROE S 
NORMAL, ALABAMA 
A COMBINATIO N HAR D T O BEA T 
A Thorough English Education Combined with a Trade 
WHA T TRAD E WOUL D YO U LIK E T O TAKE ? 
Trades for Boys, 12 Trades for Girls, 7 Trades for both Sexes 2 
SUMMAR Y O F OUR GRADUATE S 1875-1919 
Department of Academic s t 19-1* 
Departmen t of Agricultur e 
Department of Household Economic s "/ *JJ 
Departmen t of Mechani c Arts !..'![ ! ]" " \22 * 
WHA T THE Y AR E DOIN G
 226 6 
Principals of distric t schools 163 Editor s and Journalists o 
Teacher s in rura l schools 296 Bookkeeper s , \ 
Principals in secondary or high schools.. 24 u. S. Far m Demonstrator s 
Teacher s i n gramma r or high schools... . 90 Undertaker s and Embalmers I 
Doctors 41 Contractor s and Builder s a 
Lawyer s 5 u. S. Burea u of Educatio n ? 
Dentists 8 Farmer s 
Pharmacists 3 Housekeeper s . Jo? 
Druggists .... . 10 Dea d and unaccounted" for 
Workin g at trade s 302 <""> 
Banker s 1 _ . , — 
V. S. Government Service 38 Tota l 226Q 
Jeane s teachers 7 
Director s of hook establishments 2 Soldiers in the Grea t Wa r 
STAT E AN D UNITE D STATE S APPROPRIATION S 
Propert y consists of 182 acres of land, 20 building s for al l purposes Hvn .»„„ v .... . 
eauisment valued at $202,000. Send for catalog today. purposes, liv e stock and genera l 
WALTE R 8. BUCHANAN , President. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS 
Vol. 18-No. 6 OCTOBER, 1919 Whole No. 108 
Opinion 
Of W. E. B. DuBois 
SHILLAD Y AN D TEXA S 
THER E was once a man who 
said that if he owned Hell and 
Texas, he would prefer to 
rent out Texas and live i n 
Hell. He may have exaggerated, but 
he had some supporting facts: Texas 
was settled by white Southerners in 
order to extend slave territory; it 
was forcibly stolen from Mexico in 
1837, largely because Mexico tried to 
abolish slavery in 1829. Thereupon 
Texas became a center of the African 
slave trade and the "most shameful 
violations" of United States slave 
trade laws were perpetrated through 
Texas. Durin g the years of Texan 
independence slaves were rushed in 
at the rate of 15,000 or more a year 
and the annexation of Texas and the 
Mexican Wa r were movements to extend Negro slavery. 
Out of this past has risen the present Texas. In that state the first 
public burning alive of a Negro took 
place, at Pa.ris. Since 1889 Texas has 
lynched 338 human beings—standing second only to Georgia and 
Mississippi in this horrible eminence. 
Notwithstanding this, the Texas 
Negro has forged forward. 
Encouraged by his first great leader, Norris 
Wrigh t Cuney, he has bought 21,182 
farms wit h nearly two million acres 
of land, worth $25,000,000. Starting 
with nothing fifty years ago nearly 
one-third of these black folk are now 
land owners. 
To reward the Negroes for their 
thrift and struggles Texas gives them 
no voice in their own government, 
taxes them without representation 
and enforces " Jim-Crow " travel, 
more irksome than i n any other state 
because of the immense Texas distances. The Negro schools of Texas 
are better than in many Southern 
States and there are forty-four high 
schools for the 690,049 Negroes of 
the state, but 25 per cent of the Negro 
population is still absolutely illiterate 
and according to the white Houston 
Post: "The rura l schools for Negro 
children where they exist at all are 
a joke." 
Is it not natural for the Negroes 
of such a state to endeavor to escape 
slavery ? 
283 284 TH E CRISIS 
They turned to the N . A . A . C. P. 
quite without solicitation. We made 
no special effort to organize branches 
in Texas, but 7,00 0 black Texans 
joined us to help make twelve million 
Americans "physically free from 
peonage, mentally free from ignorance, politically free from disfranchisement and socially free from insult." 
Is this revolution? Is this "stirring up trouble?" It is—i n Texas, 
and to stop it a number of Texas 
gentlemen leaped on one unsuspecting, unarmed man and beat him nearly into unconsciousness, because he 
had come to their state to confer with 
colored and white people in the interests of this organization. 
Mr. Shillady is a gentleman of 
training and experience, known to social workers all over the land. He 
was set upon by a judge, a constable 
and other officials, who have openly 
boasted their lawlessness and have 
been upheld by the Governor of the 
State. 
This is Texas. This is the dominant white South. This is the answer 
of the Coward and the Brute to 
Reason and Prayer. This is the thing 
that Americ a must conquer before it 
is civilized, and as long as Texas is 
this kind of Hell, civilization in 
America is impossible. 
BYRNES 
YOU have, perhaps, noticed our 
double-page advertisement i n 
the Congressional Record, due 
to the kindness of our good 
friend James Francis Byrnes, of 
South Carolina. Congressman Byrnes 
is from the Second District and a 
confrere of the late Congressman 
James W. Ragsdale, who died suddenly during the Washington riots. 
The Congressional Districts of 
these two gentlemen have about 400,-
00 0 inhabitants and probably 80,00 0 
of these are males of voting age, the 
majority beinj: Negroes. Mr . Byrnes 
was elected to Congress by a vote of 
7,68 1 ballots out of a total of 7,80 1 
ballots cast. 
In the Second Distric t of New Yor k 
it took, the same year, 46,14 1 votes to 
make an election and 24,06 4 of these 
to elect a Congressman; but all this 
is not necessary i n South Carolina. 
Ye t Mr . Byrnes, representing with ­
out any legal authority the suppressed votes of 12,00 0 white men 
and 20,00 0 blacks, stands in Congress 
and talks just as loud—indeed, considerably louder—than Mr . Caldwell 
of New York . 
Mr . Byrnes is alarmed, and so are 
we. He is alarmed over us and we 
over him. He accuses TH E CRISI S 
and other Negro journals of causing 
not only the Washington and Chicago 
riots, but the whole unrest and dissatisfaction in the Negro race. We 
accuse Mr . Byrnes, and his kind, of 
being primarily the ones who not only precipitated the riots in 
Washington, Chicago, Atlanta, Houston, 
Longview and East St. Louis, but also of 
encouraging for fifty years the lynching of 4,00 0 Negroes, the disfranchisement of a million and a half 
voters, the enforced ignorance of 
three million human beings and the 
theft of hundreds of millions of dollars in wages, but particularly the 
theft of the highest privilege of a 
freeman—our vote and our self-respect. 
Following the advice and example 
of the alarmed Mr. Byrnes, we have 
called this situation "to the attention 
of" the President, the AttorneyGeneral and the United States Congress 
"with the request that they have proceedings instituted" against Byrnes, 
under the Fourteenth Amendment of 
the Constitution of the United States. 
An d we have intimated to them in 
the chaste language of our friend that 
"steps should be taken against the 
use" of the Congressional Record "for 
the Bolshevik and the I. W. W. " 
Meantime, may we not cordially OPINIO N 285 
thank Congressman Byrnes for allowing some seventy-five millions of 
our fellow-citizens to read a CRISI S 
editorial which might otherwise have 
reached a bare million? 
BALL S 
THE CRISI S noted with exceeding interest last summer four 
social gatherings; there were 
doubtless many others, but 
these came especially under our eye: 
the balls of the Pythians and Elk s at 
Atlanti c City, where some 15,00 0 colored folk danced on the great Young's 
Pier; the ball of the National 
Medical Association at Newark; and of 
the Sigma P i Ph i fraternity at Philadelphia. Fo r beauty of face and 
form and robing, for fine fellowship 
and joy of life it may well be doubted 
if these gatherings have ever been 
equalled in the United States. 
Assemble the nations of earth and say 
what you will , there is nothing in 
white Europe or Americ a that can 
measure up to the wonderful colorings of flesh, grace of movement and 
rhythm of music such as Black 
Americ a can furnish. To all this is being subtly added the appropriate richness and color of gown and the gentle 
manner based on deep, human sympathy. We are discovering at last 
the long-veiled beauty of our own 
world. 
TH E NATIONA L BAPTIS T PUBLISHIN G 
HOUS E 
H E CRISI S was in error last 
month in its interpretation 
of the decision of the 
Chancery Court of Tennessee in regard to the National Baptist 
Publishing House. The decree says: 
That there are two separate and 
distinct publishing boards. One is 
the corporation board, and the other 
the convention board. The convention board consisted of one member 
from each of the states and was 
elected by the convention. The convention board acted in an advisory 
and supervisory capacity, but never 
attempted to elect the members of the 
corporate board. While, then, the 
convention board was not a part of 
the corporate board, nevertheless it 
had definite and equitable interests i n 
the property as trustees for the beneficiaries. The corporate board is, 
therefore, declared the legal directors 
of the property, but an injunction is 
issued against them to restrain them 
in the disposition and application of 
the profits until the relations between 
the two boards can be agreed upon. 
TH E TRU E BROWNIE S 
THE Children's CRISI S has been 
published annually for nine 
years and is easily the most 
popular number of the year— 
that is, it makes the widest appeal to 
our readers. This is as it should be. 
Of course, we are and must be interested i n our children above all else, 
if we love our race and humanity. 
But i n the problem of our children 
we black folk are sorely puzzled. Fo r 
example, a little girl writes us—we 
remember her as red-bronze and 
black-curled, with dancing eyes—"I 
want to learn more about my race, so 
I want to begin early / hate 
the white man just as much as he 
hates me and probably morel" 
Think of this from twelve little 
years! An d yet, can you blame the 
child? To the consternation of the 
Editors of TH E CRISI S we have had 
to record some horror i n nearly every 
Children's Number—in 1915 , it was 
Leo Frank ; in 1916 , the lynching at 
Gainesville, Fla. ; i n 191 7 and 1918 , 
the riot and court martial at 
Houston, Tex., etc. 
This was inevitable in our role as 
newspaper—but what effect must it 
have on our children? To educate 
them in human hatred is more disastrous to them than to the hated; 
to seek to raise them in ignorance of 
their racial identity and peculiar situation is inadvisable—impossible. 286 TH E CRISIS 
There seems but one alternative: 
We shall publish hereafter not ON E 
Children's Number a year, but 
TWELVE ! Messrs. DuBois and Dil l 
wil l issue i n November, in co-operation with TH E CRISIS , but as an entirely separate publication, a little 
magazine for children—for all children, but especially for ours, "the 
Children of the Sun. " 
It wil l be called, naturally. The 
Brownies' Book, and as we have advertised, "It wil l be a thing of Joy 
and Beauty, dealing in Happiness, 
Laughter and Emulation, and designed especially for Kiddies from Six 
to Sixteen. 
"It wil l seek to teach Universal 
Love and Brotherhood for all little 
folk—black and brown and yellow 
and white. 
"O f course, pictures, puzzles, stories, letters from little ones, clubs, 
games and oh—everything!" 
Deftly intertwined with this mission of entertainment will go the endeavor : 
(a) To make colored children realize that being "colored" is a normal, beautiful thing. 
(b) To make them familiar with 
the history and achievements of the 
Negro race. 
(c) To make them know that other 
colored children have grown into 
beautiful, useful and famous persons. 
(d) To teach them delicately a code 
of honor and action in their relations 
with white children. 
(e) To turn their little hurts and 
resentments into emulation, ambition 
and love of their own homes and companions. 
(/) To point out the best amusements and joys and worth-while 
things of life. 
(g) To inspire them to prepare for 
definite occupations and duties with 
a broad spirit of sacrifice. 
This is a great program—a tremendous task. We want the advice 
of all mothers and fathers, of all men 
and women and children in helping 
us accomplish it. We can conceive 
of no more splendid duty at this critical hour. 
Writ e us i n care of The Brownies' 
Book, 2 West Thirteenth Street, New 
Yor k City, and—incidentally—send a 
One Dolla r subscription for a year. 
TH E WA R HISTOR Y 
WE are happy to announce 
that THE CRISIS' 
"History of the Negro in the 
Revolution of 1914-1918 " 
is progressing favorably. Two volumes are already planned. The first 
wil l be a popular narrative history, 
well illustrated, by Dr. DuBois, to 
be issued next spring; supporting this 
wil l be a volume of wa r documents, 
edited by Edward C. Williams, 
Librarian of Howard University and 
formerly Librarian of Western 
Reserve University, to follow in 1921. 
A survey of the large amount of 
material in the hands of the editors 
reveals some gaps which ought to be 
filled. 
There is still need of information 
concerning certain units, notably 
those officered by white men and especially the engineer service battalions, labor battalions, stevedore regiments, pioneer infantry regiments 
and the transportation corps. 
The material needed is of various 
kinds, as follows: 
(a) Connected narratives, i n outline or 
detail, of the histor y of each uni t from its 
organization i n the Unite d States, includin g 
trainin g camp experiences, embarkation, 
instruction or service behind the lines i n 
Franc e and movements from place to place, 
wit h dates wher e they are known . 
(b) Official reports of operations. These 
are usuall y made at headquarters, and 
man y officers have copies. 
(c) Rosters. 
(d) Official orders, genera l and special, 
memorand a and bulletins. 
(e) Reports of court martia l proceedings 
and findings. 
(f) Citation s and decorations fo r 
bravery . 
(g) Persona l experiences of individuals. 
(h) Incidents or documents showin g the OPINIO N 28 7 
discipline and morale of the colored troops 
and their relations with white Americans 
and the French. 
(i) Photographs, especially of officers and 
of men decorated for bravery, and of scenes 
from life at the front. 
Material furnished will be returned 
when the lender so desires. Such 
documents should be marked plainly 
with the owner's name and address. 
Photographs should have indicated on 
the back the persons or scenes they 
portray. 
If anyone feels unable by reason 
of lack of training to convey the information in his possession in his 
own words or handwriting, he should 
get someone to help him or send us 
the names and addresses of fellowsoldiers, white or colored, who may 
be able to give us the facts desired. 
Please act at once. It is a patriotic 
service to the credit of our race. 
OPHELI A 
OPHELI A wants to be somebody's baby. She has never 
known the love and gentleness that most little babies 
find waiting when they come into the 
world, for her mother "gave her up" 
OPHELI A 
whe n she wa s ver y tiny . She is now 
fou r month s old an d i n splendi d 
physica l condition . She is ligh t i n 
color, wit h soft, prett y hair, an d 
round , brigh t eyes. She comes o f 
good family . 
If Opheli a is to gro w into a healthy , happ y littl e girl , she must have 
a home an d the care an d affection of 
a kin d fathe r an d mother. Anyon e 
wh o is interested should writ e im ­
mediatel y to TH E CRISIS. 
The Outer Pocket 
Long Island City, N. Y. 
I A M not in the habit of writing letters 
on public questions, but I cannot resist 
the desire to congratulate you on your 
splendid fight for the colored people of the 
Unite d States through your magazine , TH E 
CRISIS . 
M y attention has been called to your wor k 288 TH E CRISI S 
by reports in the Tuesday mornin g papers 
of the criticism of you by Representative 
Jame s F . Byrnes, of South Carolina . 
The articl e quoted from TH E CRISI S by 
Byrnes, ''Returning ' Soldiers, " was magnificent. It wil l stir the bbod . not only of 
colored men, but of every decent whit e ma n 
who hates injustice. 
The publicit y given to your protest 
against the wrongs unde r whic h the colored 
ma n suffers wil l do the colored people more 
good tha n harm, I assure you. It is through 
such articles tha t the white people wil l 
some day be able to see the "race problem" 
from the colored man's viewpoint. 
I am a whit e man , but I wan t to assure 
yo u that no colored ma n views wit h more 
horro r than do I the outrages perpetrated 
upon the colored people of Chicago and 
Washington . 
I pa y tribut e to the colored people of 
those cities for retaliatin g upon the whit e 
ruffians who attacked them. The colored 
men who fell i n those conflicts died as 
gloriously for their race as did the colored 
soldiers who yielded their lives for 
America on the battlefields of France. 
M y object i n writin g this letter is to ask 
you not to believe tha t the majorit y of 
whit e men are brutes. There are thousands 
of whit e men, like myself, who sympathiz e 
wit h the colored people i n their struggle fo r 
economic and politica l equality. 
Mor e than that, there is a growin g feelin g among decent whit e people that the colored people are entitled also to absolute 
social equality wher e they prove worth y of 
it. Wha t decent whit e ma n would not be 
proud to have the friendship of men like 
the late Booke r T. Washingto n and Pau l 
Lawrenc e Dunbar ? 
I love my country because it stands fo r 
justice, even i f it is not always able to 
enforce justice. I would love my country 
more i f it would brin g justice to my colored brother. F . S. KELLEY . 
Macon , Ga . 
On Tuesday, May 27, I went to 
Milledgeville, to fill engagement of delivering the 
principa l address at the closing of Eddi e 
Hig h School. Upo n my arriva l I found the 
town stirred up. The blacks had sent their 
young men to Macon , a distance of 38 miles, 
fo r arms and cartridges. They had sworn 
to protect the school closing exercises at 
whic h I had to speak. No t less than 10 0 
men were armed wit h rifles, pistils and 
shot guns whil e the exercises were goin g 
on inside the First Baptist Church . Th e 
occasion fo r armin g themselves grew out of 
a dispute over class colors. It happened 
that the Georgi a Norma l (white ) School 
and the Eddi e Hig h (colored) School had 
chosen the same colors. The whit e boys 
met a colored boy and took his colors off 
him. The affair was reported to authorities. It faile d t) brin g results. The whit e 
students met another colored student or. 
succeeding day and tore from hi m the 
colors. Or e version is: The Negroe s went 
to the authoritie s and stated tha t "W e are 
going to protect ourselves. " Anothe r is: 
The mayo r said to them, " I cannot stop 
these whit e boys. Yo u Negroe s wil l just 
have to protect yourselves. " The latte r 
version is ver y probabl y the correct one. 
A t any rate, the Negroe s were well armea . 
The beauty about i t is, they were no. 
at al l nervous. Th e mothers and song 
sweethearts, husbands and wives, al l walked 
home together, the males carryin g their 
guns wit h as muc h calmness as i f they wer e 
going to shoot a rabbit i n a hunt, or get 
tin g ready to shoot the Kaiser's soldiers 
They were absolutely calm, both males and 
females. Milledgevill e is stil l calm and th " 
race relation is ver y cordia l at this writing . . 
Canada , Y . M . C. A . 
I wis h you c:ul d put me i n connection 
wit h one of our people i n the line of business co-operation fo r Africa n produce, lik e 
palm oil, kernels, etc., whic h I have got 
at home. Befor e the wa r I could not do any 
business swing to the fact that our 
German brutes never did allow the native to 
branch outside Duala . 
ORR Y N . DEIBOL . 
Georgetown, Britis h Guiana . 
We , the undersigned, colored native s of 
Britis h Guiana , do hereby tender sincere 
greetings and congratulations as a mar k 
of our appreciation of the ver y splendid 
wor k yo u are undertakin g on behalf of our 
race. Throug h you r propaganda , yo u wil l 
surely compel colored people to realiz e tha t 
oy unit y and indefatigabl e efforts, they wil l 
become as a people a powerfu l entity. 
JOH N J . ERSKINE . TH E OUTE R POCKE T 289 
Washington , D . C . 
Le t us hope there wil l soon be a real 
awakenin g to the responsibility of the whit e 
race towards their brethren of other creed? 
and colors. I am one of those who can 
realize wha t oppression means. W e Jews 
have been persecuted fo r the past 2,00 0 
years and should be among the first to recognize the fac t tha t all men are created 
equal. HERMA N HOLLANDER . 
* * * 
Larchmont, N . Y . 
Surel y the worl d La s already been too 
well watered wit h the tears and blood of 
the workin g class. Le t us forget that the 
color of our skins is of a different shade— 
only remember that we are comrades i n that 
grea t army , whose goa l is the Cooperativ e 
Commonwealth, whose leaders you wil l find 
have always up to the present day suffered 
and are suffering wit h their health and 
lives, fo r the class struggle. Eugen e Debs 
sits i n prison fo r the crime of enjoying his 
constitutiona l rights of free speech i n the 
fight fo r freedom of the masses and only 
a few miles awa y from the spot where John 
Brow n was huna: i n his fight for the freedom of the chattel-slave. 
MRS . BERNETT A BOWMAN . 
Washington , D . C . 
I a m a loya l whit e native of America n 
ancestry, from Lincoln , Neb. I noticed an 
item on you r recent address i n that town, 
and bought a copy of you r remarkabl e paper, on Florid a Avenue . I have thought 
over the Negr o problem before and find that 
I must just keep on thinking . I find little 
to criticiz e and much to prais e i n wha t you 
print, though you seem more interested i n 
the intelligent colored person than i n the 
crude, plain , black man. The question of 
the decency of Negroes speaking to Frenc h 
women i n publi c is too difficult to be decided 
off-hand. R . BAMAAMPHD . 
* * * 
Sault Ste. Marie , Mich . 
Do not let the fight stop—you have no 
idea how man y Negroes there are who 
would lay down their lives i n the cause of 
Liberty , Equalit y and Justice. 
M . F . FINNEY . 
St. Louis, Mo . 
Ou r "Friends " are beginning to feel the 
punch of TH E CRISIS ; now whil e they are 
groggy, lets "hi t 'em again. " Finally , they 
wil l "take the count." 
MEMBE R OF TH E N . A . A . C. P. 
AN D READE R or THE - CRISIS . 
FATHE R LOV E 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HIL L 
NOT unto him does heaven gran t to bend 
B y da y and nigh t above the creamy 
cheek 
An d dimpled smil e of baby. 'Tis the meek, 
Sweet privileg e of mothe r to attend 
The cradl e shrine . Ther e patience without 
end 
Win s her a beauty words can never speak. 
He r troubled jo y has nothin g more to seek 
Wher e lif e and love i n one devotion blend. 
Fo r hi m the heavy world , al l day for him 
The tyran t task, the tension of the mind : 
Bu t toil were vai n as any froth or foam. 
Wer e not tha t hou r to come when twiligh t 
dim 
Bring s weariness, and fathe r turns to find 
Rest wit h the blessed angels of his home. A Fairy Story 
Carr y S. Bon d 
ONC E upon a time—a long, long, time 
ago, there lived i n the wil d and hill y 
country of Morocco, i n a region called the 
Bled-el, Makhsen , a beautiful littl e princess. 
She had copper-colored ski n and black hair 
that wa s exceedingly curly. Whe n she 
laughed, he r brigh t black eyes twinkle d and 
her teeth gleamed like pearls between he r 
full , red lips. He r name was Ean . She 
used to pla y games on the hill-sides of the 
Atla s Mountains, wit h the other children 
of her father's household. 
Sometimes they would pretend tha t they 
were mounted Arab s and tha t they were 
ridin g down upon another village to attack 
it, and sometimes they would pretend tha t 
they were fighting a neighboring tribe, and 
then some of them would hide i n the thick 
holes and jump out at the others as they 
passed. This last was very dangerous, 
however, because bears and elephants and 
wil d bears lurke d i n these woods and the 
children were forbidden to go beyond those 
bushes. 
One day whil e playin g here they found 
a littl e ostrich tha t seemed to have been 
wounded by a wil d anima l and left there. 
The childre n would have stoned it, but Ea n 
came to its rescue; she gathered it up i n 
her arms and took it home, and, of course, 
being a princess, the others dared not in ­
terfere. 
No w this ostrich was an enchanted prince 
i n disguise, but, of course, the children did 
not dream of that. Meantime , every day 
the gentle littl e princess would go and feed 
her new pet and look after his wounded 
win g before she went out to play. Th e 
other childre n were chiefly Berbers and 
Semites, but Ean's fathe r was a Hamite , 
and tha t is wh y she wa s gentle r and darke r 
than the others. 
She had a littl e Berbe r cousin among 
them named Maga , wh o was also ver y pretty. She had ver y pale olive skin , wit h 
highl y arched eye-brows and a thi n nose, 
wit h long, straight, black hair, and he r face 
was not as roun d as Ean's or he r lips as 
-full . She did not have as nice a disposition 
as Ea n either. She wa s a ver y selfish and 
quarrelsome littl e gir l and alway s wanted 
the best of everything . 
Whe n Ea n wa s only twelve years old, he r 
fathe r called he r to hi m one da y and told 
he r tha t it wa s time fo r he r to become betrothed ; that she could no longe r pla y wit h 
the children, but must begin to dress herself i n a hai k and wea r golden ear-ring s 
and bracelets of silve r coins. A Berbe r 
chief i n a neighborin g town ha d been selected for he r husband, but Ea n ha d neve r 
seen him. O f course, she di d not wan t 
to be marrie d to a ma n whom she ha d never 
seen, although he r fathe r said tha t he wa s 
ver y ric h and tha t she woul d have a grea t 
man y slaves. Ea n di d not care fo r slaves 
or lots of money. She muc h preferred to 
pla y wit h he r pet ostrich and gathe r figs 
and wil d cherries and ru n about i n the 
fields. 
However, he r fathe r said tha t i f this 
chie f could not marr y her, he woul d brin g 
wa r on al l their tribe and i t woul d be a 
great disaster, fo r he wa s the most powerfu l ma n i n Norther n Africa . So, of course, 
Ea n loved he r fathe r and wanted to save 
290 A FAIR Y STOR Y 29 1 
him and was willing to obey him. She was 
a very sad little girl when she went to 
bed that night, though, and wished for her 
mother. 
You see, Ean's mother had been dead a 
long time and Maga's mother ruled everything in the palace. She was very angry, 
too, that this wonderful wedding was not 
being planned for her daughter instead of 
Ean. She thought that riches were the 
most important things in the world, and 
began plotting how she could get rid of 
Ean and substitute Maga in her place for 
this wedding. 
Of course none of them had seen this 
Berber chief, or they would not have 
thought it such a wonderful wedding, fi r 
he was old and cruel and horribly ugly. 
He had only one eye and great teeth which 
protruded like tusks. But they did not 
know this. 
Several weeks passed and the morning 
of the wedding arrived. Everything was 
in readiness for the feast. Great jars of 
Kush-Kush were being prepared and musicians were brought from far and near. 
The wicked aunt had ordered the wedding garments to be laid out, then she sent 
Ean with an old waiting-woman down to a 
special pool surrounded by holy date palm 
trees for her bath. On her way there Ean 
stopped and kissed her ostrich good-bye and 
petted him a little, for she knew that in a 
very short while she would have to leave 
him. 
Now Maga's mother was planning as soon 
as Ea n went out to dress Maga in the 
bridal clothes and have her married to the 
Berber chief in Ean's place. With her 
face covered with a veil, who would know 
the difference until afterwards, for were 
not both girls about the same size? When 
the Sheik Ean's father found out, it would 
be too late, and if he were angry, the aunt 
would go and live with her own daughter, 
she planned. 
However, when the old crone and Ean 
reached the pool, just before the girl laid 
aside her garment, a horseman galloped up 
and stopping at the edge of the cluster of 
trees called out. Immediately the old woman took her head-cloth and tied it over 
Ean's mouth and dragged her to the horseman, but when she looked up, to her surprise she did not see the old servant whom 
Maga's mother had planned to send, but a 
handsome young Arab prince on a beautiful 
white horse. Before the waiting-woman 
could speak, he had Ean up on his horse 
and had taken the cloth from her mouth. 
Of course, you know that this was the 
enchanted Prince who had been disguised 
as an ostrich. He began explaining to Ean, 
as they galloped away and left the old 
woman standing there, that all he had 
needed to break the spell of his enchantment was for some beautiful maiden to kiss 
him, and this she had done that very morning. He was a very brave and wonderful Prince and Ean fell in love with him at 
once and was willing to go with him into 
his land, where they lived happily ever 
afterwards. 
How the wicked aunt was disappointed 
after she carried out her plans and how 
Ean's father finally went to live with her— 
that is another story. "THO U WHOS E EXTERIO R SEMBLANC E DOT H BELI E 
TH Y SOUL' S IMMENSITY— " 
Ode on the Intimations of Immortality. 
292 N . A . A . C. P. 
CHICAG O AN D ITS EIGH T REASON S 
WALTE R P . WHIT E 
MAN Y causes have been assigned fo r 
the three days of race rioting , from 
Jul y 27 to 30 i n Chicago, each touching 
some particula r phase of the genera l conditio n tha t led up to the outbreak. Labo r 
unio n officials attribut e it to the action of 
the packers, whil e the packers are equally 
sure tha t the unions themselves are directly 
responsible. Th e cit y administratio n feels 
that the riots were brought on to discredit 
the Thompson forces, whil e leaders of the 
anti-Thompso n forces, prominent among 
them being State's Attorne y Macla y Hoyne , 
are sure that the administratio n is directly 
responsible. I n this manne r charges and 
counter-charges are made, but, as is usuall y 
the case, the Negr o is made to bear the 
brunt of it all—to be "the scapegoat." A 
background of strained race relations 
brought to a head more rapidl y through 
politica l corruption, economic competition 
and clashes due to the overflow of the 
greatl y increased colored population into 
sections outside of the so-called "Blac k 
Belt, " embracin g the Second and Thir d 
Wards, al l of these contributed, aided by 
magnifyin g o? Negr o crime by newspapers, 
tc the formatio n of a situation where only 
a spar k wa s needed to ignit e the flames 
of racia l antagonism. Tha t spark was contributed by a whit e youth when he knocked 
a colored lad off a raft at the 29th Street 
bathin g beach and the colored boy was 
drowned. 
Fou r weeks spent i n studyin g the situa ­
tion i n Chicago, immediately followin g the 
outbreaks, seem to show at least eight genera l causes for the riots, and the same conditions, to a greater or less degree, can be 
found i n almost every large city wit h an 
appreciable Negr o population. These causes, 
taken after a careful study in order of 
their prominence, are : 
1. Race Prejudice . 
2. Economi c Competition. 
3. Politica l Corruptio n and Exploitatio n 
of Negr o Voters. 
4. Police Inefficiency. 
5. Newspape r Lie s about Negr o Crime 
6. Unpunished Crime s Against Negroes 
7. Housing . 
8. Reaction of White s and Negroes from 
' War . 
Some of these can be grouped under the 
same headings, but due to the prominence 
of each they are listed as separate causes. 
Prio r to 1915, Chicago had been famous 
for its remarkabl y fair attitude towar d colored citizens. Since tha t time, when the 
migrator y movement from the South assumed large proportions, the situation has 
steadily grown more and more tense. This 
was due i n part to the introduction of man y 
Negroes who were unfamilia r wit h city 
293 294 TH E CRISI S 
way s and could not, naturally , adapt themselves immediately to their new environ ­
ment. Outside of a few sporadic attempts, 
littl e was done to teach them the rudimen ­
tar y principle s of sanitation, of conduct or 
of their new status as citizens under a system different from that in the South. 
During their period of absorption into the new 
life , their care-free, at times irresponsibl e 
and sometimes even boisterous, conduct 
caused complications difficult to adjust. 
Bu t equally important, though seldom considered, is the fact tha t man y Southern 
whites have also come into the North , man y 
of them to Chicago, draw n by the same 
economic advantages that attracted the colored workman . Th e exact figure is un ­
known , but it is estimated by men who 
should know tha t full y 20,000 of them are 
i n Chicago. These have spread the viru s 
of race hatred and evidences of it can be 
seen i n Chicago on every hand. This same 
cause underlies each of the other seven 
causes. 
Wit h regar d to economic competition, the 
age-long dispute between capita l and labor 
enters. Larg e numbers of Negroes were 
brought from the South by the packers and 
there is littl e doubt tha t this wa s done i n 
part so tha t the Negr o migh t be used as 
a club over the heads of the unions. Joh n 
Fitzpatric k and E d Nockels, president and 
secretary, respectively, of the Chicago 
Federation of Labor, and William Buck, editor 
of the New Majority, a labor organ, -openl y 
charge tha t the packers subsidized colored 
ministers, politician s and Y . M . C. A . secretaries to prevent the colored workme n 
at the stockyards from enterin g the unions. 
On the other hand, the Negr o workma n is 
not at al l sure as to the sincerit y of the 
unions themselves. Th e Negr o i n Chicag o 
yet remembers the waiters' strike some 
years ago, when colored unio n workers 
walked out at the command of the unions 
and whe n the strike was settled, the unions 
did not insist tha t Negr o waiters be give n 
their jobs back alon g wit h whites, and , as 
a result, colored men have neve r been able 
to get back into some of the hotels even 
to the present day. Th e Negr o is between 
"the devil and the deep blue sea." H e 
feels tha t i f he goes into the unions, he 
wil l lose the friendshi p of the employers. 
H e knows that i f he does not, he is goin g 
to be met wit h the bitte r antagonism of the 
unions. Wit h the exception of statements 
made by organizers, who cannot be held to 
accountability because of their mino r official connection, no statements have been 
made by the local union leaders, outside of 
hig h sounding, but. meaningless, protesta ­
tions of friendship fo r the Negr o worker. 
H e feels tha t he has been given promise s N . A . A . C . P . 
29 5 
too long already. In fact, he is "fed up" 
on them. What he wants are binding statements and guarantees that cannot be broken 
at will. 
With the possible exception of 
Philadelphia, there is probably no city in America 
with more of political trickery, .chicanery 
and exploitation than Chicago. Against the 
united and bitter opposition of every daily 
newspaper in Chicago, William Hale 
Thompson was elected again as mayor, due, 
as was claimed, to the Negro and German 
vote. While it is not possible to state that 
the anti-Thompson element deliberately 
brought on the riots, yet it is safe to say 
that they were not averse to its coming. 
The possibility of such a clash was seen 
many months before it actually occurred, 
yet no steps were taken to prevent it. The 
purpose of this was to secure a two-fold 
result. First, it would alienate the Negro 
set from Thompson through a belief that 
was expected to grow among the colored 
vote when it was seen that the police force 
under the direction of the mayor was unable 
or unwilling to protect the colored people 
from assault by mobs. Secondly, it would 
discourage the Negroes from registering and 
voting and thus eliminate the powerful 
Negro vote in Chicago. Whether or not this 
results remains to be seen. In talking with 
a prominent colored citizen of Chicago, asking why the Negroes supported Thompson 
so unitedly, his very significant reply was: 
"The Negro in Chicago, as in every 
other part of America, is fighting for 
the fundamental rights of citizenship. 
If a candidate for office is wrong on 
every other public question except this, 
the Negroes are going to vote for that 
man, for that is their only way of securing the things they want and that 
are denied them." 
The value of the Negro vote to 
Thompson can be seen in a glance at the recent 
election figures. His plurality was 28,000 
votes. In the second ward it was 14,000 
and in the third, 10 000. The second and 
third wards constitute most of what is 
known as the "Black Belt." 
The fourth contributing cause was the 
woeful inefficiency and criminal negligence 
of the police authorities of Chicago, both 
prior to and during the riots. Prostitution, 
gambling and the illicit sale of whisky 
flourish openly and apparently without any 
fear whatever of police interference. In a 
most dangerous statement, State's 
Attorney Maclay Hoyne, on August 25; declared 
that the riots were due solely to vice in 
the second ward. He seemed either to forget or to ignore the flagrant disregard of 
law and order and even of the common principles of decency in city management existing in many other sections of the city. 
Al l of this tended to contribute to open 
disregard for law and almost contempt for 
it. Due either to political "pull" or to reciprocal arrangements, many notorious 
dives run and policemen are afraid to arrest the proprietors. 
During the riots the conduct of the police 
force as a whole was equally open to criticism. State's Attorney Hoyne openly 
charged the police with arresting colored 
rioters and with an unwillingness to arrest 
white rioters. Those who were arrested 
were at once released. In one case a colored man who was fair enough to appear 
to be white was arrested for carrying concealed weapons, together with five white 
men and a number of colored men. Al l were 
taken to a police station; the light colored 
man and the five whites being put into one 
cell and the other colored men in another. 
In a few minutes the light colored man and 
the five whites were released and their ammunition given back to them with the remark, You'll probably need this before the 
night is over." 
Fifth on the list is the effect of newspaper publicity concerning Negro crime. 
With the exception of the Daily News, all 
of the papers of Chicago have played up 
in prominent style with glaring, prejudicebreeding headlines every crime or suspected 
crime committed by Negroes. Headlines 
such as " NEGR O BRUTALL Y MURDER S PROMI ­
NEN T CITIZEN, " "NEGR O ROBS HOUSE " and the 
like have appeared with alarming frequency and the news articles beneath such 
headlines have been of the same sort. 
During the rioting such headlines as "NEGRO 
BANDIT S TERRORIZ E TOWN, " "RIOTER S BUR N 
100 HOMES—NEGROE S SUSPECTE D O F HAVIN G 
PLOTTE D BLAZE " appeared. In the latter case 
a story was told of witnesses seeing Negroes 
in automobiles applying torches and fleeing. 
This was the story given to the press by 
Fire Attorney John R. McCabe after a 
casual and hasty survey. Later the office 
of State Fire Marshall Gamber proved conclusively that the fires were not caused by 
Negroes, but by whites. As can easily be 296 TH E CRISI S 
seen such newspaper accounts did not tend 
to lessen the bitterness of feeling between 
the conflicting groups. Further, man y wil d 
and unfounded rumors were published i n 
the press—incendiary and inflammatory to 
the highest degree, a few of them being 
given below i n order to show their nature. 
Some are : 
Ove r 1,000 Negroes ha d been slai n and 
their bodies thrown i n "Bubbl y Creek " 
and the Chicago River. 
A Negr o had been lynched and hanged 
from a "Loop " buildin g overlooking 
Madiso n Street. 
A whit e woma n had been attacked and 
mutilated by a Negr o on State Street. 
A Negr o woma n had been slain, her 
breasts cut off and her infan t had been 
killed by havin g its brains dashed out 
against a wall . 
A white child had been outraged by a 
colored man. 
A whit e child had been kidnapped by 
a band of colored men and its body 
later found, badly mutilated and dismembered. 
Immediately followin g the riots, a whit e 
woman was murdered in Evanston, 111. 
Immediately the crime was laid at the door 
of a colored ma n wit h whom the woman 
had been intimate a number of .years. 
Pitiful stories were told of the woman waiting 
for hours on street corners for "just one 
look at her Billiken-like , mulatto lover, " 
played up under headlines such as "CON ­
FESSIO N EXPECTE D TODA Y FRO M NEGR O SUS ­
PECT, " "NEGR O SUSPEC T RAPIDL Y WEAKEN ­
ING " and the lik e whic h clearl y led one to 
"believe tha t the colored ma n was guilty. A 
few days later, i n an obscure item on an 
inside page, a short account was given of 
the release of the colored suspect "because insufficient evidence to hold him " existed. A long period of such publicit y had 
inflamed the minds of man y people against 
Negroes who otherwise would have been 
unprejudiced. Muc h of the blame for the 
riots can be lai d to such sources. 
Fo r a long period prio r to the riots, organized gangs of whit e hoodlums had been 
perpetratin g crimes against Negroes for 
which no arrests had been made. These 
gangs i n man y instances masqueraded under the name of "Athleti c and Socia l Clubs " 
and late r direct connection was shown between them and incendiary fires started 
durin g the riots. Colored men, women and 
children had been beaten i n the parks, most 
of them i n Jackso n and Lincol n Parks. I n 
one case a youn g colored gir l wa s beaten 
and thrown into a lagoon. In other cases 
Negroes were beaten so severely tha t they 
had to be taken to hospitals. Al l of these 
cases had* caused man y colored people to 
wonde r i f they could expect an y protection 
whatever from the authorities. 
Particularly vicious in their attacks was an organization known locall y as "Regan's Colts. " 
Muc h has been writte n and said concernin g the housin g situatio n i n Chicag o and 
its effect on the racia l situation. Th e problem is a simpl e one. Since 1915 the colored population of Chicag o has mor e tha n 
doubled, increasin g i n four years from a 
little over 50,000 to wha t is now estimated 
to be between 125,000 and 150 000. Most 
of them lived i n the are a bounded by the 
railroa d on the west, 30th Stree t on the 
north, 40th Stree t on the south an d Ellis 
Avenu e on east. Alread y overcrowded this 
so-called "Blac k Belt " could not possibly 
hold the doubled colored population. One 
cannot pu t ten gallons of wate r i n a fivegallon pail . Althoug h man y Negroe s had 
been livin g i n "white " neighborhoods, the 
increased exodus from the old areas created 
an hysterica l group of persons who formed 
"Propert y Owners' Associations " fo r the 
purpose of keeping intac t whit e neighborhoods. Prominen t among these wa s the 
Kenwood-Hyde Park Property Owners' 
Improvement Association, as well as the Park 
Mano r Improvement Association . Earl y i n 
June the writer, whil e i n Chicago , attended 
a privat e meeting of the first named at 
the Kenwoo d Clu b House , at Lak e Par k 
Avenu e and 47th Street. Variou s plans wer e 
discussed fo r keepin g the Negroe s i n "their 
part of the town, " such as securin g the 
discharge of colored persons from positions 
they held whe n they attempted to move 
into "white " neighborhoods, purchasin g 
mortgages of Negroe s buyin g homes and 
ejecting them whe n mortgag e notes fell due 
and were unpaid , and man y more of the 
same calibre. Th e language of man y 
speakers was vicious and strongly prejudicia l and ha d the distinc t effect of creatin g race bitterness. 
I n a numbe r of cases durin g the period 
from January , 1918, to August , 1919, there 
were bombings of colored homes and houses 
occupied by Negroe s outside of the "Blac k N. A. A. C. P. 297 
Belt. " During ' this period no less than 
twenty bombings took place, yet only two 
persons have been arrested and neither of 
the two has been convicted, both cases bein s continued. 
Finally, the new spirit aroused in 
Negroes by their war experiences enters into 
the problem. Fro m Loca l Boar d No . 4, embracing: the neighborhood i n the vicinit y of 
State and 35th Streets, containing: over 
30,000 inhabitants of whic h full y ninety 
per cent are colored, over 9,000 men registered and 1,850 went to camp. These men, 
wit h their new outlook on life, injected the 
same spirit of independence into their companions, a thin g that is true of many other 
sections of America . One of the greatest 
surprises to man y of those who came down 
to "clean out the niggers " is that these 
same "niggers " fought back. Colored men 
saw their own kin d being killed , heard of 
many more and believed that their lives 
and liberty were at stake. In such a spirit 
most of the fighting was done. 
TH E "INFURIATED " WHIT E MO B I N CHICAG O 
TH E RIOT A T LONGVIEW, TEXAS 
COMPARATIVEL Y few people know of 
the race riot whic h was a precursor 
of the more serious outbreaks in 
Washington, Chicago and Knoxville. Last June, at 
Longview, i n the state of Texa s of ill-fame , 
a colored man , Lemue l Walters, was arrested and jaile d on the charge of havin g 
been found i n a whit e woman's room. On 
the 22nd of June , Professor Jones, one of 
of the leading colored citizens_ of 
Longview, stopped at the jail to deliver the 
colored papers, fo r whic h he was agent, and 
was told by three colored and one white 
inmat e tha t Walters had been spirited awa y 
by a mob of whit e men. Subsequently the 
Longview Leader spoke of an unidentified 
Negr o who had been found shot to death 
nea r the railroad . This Negro, Professor 
Jones believed to have been Lemue l Wal ­
ters. 
Thereupon Professor Jones and Dr. 
Davis with nine other colored citizens approached Erskin e H . Bramlette , County 
Judge of Greg g County, and as representatives of the colored people asked for an 
investigation. The judge merely asked the 
names of the four prison inmates and counselled profound secrecy. Afte r a brie f dela y the committee visited the judge again. 
On this occasion he professed his utter 
powerlessness, but promised to refer the 
matte r to the Distric t Attorney . H e also 
sought more informatio n as to the names 
and descriptions of the prisoners who had 
supplied the information. Late r on the 
reason fo r this interest wa s made clear, 
for when three days late r Professor Jones 
went back to the jail , he found the prisoners had been taken away. 
Thus much for the prologue. 298 TH E CRISIS 
A t this point the Chicago Defender stepped i n and on Jul y 5 published a statement tha t the whit e woma n whose name 
had been originall y connected wit h Walters 
wa s reall y i n love wit h him, woul d have 
been gla d to become his wif e and wa s 
deeply stricken by his death. Th e Defender 
also declared tha t the sheriff ha d seen the 
mob pass into the jai l and was, therefore, 
an accessory before the fact. 
The sequel was immediate . O n Jul y 10, 
Professor Jones wa s accosted and horribl y 
beaten, struck and cut over the head wit h 
a wrench and otherwise badly injured. 
Eve n then he defended himself and man ­
aged to break awa y from his assailants— 
three whit e men—but he tripped, fel l headlong and whil e stil l on the groun d wa s 
beaten even more violently. His crime , he 
was told, was tha t of being responsible fo r 
the statement whic h had occurred i n the 
Defender. Vigorousl y denyin g this charge 
he broke away , got some relie f from his 
friend, Dr . Davis, and then repeated his 
denia l i n person to J . J . Ross, Secretary of 
the Chambe r of Commerce. 
Bu t the mischie f ha d started. Deput y 
Sheriff Harriso n told an old colored ma n 
tha t Jones woul d be lynched before mid ­
nigh t unless he ha d already left town. 
Davis wa s told of this and consulted severa l prominent whit e men i n the town, in ­
cludin g Mayo r G. A . Bodenheim. No t even 
the official would promise any help, but 
simpl y advised both Jones and Davis to 
leave town. Instead of followin g this advice, Dr . Davis got together a group of 
men and lai d the matte r before them. The y 
decided to defend themselves by defending 
Professor Jones and Dr. Davis. 
Eve n then Dr . Davis hoped fo r a change 
i n the attitude of the whites. Bu t when he 
found that, although the mayor, other officials and some leading citizens ha d convened, stil l no help wa s promised, he prepared for the worst. H e instructed his 
guar d to surroun d Jones' house and hold 
themselves i n readiness fo r an attack, but 
on no account wa s any one to shoot into 
the houses of whit e people or to fire unti l 
he himself had done so. 
Close on midnigh t the mob came down the 
street. Fou r whit e men mounted the back 
porch and called fo r Jones to come out. 
No t unti l he was sure tha t their pla n wa s 
to rus h the house di d Dr . Davis open fire. 
I n the violent scrimmag e whic h followed no 
colored men wer e killed , but i t is reported 
tha t the manage r of the Kell y Plo w Work s 
admitted the death of eleven whit e men. 
Th e mob withdrew. Professo r Davis 
cautiously went back to the town . Ther e 
was some tal k on the part of the white s of 
a retur n attack, bu t they seemed to lac k 
leaders. Al l about wer e signs of confusion 
and distress. Whit e wome n wer e hear d 
lamentin g the foolhardiness whic h ha d 
prompted their men to such an attack. 
Automobiles rushed back and forth, their inmates pickin g up the dead and wounded 
and carryin g them back to their homes. 
Thu s the nigh t wor e on. Bu t a t daybreak; 
as Dr . Davis ha d suspected, the mob foregathered again . This time arson wa s the 
weapon. Professo r Jones' house—from 
whic h he ha d alread y escaped—and tha t of 
Dr . Davis were burned to the ground . Th e 
famil y of Dr.' Davis wa s permitte d to 
escape. Bu t a n innocent householder an d 
his wif e who live d opposite Professo r Jones 
lost not onl y their house, bu t were themselves shot and seriously injured . 
Bot h Professo r Jone s an d Dr . Davis 
reached a place of safety. Professo r Jones 
hi d i n Longvie w unti l the followin g nigh t 
and then got away . Dr . Davis disguised 
himself as a soldier, boarded a train , rode 
a short distance an d dismounted. Bu t his 
reall y difficult moments passed whe n 
throug h a misunderstandin g he arrive d at 
the station two hours too earl y fo r the 
trai n by whic h he hoped to continue his 
flight. H e dared not ris k returnin g to the 
friends wh o ha d been protectin g him. It 
wa s equally inadvisabl e fo r hi m to show 
anxiet y or fear. So he bought popcorn, 
soft drink s and the like , an d hun g about 
the station—laughing , singing , eatin g an d 
shooting "crap " i n most approved "darky " 
style. Finall y the trai n came up wit h colored soldiers i n it. H e made his pligh t 
known to them and wa s supplied wit h an 
overseas cap and gas mas k whic h made 
his disguise complete. 
Th e riot at Longvie w has two aspects. 
First , simpl y and solely it is a fai r sampl e 
of the lawlessness whic h at present is 
stalkin g restlessly throug h the nation . Secondly, it is indicative of the attitude whic h 
Negroe s are determined to adopt fo r the 
future . A s the Assoc^kted Press report 
(it appeared, by the way , i n a Longvie w pa ­
per), has it : "Negroe s are not plannin g 
anything , but wil l defend themselves i f 
attacked. " "THOU LITTL E CHILD, GLORIOUS IN TH E MIGHT 
OF HEAVEN-BOR N FREEDOM—" 
Ode on the Intimations of Immortality, 
299 The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
CLAUD E McKA Y i n the Liberator: 
If we must die—let i t not be like hogs, 
Hunte d and penned i n an inglorious spot, 
Whil e round us bar k the mad and hungr y 
dogs, 
Makin g their mock at our accursed lots. 
If we must die—oh, let us nobly die, 
So that our precious blood ma y not be shed 
I n vain ; then even the monsters we defy 
Shal l be constrained to honor us though 
dead! 
Dr . Algerno n Brashea r Jackson, of Merc y 
Hospital, Philadelphia , sends us a necessary 
..nd well-writte n pamphle t entitled "Th e 
Healt h Question of the Ma n Nex t Door. " 
We have received also a pictoria l study of 
"Colore d Soldiers i n France, " by Edwar d 
L . Snyder. It contains attractive and in ­
structive pictures of America n Negr o soldiers, of Frenc h Colonials and distinguished 
officers. Accompanyin g each picture is a 
short paragrap h of explanation. This book 
is; particularl y valuable because of the failure' of official photographers to take pictures 
of colored troops whil e i n France . 
Recent treatment of the Negr o i n periodicals : 
"Sam Jackson's Better Day," S. W. 
MacConnell, Illustrated World Outlook, April, 
1919. 
"Color and Culture," E. B. Reuter and 
Jessie Fauset, Survey, April 19, '19. 
"Mr . Burleso n and Negr o Posta l Clerk, " 
New Republic, Ma y 31, '19. 
"Intelligenc e of Negroes at Camp Lee, W . 
Va., " G. 0 . Ferguson , Jr., School and 
Society, Jun e 14, '19. 
"Negr o at Bay, " Nation, Jun e 14, '19. 
"Protectin g Southern Womanhood, " H . J. 
Saligmann , Nation, Jun e 14, '19. 
"Nationa l Responsibilit y fo r the Educatio n 
of the Nejro, " Kell y Miller , Educational 
Review, June , '19. 
"Negr o Enters the Labo r Union, " Literary 
Digest, Jun e 28, '19. 
"Negro Visitor in Negro Homes in 
Minneapolis," Survey, July 12, '19. 
"Negr o and His Opportunity, " Industrial 
Management, R. W . Immel, July , '19. 
THE CASE OF MR. SHILLADY 
SOUTHER N intolerance has taken a 
logica l stride forward . It is but 
natura l that violence towar d Negroes, i f 
permitted to go unchecked, should be eventuall y turned towar d a whit e ma n who 
espouses their unpopula r cause. O n August 
22, John R. Shillady, Secretary of the 
National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People, wa s assaulted i n Austin , 
Tex. 
* . $ * 
The Austi n News gives a bold account: 
Followin g the holdin g of a meeting here 
wit h Negroe s after he had been told b y 
loca l officials to leave town, J . R. Shillady , 
white, Secretary of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People, was severely, but not dangerously, 
beaten by County Judge Dave Pickle, 
Constable Charles Hamby and Ben Pierce in 
front of his hotel on one of the mai n streets 
here today 
Judg e Pickl e freely discussed the occurrence. "W e can handle the Negr o question 
withou t interference by these Northerners 
who come down here and preach social 
.quality, " said Judg e Pickle . "Th e mai n 
object of this man's visit here wa s to sow 
300 TH E LOOKING GLASS 301 
discontent among the Negroes, and I 
thought it was my duty to stop him. An d 
we not only stopped him, but nave gotten 
him out of our community. " 
Constable Hamby , i n describing the whip -
rin g give n Shillady , said tha t he and Judge 
Pickl e and Le n Pierc e struck Shillad y severa l times, and tha t Shillad y was knocked 
down. The scene of the whippin g was i n 
the street i n fron t of the Driskil l Hotel, 
where Shillad y registered upon his arriva l 
i n Austi n yesterday. Shillad y made no attempt to defend himself, said Hamby . 
"Whe n we came up to him, we told him 
tha t he ha d been holdin g a conference wit h 
a bunch of Negroes, and tha t he would have 
to leave town righ t now, " said Hamby . "H e 
remarke d tha t we could not see from his 
point of view, but he did'nt get any further, 
as we then started i n to whi p him. " 
$ * * 
Needless to say tha t comment i n the 
Nort h and the South differs widely. 
Th e Ne w Orlean s States, Ne w Orleans, 
La. , takes this fling at the N . A . A . C. P. : 
The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People is not promotin g the welfar e of the race i n the South, 
and it is doubtful i f it is helpin g the rela ­
tions between the whites and blacks of the 
North . Th e sooner it ceases its activitie s 
i n this section and confines them to other 
sections of the country, the better it wil l be 
fo r the cause i n whic h it is enlisted, for i n 
the South it is only breeding trouble, in ­
tensifyin g racia l feeling and provokin g 
clashes. 
* * * 
An d the Rome , Ga. , Tribune-Herald follows i n like strain : 
W e have no patience whateve r wit h the 
whit e promoters of Negr o dissatisfaction. 
It is scarcely conceivable that white men 
would stir up antagonism between the 
races tha t migh t be awfu l i n their consequences, but tha t there are such inferna l 
degenerates i n this country is all too apparent. The y deserve the condemnation of 
al l good men, whethe r whit e or black. 
Ther e is no reason whateve r fo r il l feeling 
between the races i n this country, and there 
would not be except for the activitie s of 
such men as Shillady . The y are not only a 
publi c nuisance, they are a publi c menace, 
and no decent whit e man , either Nort h or 
South, should associate wit h them. 
Th e country has problems enough to be 
solved and troubles enough already without 
havin g racia l troubles heaped upon it. Me n 
lik e Shillad y should be kept i n jail . 
* * * 
Th e Public says pointedly: 
Lest anybody should doubt the fitness of 
Texa s to "clean up " Mexico , and teach the 
"greasers " how to observe law and order, 
bount y Judge Dave Pickl e and Constable 
Charle s Hamb y of Austin , Texas, aided by 
some other law-abidin g citizens, gave a conclusive demonstration by beating up John 
R. Shillady, Secretary of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People, as he emerged from a publi c hall 
i n that city. Havin g thus expressed their 
devotion to law and order, these Texa s 
heroes put Mr . Shillad y on a train , and 
warned him not to leave it til l i t got out of 
the state. We trust that President 
Carranza will be properly impressed by this 
demonstration, and wil l instil l i n the minds 
of his judges such a love of order and 
justice that i f anybody i n Mexic o says anythin g against the ancient and honorable 
custom of lynching , they wil l vindicat e the 
law, as Judge Pickl e did when he pummeled 
Mr . Shillad y wit h his bare fists. It migh t 
be said, by wa y of extenuation, that the 
Judge said he had acted i n his capacity as 
a gentleman, and not as a member of the 
bench. We trust that Mr . Shillad y wil l 
note the distinction. 
* * * 
The Evening Globe, Ne w York , discloses 
the underlyin g motives: 
The rumors about Shillady's activitie s 
were tha t he was stirrin g up the Negroes 
to demand "socia l equality wit h the whites. " 
Actuall y his association has incurred the 
displeasure of certain classes of 
Southerners not by any such impossible policy as 
this, but by exposing the trut h about lynch -
ings. The association has repeatedly 
brought to ligh t facts about mob murders 
which had never been published i n the newspapers and which otherwise would never 
have been heard of outside the communities i n whic h they took place Fro m 
the point of view of those who take part 
in , or tolerate, lynchings, any humanitaria n 
interest i n the Negr o is bad. The ugl y 
truth is that a large number of Southerners 
are determined not only to refuse to mingl e 
socially wit h the Negroes—no sane person 
demands that—but to compel them, irre ­
spective of individua l abilit y or merit, to 
remain a subject race. The y are determined 
that the black ma n shall not have any 
share i n the government unde r whic h he 
lives, and they insist tha t he ought; to be 
and shall be, a hewer of wood and drawe r 
of wate r for the whit e race. I n this their 
point of view is not essentially different 
from that of al l superior races i n the presence of those considered inferiors. They 
look upon the Negr o as the Russia n landlord looks upon the peasants, as the 
Japanese looks upon the Coreans, as the Kurds 
look upon the Armenian s 
Ther e is not a trace of modern humanitarianism or modern democracy i n the rela ­
tions of the southern whit e wit h the s)uthern black. Mr . Shillad y and his association are fighting against a traditio n as old 
as those dim prehistori c days of India , when 
the first invaders swept down out of the 
hills, conquered the people of the plains, and 
set up the system of caste. 
* * * 
The Ne w Yor k Call makes the suggestion : "TH E BAB Y FIGURES OF TH E GI 
302 MASS OF THINGS TO COME." 
Troilus and Cressida. 
303 301 TH E CRISIS 
That a survey of the treatment of 
Negroes be made in this country and a digest 
of it be published abroad for the informa ­
tion of oppressed nationalitie s and races. 
The Jews, for example, migh t be asked 
whether they prefe r the old Russia n and 
modem Polis h forms of pogroms to the 
more dramati c roasting of blacks, which 
is so popula r i n the Democrati c South. 
Nothin g like exchangin g ideas on these matters and being up to date. We do not 
think that the South can lear n anythin g 
from the Europea n pogromists, but the 
latter ma y be able to learn from the grea t 
southern ''democracy. " Ou r fame i n this 
respect is not sufficiently known to carr y 
much weight abroad. 
In the meantime, Mr . Shillad y can nurse 
his bruises, and whil e he is recovering, he 
can console himself wit h reading some of 
the addresses the Grea t Democra t delivered 
durin g the wa r regardin g oppressed races 
in Europe . Nothin g like "that is calculated 
to increase our affection for "America n 
democracy. " 
SPEAKING OF ABYSSINIA 
THE treatment of the Abyssinia n envoys could not have been more badlytimed. Town Topics, Ne w York , says: 
Whateve r advantages our government 
hoped to obtain through its entertainment 
of the Abyssinia n Specia l Embassy , durin g 
its stay i n this country, has been imperiled, 
to say the very least, by the gross' affront 
to whic h it permitted the guests of the na ­
tion to be subjected on the last day of 
their otherwise successful visit. Tha t Duk e 
Nadao , who is a scion of the reignin g family , a nephew of the Empress of Abyssinia , 
and who fills the office of Ministe r of Wa r 
in his native land, should have been barred 
as a Negr o on Sunda y nigh t from the 
Democrati c Club , was a contretemps whic h 
is discreditable to all concerned, and whic h 
caused the Ambassado r and the various 
dignitarie s of his mission to sail for their 
home on the followin g afternoon wit h a 
sense of mortification, of undeserved humiliation and of profound resentment. It wa s 
all the more keenly felt by them, i n view o f 
the roya l honors Wit h which the Duk e had 
been welcomed by President Poincar e i n 
Franc e and by Kin g George and Queen 
Mar y i n Grea t Britain . The affair could 
not have occurred i f more care had been 
exercised i n the selection of those permitted 
to advertise themselves and their business 
by pressing hospitality upon the envoys, 
who have nothing in common with the 
African or American Negro, save the somewhat 
dusky hue of the skin , and belong to an 
entirely different race—one of the most 
proud and ancient i n the world . Unde r the 
circumstances, the Abyssinian s should have 
been quietly and discreetly steered awa y 
from the colored churches i n Ne w York , in ­
stead of being taken thithe r to attend functions i n their honor withou t any realization 
of the social prejudice that exists here 
against the Negr o population. 
Not e the implicatio n i n the last sentence 
above. I n the circumstances, it is interestin g to read wha t the West Indian has to 
say of a n Abyssinia n Bishop : 
It wa s on the occasion of the celebration 
of the Armistic e i n St. George's Cathedral, 
i n Jerusalem, wher e B . W . I.'s of al l denominations were represented. A s I sat 
there I saw the Anglican Bishop of 
Abyssinia, a pure-blooded black man, as the 
leadin g churc h dignitar y of tha t impressive 
service, robed and carryin g al l the beautifu l paraphernali a of his office. H e wa s 
followed by the Bisho p of Jerusalem, 
(white ) and a crowd of other whit e churc h 
of Englan d priests, who, wit h befitting 
ceremony, conducted him to his throne. It 
was plai n tha t the honor accorded hi m was 
real. I was electrified wit h the beautifu l 
Christianit y of the whole thing . M y min d 
went back to m y own St. George's Anglica n 
Church , i n Grenada : and I wondered, and 
I feared. Bu t we were i n Jerusalem, made 
sacred by the footprints of the Master, and 
not i n Grenada , whic h should account for 
any difference tha t migh t have been. Th e 
Bisho p of Abyssini a is a ver y stately and 
engaging personality. Somehow or other 
I was proud to be an Anglica n as I sat 
there. It wil l be my most memorabl e experience as a soldier abroad. 
SPIRIT OF THE TIMES 
HARR Y H . JONES , a youn g colored 
man , membe r of the Facult y of the 
Lincol n Hig h School, write s i n the Wheelin g 
Majority, Wheeling , W . Va. , on the causes 
of the recent race riots. Afte r mentionin g 
politica l discrimination , anti-Negr o propa ­
ganda and its circulatio n b y the whit e press, 
and the genera l social unrest, Mr . Jones 
says: 
In the fourt h place, the development of 
race consciousness among Negroe s durin g 
the wa r has tended to spu r their demands 
fo r consideration at the hands of their fellow Americans. Prior to the war the 
Negro was wont to confine his agitation for 
justice to restricted channels on this side 
of the Atlantic . Today, followin g the example of other oppressed peoples, he is carrying on an international propaganda. 
Formerly, when he was attacked by mobs, he 
ran ; today he stands and defends himself. 
H e is consciou s of havin g rendered efficient 
service to his government durin g the wa r 
and now he asks tha t his government rewar d hi m wit h the rights and privilege s of 
America n citizenship. Th e wa r broadened 
his views; it brought him i n contact wit h 
man y races of mankind . Eithe r on the 
battlefield or throug h the press, he found 
that Franc e wa s willin g to accept him at TH E LOOKING GLASS 305 
his worth . He has faced death man y times 
more horribl e than that which a Georgi a 
mob could inflict on him. H e has lost the 
fea r of death 
Th e Negr o soldie r found a new set of 
value s i n this war. H e has developed a 
new consciousness. In fact, his very soul 
has changed. On the other hand, the civilia n Negro/havin g given his best i n manhood, means and brawn , "to make the worl d 
safe fo r democracy, " havin g had sounded 
repeatedly into his ears that al l mankin d 
is entitled to self-determination, has formed 
the opinion tha t Democracy ought to begin 
at home, and tha t he ought to share in the 
fruits of victory . H e cannot appreciate our 
championin g the righ t of weak people; in 
Europ e and Asi a to self determination and 
our remainin g silent on his righ t to enjoy 
it at home. I n fact, Negroe s of all classes, 
from the radica l to the conservative, are 
one i n believin g tha t Americ a must change 
her treatment towar d their race. The y diffe r only as to means. 
"Anise, " says i n the Seattle UnionRecord, Seattle, Washington : 
"Wa s it not their Lansin g 
* * ::: 
Wh o called on all the nations 
* * * 
To brin g order to Russi a 
* * * 
Whe n we had OU R riots! " 
"What ! Ar e THES E the people," 
* # * 
Sai d the Peasant Bolshevik, 
"Wh o have so MAN Y troops 
A n 1 so much law and order 
* # * 
To SPAR E 
* * * 
Fo r Russia? " 
* * * 
Fro m the Fa r East comes this word i n 
the Hochi, Tokyo , Japan : 
The racia l strif e i n Americ a is a disgrace to the civilize d world . If Americ a 
wishes to preach the principl e of justice 
and humanit y to others, she must first solve 
the question of racia l strif e on her own 
soil. 
* * * 
The Ne w Yor k Times gives some notion 
of England's attitude : 
I n the Hous e of Commons today the Hon . 
Walte r E . Guinness, Unionist member for 
Suffolk, asked Andre w Bona r Law , the 
Government leader, to give the day's discussion over to the present position of the 
black races, but his request was refused. 
Th e questioner responded by askin g 
whethe r i t would not be a graceful act of 
reciprocity to place at the disposal of the 
Unite d States the benefit of Britis h experience i n governin g Negroes in return 
for the discussion of Irish affairs in the 
United States Senate. 
Captai n Willia m Wedgewood Benn . 
Libera l member fo r Leith , asked Mr . Bona r 
La w to do his best to prevent efforts to sow 
dissension between Americ a and Grea t 
Britai n by alleged humorous questions. 
Humorous questions! This is a new interpretation of the Britis h sense of humor. 
I AM AN AMERICAN CITIZEN 
Bust of a Negro child, by Paolo S. Abbate . 
(Photograph by International Film Service.) 306 TH E CRISIS 
THE RIOT-MILL 
THI S is the wa y the whit e America n 
press starts race riots: On August 
5, the Washington Post published this account, on the thir d page, top of the column, 
towar d the outer edge of the sheet. Notic e 
the multiplicit y of details and the attempt 
at an exact description of the alleged assailants. Al l the possible resources of "make ­
up " wer e brought to play. W e present an 
exact photographi c copy: 
ATTACKED BY NEGROES 
Mrs. Minnie Franklin Injured at 
League Park Carnival. 
TWO ASSAILANTS GET AWA Y 
Covered by Revolver on Outskirts 
of Crowd as Companion Drives, 
Away—Taken to Casualty Hos- | 
pital and Later to Home—Reserves Hunt Men. 
Tw o squad's o f headquarter s detec ­
tives, aide d b y reserve s fro m th e 
Nint h precinct , earl y toda y wer e 
searchin g house s an d scourin g fields 
i n th e neighborhoo d o f Fifteent h an d 
it streets northeas t i n a n effor t to ap ­
prehen d tw o youn g negroe s wh o 
shortl y befor e 10 o'cloc k last nigh t at ­
tacke d Mrs . Minni e Frankli n nea r th e 
I carniva l tents o n th e ol d Unio n Leagu e 
I bal l grounds. 
Whil e hundred s o f merrymaker s 
I thronge d th e carnival , .tents Mrs . 
Frankli n wa s subjecte d to .treatmen t 
I tha t left her ' hysterica l an d abl e to 
'mak e bu t vagu e statements a s to th e 
affair . A partia l descriptio n o f th e 
colore d me n wa s obtaine d fro m per ­
son s wh o sa w the m fleein g fro m the 
scen e o f th e crime . 
! I Covered Her With Pistol. 
i Mrs . Franklin , wh o is 37 year s ol d 
an d th e wif e o f Edwar d S. Franklin. , 
o f 1381 K stree t southeast , is-under ­
stoo d to hav e bee n wit h a companio n 
a t th e carnival . The y ha d walke d 
awa y fro m th e mai n tent, bu t wer e 
stil l i n th e radiu s o f ligh t fro m gaso -
olin e torches, whe n th e tw o negroe s 
appeared . On e o f the m cowe d Mrs . 
Frankli n wit h a revolver . 
Seve ra l minute s late r sh e stagge r d 
to the entranc e o f th e ground s an d re ­
late d wha t ha d occurred . Th e police 1 
wer e communicate d wit h a t once , a s 
wa s Casualt y Hospital . Mrs . Frank ­
li n was - remove d to th e institution , 
wher e sh e wa s treate d an d questione d 
b y detectives.- Late r sh e wa s take n 
to he r home , wher e he r husban d an d 
(childre n wer e apprise d o f th e attack . 
j Lawless Element in Crowd. 
| A Specia l detai l fro m the Nint h pre -
cinc t ha s bee n statione d a t th e carni ­
va l sinc e its inauguration , bu t unti l 
last night no disorder had been reported from the grounds. It is known, I 
.however , tha t a lawles s element , bot h j 
whit e an d colored , ha d bee n attracte d | 
to th e "free-for-all " scen e Cjf jolity . I 
Th e descriptio n o f th e negroe s flash ­
ed fro m headquarter s read s a s fol ­
lows: 
"Loo k ou t fo r tw o colore d men , 5 
fee t 3 o r 4 inche s in" height ; brow n 
skin , 23 to 25 year s old : wearing : whit e 
shirts, n o coats, ta n o r yello w caps. " | 
On August 16, this tin y articl e appeared 
tucked awa y on page 5, i n the middl e of the 
first column, on the inne r edge. Nee d we 
comment? 
CALLS ASSAULT A "STORY" 
Mrs. Franklin's Charg e Against Tw o 
Negroe s Droppe d by Police . 
I n a statemen t to headquarter s de ­
tective s last night . Mrs . Minni e 
Franklin , o f 1361 K stree t southeast , 
declared , accordin g to he r questioners, 
includin g Detective s Vermillion , Em -
brey , O 'Brie n an d Bradley , tha t he r 
stor y o f havin g bee n attacke d Thurs ­
da y nigh t nea r Fifteent h an d H 
streets northeas t b y tw o negroe s wa s 
a fabrication . 
Mrs . Frankli n first wa s interrogate d 
ti y Mrs . Min a C . Va n Winkle , hea d o f 
the woman ' s bureau . Th e cas e ha s 
bee n dropped . 
CARNEGIE The Horizon 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
JOH N McCORMICK , the noted Iris h 
tenor, is said to be educating a young 
Negro baritone, Ross Houston, of 
Shelbyville, 111., at Fisk University; a musical 
education is to follow his academic train ­
ing . 
C R. Nathanie l Dett, the Negr o composer, 
has secured a leave of absence from his 
position as Directo r of Musi c at Hampto n 
Institute , to devote his time to study at 
Boston, Mass. 
C Ily a Schkolnik , the concert maste r of the 
Detroi t Symphon y Orchestra , conducted A . 
Walte r Kramer's "Symphoni c Rhapsod y on 
Negr o Themes " at a concert given at the 
Stadium, Ne w York . 
C George W . Broome , of Medford , Mass., 
is manufacturin g a series of phonograph 
records by Negr o artists. "GO Down , 
Moses," by Harry T. Burleigh, and 
"Villanelle," sung by Mme. Florence Cole-Talbert, 
are announced i n September. 
(I Th e Denve r Musica l Association , for 
the purpose of encouraging study, a highe r 
standard of musi c and the use of compositions of Negr o composers and the folklore songs, has been organized, wit h Mme . 
Lillia n Hawkin s Jones, president. 
C. Mrs. Azali a Hackle y has held folk-song 
festivals i n Montgomery , Ala. , Greensboro 
and Hig h Point, N . C. The y have been 
largel y attended and very successful. 
d Ove r two hundred Negr o musicians met 
in Chicago and formed the National 
Association of Negro Musicians. Mr. Henry 
Grant, of Washington , D . C , was chairman . 
A Scholarship Fun d was inaugurated and 
Miss Mario n Anderson , the youn g contralto 
of Philadelphia , was selected as the first 
beneficiary. 
C A t the close of the A . and T. Summe r 
School, Greensboro, N . C , Mme . Mar y Ross 
Dorsey presented the pla y "Everywoman. " 
Ther e was a mixe d audience, includin g 
man y prominent citizens, who witnessed the 
successful performance. 
C "Th e Smarte r Set, " Negr o comedians, 
etc., headed by S. Tut t Whitne y and J. 
Home r Tutt, wil l present this season under 
the booking of Kla w and Erlange r "Childre n 
of the Sun, " i n two acts and ten scenes, 
representing the Swanee River, Japan, 
India, Persia, Thebes and Ethiopia. 
(L The Frederic k Douglass Fil m Compan y 
i n Jersey City , N . J. , owned and controlled 
by Negroes, has added to its productions 
"Heroi c Negr o Soldiers of the Worl d War, " 
i n two parts, directed by Dr . Willia m S. 
Smith . 
(I Th e Democracy Fil m Company, of Los 
Angeles, Cal. , a Negr o enterprise, is presenting "Injustice, " writte n and directed 
by Captai n Lesli e T. Peacocke, as an answe r to "Th e Clansman. " 
C Percy Grainger, the distinguished 
Australian pianist, who makes his home in 
Americ a and whose appreciation of Afro -
America n music and musicians has been 
particularl y noticeable, states tha t i n a 
list of works taught and heard durin g his 
first two weeks' teaching at the Chicago 
307 TH E CRISI S 
Musical College were works of R. 
Nathaniel Dett, the Negro composer. Mr. 
Grainger adds that he will play a Dett number 
on his programs this coming season. H e 
furthe r states tha t a colored student, Mrs. 
Corneli a Lampto n Forrest, was one of his 
Lest pupils at the Chicago Musica l College. 
INDUSTR Y 
THE Liberia n Haberdasher y Compan y 
has been organized by Negroes in 
Cincinnati, Ohio, as a $5,000 corporation. 
Thoma s E . Richmond , 19 Templ e Court 
Building , is the attorney fo r this enterprise. 
G A colored woman , Margare t Myers, of 
Marysville , is the champion peach pitte r of 
California . He r wage at a loca l cannery 
is $14-$20 per day. 
C Th e Mississipp i A . and M . College reports that in 1918 the membership of 
Negro farm clubs increased 400 percent over 
the previous year. Fiv e boys produced an 
average of 108 bushels of corn to an acre; 
195 boys reported a sale of hogs amountin g to $6,253.38, at a profit of $3,474.10. 
G In 1918 through the United States 
Department of Agricultural and State Colleges 
(here were organized i n the South 1,563 
rura l colored women's clubs, wit h 37,913 
members, and 1,962 girls' clubs, wit h 50,995 
members. The tota l colored membership is 
103,377. The women in these clubs have 
organized 117 co-operative poultr y breedin g associations and fifty co-operative egg 
circles. 
C Negroes i n St. Louis, Mo. , have organized the Co-operative Associatio n of Libert y 
and subscribed $25,000 i n cash and pledges 
for the stock of the store. The Rev. B . G. 
Shaw, pastor of Metropolita n A . M . E . Zion 
Church , whic h has a membership of 4,000, 
is president of the association. 
G A t a meeting held i n Metropolita n A . 
M . E . Church , Philadelphia , Pa. , $15,000 
wa s subscribed by Negroes for a local department store. 
C The Orde r of Sleeping Ca r Porters of 
Canad a has been chartered by the Canadia n 
Brotherhood of Railwa y Employee s and admitted to membership i n the Trade s and 
Labo r Council of Winnipeg , wit h delegates 
representing each road i n Canad a at all 
meetings. Mr. J. A. Robinson, of the 
Canadian National Railways, was elected president. 
C T. L . O. Lambert, a colored man, has 
been i n the employ of the Detroit Post Office for forty-nine years. H e is seventyeight years old. J. F . Rickar d has been i n 
the employ of the same office fort y years. 
C Uzzia h Miner, of Fay , Okla. . wh o has 
been employed as clerk i n the office of the 
Registe r of the Unite d States Treasur y 
since April, has been promoted to 
Assistant Supervisor in the Division of Interest 
Coupons. H e is a graduat e of Howar d 
Universit y '18, and he saw active service 
i n Franc e wit h Batter y "F, " 349th Fiel d 
Artillery . 
G A site 290 x 150, at Aubur n Avenu e and 
Courtlan d Street, Atlanta , Ga. , now occupied by the Wesle y Memoria l Hospital , has 
been sold to H . E . Perry , President of the 
Standar d Lif e Insuranc e Compan y and of 
the Service Compan y of Atlanta , colored, 
and wil l be converted into an office build ­
in g fo r Negr o lawyers, physicians, fraterna l 
associations, insuranc e companies, commercia l agencies, etc. 
C The Hai r Vi m Chemica l Compan y of 
Washington , D . C , wil l establish a branc h 
i n Ne w Yor k City , where propert y i n West 
130th Street has been bought fo r $30,000. 
The enterprise has for its president Dr. 
Juli a H . P. Coleman. 
C The Berry & Ross Manufacturing 
Company, a colored business in New York City, 
has added a first-class clothing, doll toy, 
novelty and notion store to its enterprise. 
C The Elro y Manufacturin g Company , 
Inc., at St. Louis, Mo. , whic h manufac ­
tures everythin g necessary fo r undertakers, 
is a concern owned and operated by 
Negroes. Apart from a private office and 
a genera l office there are ten departments 
i n connection wit h the factory, includin g 
a machine room, storage room fo r lumber, 
a polishin g room, drawin g and design department, sewing room, paintin g and finishin g room, a varnishin g and dryin g room, 
a stock room and a shippin g room. Th e 
president and business manage r of the 
company is J. W . Bronaugh . 
G The Unite d Investment Corporatio n has 
been organized i n Atlant a Ga. , by Negroes, 
wit h a capita l stock of $100,000—$30 000 
of whic h was raised at a recent meeting. 
The ultimat e end of the enterpris e is the 
supplyin g of funds to Negroe s of the South 
for the buildin g and the ownin g of homes. 
On the board are J. B . Long , Captai n A . T. 
Waldon, Charles McArthur, R. H. 
Singleton, P. James Brown William Driskoll, 
W. F . Body , S. C. Cummings. TH E HORIZO N 309 
C A Negro, Green Springfield, at 
Corsicana, Tex., very black, and white haired, has 
oil lands t) the value of half a millio n 
dollars; a deep test well i n his 400 acre 
farm is expected to add a millio n dollars 
to his fortune. 
C I n Chicago, a Negr o daily—The Chicago 
Evening World, has been started, wit h T. 
A . Donaldson, Cit y Editor. Th e paper sells 
for two cents. 
C Negroe s i n Chicago, 111., have deposited 
wit h the Illinois Trust and Savings Compan y 
over five millio n dollars. 
C Negr o non-Unio n labor has replaced 
1,500 Poles and Russians, who struck at the 
Arg o Cor n Plan t Products Company , at 
Chicago. Th e strikers asked fo r a closed 
shop. 
C Th e State Employmen t Burea u i n Ne w 
Yor k City , whic h was established through 
Assemblyma n E . A . Johnson, has placed colored people in thirty-three industries. 
Usually about 1,000 unemployed persons a 
mont h are dealt with . P . L . Edwoods is 
superintendent. 
G Th e Providen t Development Corporatio n 
of Bridgeport, Conn., has purchased and 
improve d property valued at $60,500 and 
has an equity of $19,775 i n the property. 
These houses have been rented to twentytwo colored familie s and the annua l income 
from rent is $7,074. L . J. Jorda n is president. 
C Henr y James, the colored chauffeur fo r 
Senator and Mrs. J. N . Camden, at Sprin g 
Hill , N . J. , received a check of $1,000 from 
his employe r on the twentieth anniversar y of his service. 
TH E WA R 
THE late Richar d Berry , of Hillsboro , 
N . C , Regimenta l Sergeant of the 
810th Pionee r Infantry , through his business experience as Assistan t Manage r for 
W . P. Evans, one of the largest merchants 
i n the South, was made Manage r of the 
Post Exchang e Recrui t Camp No . 2. It 
wa s said of him b y one of the hig h officials, 
"W e cannot find another to fill his place. " 
C Mr . Cleveland Buchana n has brought to 
America the .300,000 feet production 
"Democracy Paid For," filmed by the "Eclair" 
Societe Industriell e Cinematographique , of 
Paris. Actua l scenes are woven into a composite pla y of the colored troops who served 
in France . 
([ Th e Carte r Brow n Post of the America n 
Legio n has been organized by Negroes i n 
Mobile , Ala . Sixt y members have been 
enrolled. 
C A t the athletic tournament held at For t 
Huachuca , Ariz. , between four regiments 
of the Regula r Army , two colored and two 
white, colored men won seventy-six points 
and white men five. Sergeant Williamson , 
of the Tent h Cavalry , won the cup for the 
highest individua l score. 
G O'Neil l Mitchel l has been assigned to organize the colored division of the Wa r Camp 
Communit y Service, i n Kansa s City . 
CRIM E 
ON July 9, at Pensacola, Fla., Miss 
Rosebud Spann, a young colored woman 
was attacked by white men and dragged 
from her buggy to the woods. A rewar d of 
$250 has been offered for the arrest and 
conviction of the assailants by the colored 
citizens. 
C It is reported to TH E CRISIS that Joh n 
Hartfield was lynched, not for attackin g a 
woman at Ellisville , Miss. , but because he 
and the white woman were lovers; tha t the 
woman tried to effect his escape and gave 
him money. It is said that a large number of colored people were put to death 
by the mob durin g the ten days i n which 
they were searching for Hartfield. Whe n 
Hartfield started to tell the mob about his 
relations wit h the woman, his tongue was 
cut out. Tw o whit e ministers of the town 
were among the leaders of the mob. 
C The followin g lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: 
Pope City , Ga., August 14, Ji m Grant, 
returned soldier, hanged fo r alleged shootin g of Lee Gammage and his son. 
Louisburg, N. C, August 20, Walter 
Elliott, shot to death and hanged; alleged assault on whit e woman. 
Ocmulgee, Ga., El i Cooper, August 28, 
shot to death i n a church and the church 
burned because of reports that Negroe s 
were plannin g to rise. 
Youngsville , N . C , August 28, Walte r 
Tyler, nineteen years old, hanged; accused 
of attackin g white woman. 
Boaglusa, La., August 31, Lucius 
McCarty, discharged Negro soldier, burned; 
alleged attack upon a white woman. 
EDUCATIO N 
J. M . WILLIAMS , the celebrated end 
on Brow n University's Football Team, 
wil l pla y the coming year. 310 TH E CRISIS 
C A n examinatio n for scholarships under 
the George Washingto n Educatio n Fun d has 
been held at Jerseyville , 111. Tw o colored 
students wil l be sent to college this fal l and 
two others are being educated—one at the 
University of Chicago and one at the 
University of Illinois. The fund was established by a colored ma n and amounts to 
more than $20,000. 
C Th e Genera l Educatio n Boar d has appropriated money to employ field agents for 
the Negr o rura l schools i n Texa s and South 
Carolina . 
C The Baptists of Virgini a have held a 
tercentenary celebration and collected $23,-
000 fo r missions and education. Dr . Z. D . 
Lewis was chairman . 
C Howar d A . Fishe r has been fo r the 
thir d time re-elected Secretary of the Darb y 
Townshi p School District, of Delawar e 
County, Pa . H e has been president and vicepresident of the Boar d and was once elected 
treasurer, "but no bond company would 
go on my bond of $4,000 simpl y on account of my color. " 
C The formal inauguration of Dr. J, 
Stanley Durkee as president of Howard 
University will take place next month. A Readjustment and Restruction Congress wil l 
be held at the same time. 
G The Methodist Churc h wil l appropriat e 
$200,000 from its Centenary Funds to 
Meharry Medical College and will move 
Walden University to Mississippi or Georgia, 
to make room for the growt h of Meharry . 
G The recent Legislatur e of Texa s appropriated very nearly a half millio n dollars 
for Prairi e Vie w College. This colored in ­
stitution now has the righ t to gran t degrees. 
G The Methodist Freedmen's Ai d Society 
received $217,044 for its Negr o wor k last 
yea r and made appropriations of $118,000 
fo r its schools next year. 
C The Boar d of Educatio n in Atlanta , Ga. , 
has voted 4-2 i n favor of turnin g over Ash -
by Street School to the Negroes, on Januar y 
1, 1920, to be used as a hig h school. 
G Littl e children broke the ground fo r the 
new $100 000 school at Truxton , Va. , a 
town built by the government for Negr o 
employees of the Navy Yard at 
Portsmouth. Fred D. McCracken, a Negro, is 
Town Manager. 
G Paulin e Newton , of Cranford , N . J. , 
who graduated as valedictoria n from the 
local Hig h School, i n June , 1917, at the age 
of sixteen, was graduated from the New 
Jersey State Normal School, Newark, N . J. , 
Jun e 27, 1919, being one of three speakers 
out of 274 graduates. She has accepted a 
position as teacher i n Springtown , N . J . 
C Ou t of 131 applications filed at Ne.v 
Orleans, La. , for examinatio n fo r teachers' 
certificates, 101 wer e Negr o applicants. 
G I n Muskogee , Okla. , a colored woman, 
Oreba Bryant , is the first of he r sex to pass 
the State Boar d of Denta l Examinations. 
Miss Bryan t is a graduat e of Meharry . 
G "Mr . Unknown, " so-called because his 
name has never been learned, has called at 
the office of the Lutheran s i n New York 
Cit y for the twenty-thir d time, since 1896, 
and left $500 fo r wor k amon g Negroes. 
His gifts now tota l $15,000. 
G Th e Boar d of Educatio n at Athens, Ga., 
has re-elected Mr. S. F. Harris, 
Supervising Principal of Negro Schools. 
C Mrs. Lillia n Atkin s Moore , the onl y colored student i n a class of fort y at the 
Women's Medica l College, Philadelphia , in 
Jun e won the Agne s B . Robinson-Messne r 
priz e i n anatomy ; durin g preparator y wor k 
at Shaw Universit y she won a scholarship 
priz e for the highest average over ninety 
percent fo r two years. 
C The colored population at Dover, Ohio, 
refused to send their childre n to a separate 
school; the School Boar d has, therefore, 
been compelled to abandon it. 
G The Trainin g School fo r Communit y 
Workers will hold its fifth session, 
September 30, 1919, to May 20, 1920. The superviso r is Miss A . A . Freeman , 70 Fift h 
Avenue , Ne w Yor k City . 
G Willis N . Cummings, of Galveston , Tex., 
was graduated from the Universit y of 
Pennsylvani a wit h the degree of Docto r of 
Denta l Surgery . Fo r his three years he 
ranked among the first six of a class of 
259 and wa s elected to the honor fraternit y 
of denta l schools. I n 1918 he wa s captai n 
of the varsit y cross countr y team an d is 
one of the three Negroe s who have received 
the varsit y "P. " 
MEETING S 
THE Colored Citizens' Club, Inc., at 
Buffalo, N. Y., held a week's celebration, 
September 8-13, commemoratin g the 300th 
anniversar y of the Negr o race. 
C Tw o race congresses wil l be held in 
Washington—on e by the Equal Rights 
League of Boston , in September, and the 
other by the Nationa l Race Congress, of 
Washington , in October. TH E HORIZON 311 
C The Nationa l Negr o Business League 
met i n St. Louis, Mo. , wit h 1,000 delegates 
from twenty-si x states. A nationa l office 
was planned fo r Washington , D . C. Dr . 
R. R. Moton , of Tuskegee, was elected president and Dr . R. E . Jones, Chairma n of the 
Executiv e Committee . The meeting took 
place at Por o College, which has a $350,000 
plant fo r beauty culture . The next meetin g wil l be held in Philadelphia . 
C Th e Nationa l Associatio n of Teachers of 
Colored Yout h wa s held at Orangeburg , S. 
C. Joh n M . Gandy , of Petersburg, Va. , was 
elected president. Baltimor e was selected 
fo r the next meeting. 
C Th e Nationa l Associatio n of Colored 
Graduat e Nurse s met i n Boston, wit h 100 
members present. The next meeting wil l 
take place a t Tuskegee Institute. Mrs. 
Ada h B . Thorns wa s re-elected president. 
C Th e sixt h annua l convention of colored 
posta l employees was held i n Jacksonville , 
Fla . Twenty-five officers and delegates 
wer e present, representing 325 Negr o postal 
employees i n thirteen states. The y reported 
a n income of $8,340 last year. 
FRATERNITIE S 
THE twenty - second session of the 
Knights of Gideon has been held at 
Kenbridge , Va . 
C Th e Weldo n Lodge of Elk s at Savannah , 
Ga. , has bought fo r $9,000 a home, at the 
corner of Houston , McDonoug h and Hul l 
Streets. 
C Th e Gran d Lodge of the Improved Orde r 
of Elk s met i n Atlanti c City , wit h a large 
attendance. George W . F . McMecha n was 
elected Gran d Exalte d Ruler. 
C Th e Supreme Lodge of Knights of 
Pythias, Easter n and Wester n Hemispheres, 
met at Kansa s City . W . Ashbi e Hawkin s 
was re-elected Supreme Chancellor. 
C Th e Supreme Lodge of Knights of 
Pythia s was held i n Atlanti c City , and wa s 
largel y attended. Ther e were a parade of 
8,000 and a bal l on the Millio n Dolla r Pier. 
S. W . Green was- re elected head of the 
order and E . G . Tidrington , Vice-Supreme 
Chancellor, i n place of J . L . Jones. Th e 
next biennial meeting will take place at 
Topeka, Kans. 
C The fifty-second convention of the 
Independent Order of St. Luke was held in 
Richmond , Va . A . C. Russ, of Pittsburgh , 
was elected Gran d Chie f and Mrs. Maggi e 
L . Walker, Gran d Secretary-Treasurer. 
The order has 60,000 members. 
SOCIA L PROGRES S 
LOUI S G. HARPER , a Negr o i n Atlanta , 
Ga. , is the winne r of the thir d priz e 
in a nation wide essay contest on "Wh y 
We Should Hav e an America n Language. " 
The contest was conducted by the State 
Librar y of Ohio and was open to accredited 
university, college and hig h school students 
throughout the country. 
C The Episcopa l Missio n of Hel p has appointed another colored woman, Mrs. Ev a 
Deaver, to succeed the late Mrs. Adelphi a 
B. Holme s i n looking after the interests of 
Negr o women i n the Woman's Da y Court, 
Ne w Yor k City . 
C Robert R. Moton and Robert R. Churc h 
have been made members of the Genera l 
Committee of the Roosevelt Memorial 
Association, with headquarters in New York 
City , to represent the Negr o race. A campaig n wil l be conducted October 20-27. 
C Eightee n Negr o physicians i n Detroit, 
Mich. , a yea r ago organized fo r the purpose of raising funds for a hospital. 
Almost the entire fund of $6 000 was contributed by the Negr o citizens, and now the 
Dunba r Memoria l Hospita l has been established, wit h a staff of seventeen physicians 
and accommodation for thirt y patients. 
Willia m C. Osby is president. 
C Colored people of Asheville , N . C , have, 
paid $12,000 fo r a buildin g to be used by 
the Y . W . C. A . and other social activities. 
PERSONA L 
DR. S. C. FULLER , the well-known 
alienist who has been i n the State 
service fo r twenty-two years, has resigned 
as Director of Pathology at Westboro 
Insane Asylum, Massachusetts, and become 
Associat e Professor of neuro-pathology at 
Boston University . 
C Man y Bruner, a Negr o seventy-four 
years old, livin g at Tahlequah, Okla. , has 
thirt y three livin g children—twenty sons 
and thirteen daughters, among them five 
pairs of twins. Twelve of his sons served 
in the recent war. 
C W . E . King , editor and founder of the 
Dallas Express, a Negr o weekly, is dead. 
H e had been in newspaper work since 1881. 
C Joseph Perry , of Kansa s City , is dead 
from rabies, due to injurie s received i n attempting to rescue a four-year-old whit e 
child from a mad dog. 312 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
HOWARD UNIVERSITY 
WASHINGTON , D . C. 
Collegiate and Professional Schools 
JUNIO R COLLEG E leading to Schools of Lib ­
eral Arts, Education , Journalism , or Commerce and Financ e four year course, giving: 
degree, A.B . or S.B. ; A.B . or S.B. i n Edu ­
cation; S.B. in Journalism ; S.B. in Commerce. 
SCHOO L O F APPLIE D SCIENCE , four year 
course, giving degree, S.B. in C.E. , S.B. 
in E.E. , S.B. in M.E. , S.B. in Arch. , S.B. 
in Agrl. , or S.B. in H. E 
SCHOO L O F MUSIC , four year course, giving degree of Mus.B . 
SCHOO L O F RELIGION , three year course, 
giving degree of B.D . (Also diploma and 
correspondence courses.) 
SCHOO L O F LAW , three year evening 
course, giving degree of LL.B . 
SCHOO L O F MEDICINE , including Medical, 
Denta l and Pharmaceutica l Colleges. Fou r 
year course for Medica l and Denta l students; three year s for Pharmaceutical . 
Followin g degrees given: M.D. . D.D.S. , 
Phar.C . 
For Catalog and Information Write— 
REGISTRAR DWIGHT 0 . W . HOLMES 
Howard University, Washington, D . C . 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
MANUAL TRAINING and 
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
FOR COLORE D YOUT H 
BORDENTOWN , N . J . 
A hig h institutio n for the trainin g of 
colored youth . Excellen t equipment, 
thoroug h instruction , wholesome surroundings. Academi c trainin g for al l 
students. 
Courses i n carpentry, agricultur e and 
trades for boys, includin g auto repairing . 
Course s i n domesti c science and domesti c art for girls. 
A new trades building , thoroughl y 
equipped. 
Ne w girls' dormitor y thoroughl y and 
modernl y equipped. 
Term s reasonable. 
Fal l term began Septembe r 15, 1919. 
Fo r informatio n address 
W . R . VALENTINE , Principal 
"THERE ARE FEW COLORED MEN IN 
SIGHT FOR THESE POSITIONS" 
This statement was made at Tuskegee 
Institute recently by a representative of 
the Federal Board of Vocational Education. 
These positions are now paying $75.00 per month and upwards and may go 
as high as $3,000 a year provided men of the right type can fit themselves 
for the positions now offered as Smith- Hughes Instructors in 
AGRICULTUR E - TRADE S AN D INDUSTRIES 
YOUN G WOME N IN HOM E ECONOMIC S 
The Smith-Hughes appropriation is arranged on an upward sliding scale 
for each state. This assures steady increases in salary and rapid advancement for those who begin now. 
Graduates of Colleges and Hig h Schools with two years' training at 
Tuskegee Institute in the special Smith-Hughes courses can easily qualify. 
Man y positions now open. 
Correspondence invited. 
ROBER T R. MOTON , Principal, Tuskegee Institute, ALABAM A 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 31 3 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FO R YOU R GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute far Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla. 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational. 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , - - Principal. 
1888 1919 
St. Paul Normal and 
Industrial School 
LAWRENCEVILLE , VA. 
Thirty - Second Session 
OPENED SEPTEMBE R 1919 
COURSES 
Primary, Grammar School, Normal, Industrial 
Graduates receive State Hig h 
School Certificate whic h wil l 
admit to Standard Norma l 
Schools and Colleges, 
SUMMER SCHOOL FOR TEACHERS 
EXTENSIVE TRADE COURSES 
Athletic Training, Football, Baseball, Tennis, EtcFUL L COURS E IN MILITAR Y TRAININ G 
For Catalog and Further Information address 
Rev. James S. Russell, D. D., 
Principal 
LAWRENCEVILLE, VA. 
Be a Soldier—Join the 
Reserve Officers' Training Corps 
For Young Colored Men 
71 ic* Government furnishes uniform, equipment and an 
officer to give 
MILITARY INSTRUCTION 
Cadets pay their own hoard and lodging amounting to 
twelve dollars per month, but they may work out a 
.-mall part of this according as provision is mads with 
the President 
Trades for Boys 12 Trades for Girls 7 
AM students carry on their regular academic studies and 
iradet courses in connection with their milii ary training. 
Grammar School. High School, Normal School, College. 
Camp Opened September 22nd, and Closes June 1st. 
(f you want to train to be an officer apply for admission to 
SERGEANT THOMAS JOHNSON, COMMANDANT. 
A. & M. College. Normal. Ala. 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the Negro Problems 
20 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY II ATLANTA , GA . 
The Slater Industrial and 
State Normal School 
For Colored Youth of Both Sexes 
WINSTON-SALEM, N. 0. 
I. Offering Standard Courses 
In Academic Subjects 
In Industrial and Vocational Subjects, 
In Education. 
II. Graduates receive the Teachers' Certificate. 
III. Located amid the foothills of the mountain section of Western North Carolina 
and the health conditions are ideal. 
IV. Accommodations excellent and expenses 
moderate. 
For further information communicate with 
S.G.ATKINS , Principal 
SLATER STATE NORMAL SCHOOL, 
"Winston-Sal em, N . C. 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND, LA . 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Home 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H . Society of New York. Students 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L . COLEMAN . President 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
A n Episcopa l hoarding school for girls, under the 
direction of the sisters of St. Mary . Address: TH E 
SISTER-IN-CHARGE , 6138 Germantown Avenue , 
Philadelphia , Pa . 
Bell Phone Spruce 1924 30-Day Syitem Position 
Derrick 
Shorthand School 
Chillis' Building 
1435 Chestnut Street 
PHILADELPHIA 
Enroll Immediately to Hol d Place 
in Class 
Send for Enrollment Blank and full information 
Day and Evening Classes 
NOTE — W e are enrolling- Fal l Students and 
would advise all who desire to take Special 
Course to send In application A T ONO E 
as places wil l be at a premium. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 314 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUTE 
1827 S. 17th STREET , PHILADELPHIA , PA . 
W e trai n up a child 
in the wa y he should 
go and when he is old, 
we know, he'll not depend upon others to 
make his business initiatives. 
The ages of these children range from 10 to 
16. The y will be prepared for Front Lin e 
Busines s Positions 
when they are old 
enough to take them. 
The y demonstrated 
blindfolded on letterless keyboard Type ­
writers, writing business letters, before a 
large audience. Labor 
Dav . at UNIO N BAP -
TIST CHURCH , Philadelphia, Pa . Most of 
them averaged 95 and 
100 per cent, for accuracy. Th e next demonstration will be at 
Cherry Memorial Baptist Church, 16th and 
Christian Sts., Philadelphia, Pa . 
The Children's Business Class. 
SHORTHAN D TYPEWRITIN G BOOKKEEPIN G 
FAL L TERM , FO R CHILDRE N AN D ADULTS , OPENS OCTOBE R 1, 1919 
EDWAR D T . DUNCAN , President. 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTED 
Al l Race s 
Prepare in the best school of its kin d in the State. 
Subjects 
Shorthand, Typewriting, Rnokkeeping, English, Penmanship, Civil Service Trainine , and SPANISH . 
COMMERCIA L CLAS S 
Lenny C<~>mmunitv Center—at 
PUBLI C SCHOO L 89 
Leno x Avenue and 135th St., Ne w York , N . Y . 
Open All Year—Four Evcninas Weekly. 
Fit? \ V Mnttlev. PrpcJHrn t 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apfly to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincol n Hospita l and Hom e 
New York, N.Y . 
HAL E INFIRMARY AN D NURSE TRAININ G 
SCHOOL , 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. 
Offers to High School graduates and young 
women of higher education and good moral 
character, between the ages of 18 and 35, a 
three years' course in the profession of nursing. Fo r further information apply to the 
Superintendent enclosing a stamp. 
THE NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY 
Contains 296 Pages, 35 Chapters, Historical 
and Biographical, 17 Ful l Page Illustrations 
Printed on Fine Antique Book, Boun d in Ful l 
Green Extr a Cloth. Gold Titl e on Fron t Cove r 
and Shelf Back. Price , net $1.25. Postage 
Prepaid $1.40. Orde r through any bookseller 
or direct from the author. Address 
JOH N W. CROMWEL L 
1439'Swann St. Washington, D. C . 
BUSTS O F 
Booker T . Washington. 
Fred Douglass, Paul, 
Lawrenc e Dunbar , 
Bishop Richard Allen. 
$1.50 each. The 4 busts for $5.00 
Agents wanted. Send at once. 
Th e Isaac Hathaway Art 
Company 
718 S. HICKOR Y STREE T 
PIN E BLUFF , ARK . 
A MONEY GETTE R berause it is A CROWD GETTER . 
Churches and Cubs looking for a play that will afford an 
evening of Side-Splitting Fun, should have 
The Slabtown Convention 
An entertainment in one act; full of wit 
and good humor. Scores of churches have cleared from 
One to Two Hundred Dollars in One Night. PRICE, 50c 
MISS NANNIE H. BURROUGHS, Author 
Lincoln Heights, Washington, D. G. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 315 
Reconstructio n 
Wa r — and its aftermath—has 
opened the eyes of bur people. They 
are now seeing and thinking straight. 
They now demand of individuals and 
enterprises seeking their patronage 
and support, performance rather than 
glittering promises. They also demand evidences of stability in such 
enterprises and experience on the part 
of those conducting them. 
The management of the Southern 
Ai d Society of Virginia , Inc., rejoices 
to see this day—They have labored, 
in season and out, for 26 years to 
help to bring about just such improvement in our business relationships. 
The Southern Ai d Society of Vir ­
ginia, Inc., has always issued a superior contract—The only one guaranteeing payments for Sickness and Accidents each week of every year and 
an undiminished Death Claim after 
death. 
To-day it challenges the country to 
show a better record—than the following—for an institution confining 
its business to its Home State. 
26 years of satisfying service to policy-holders. 
$30,000.00 Capital Stock, fully paid in. 
$50,000.00 Federal, State & City Bonds. 
$50,000.00 1st Lien Mortgages—Loans to our people tc 
secure good homes in desirable locations. 
$100,000.00 Cash in Banks. 
$150,000.00 Real Estate—Free from all encumbrances. 
We invite the scrutiny of the reconstruction attitude of the insuring public. 
SOUTHER N AID SOCIETY OF VA. , Inc. 
Home Office: 527 N. SECOND ST., RICHMOND, VA. 
District Offices and Agencies Throughout the State 
A. D. PRICE, Pres. B. L. JORDAN, Sec. W. A. JORDAN, Asst. Sec. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 316 TH E CRISI S 
THE MOST ATTRACTIVE 
LOT OFFER EVER MADE! 
IDEA L BUILDIN G LOTS , improved an d developed, wit h 
FRUI T TREE S PLANTE D O N THEM , i n 
Beautifu l ORCHARDVILLE 
FO R 
ONL Y $4 9 50 O N VER Y 
EAS Y TERM S 
This offer is attracting the attention of people 
from all over the country and the demand for 
the lots is increasing very rapidly. A GREA T 
MAN Y HAV E ALREAD Y BEE N SOL D and from 
all indications we do not think it will be long 
before they will all be sold. 
Orchardvill e is located in a high-grade fruit-growing region and is to be developed along entirely 
new lines into a BEAUTIFU L FRUI T CIT Y 
that will be the only one of its kind in the 
country. 
Unlike other lot offers, where the purchasers are 
left to develop their lots themselves. W E D O 
THA T FO R YO U AN D PLAN T FIV E HIG H 
GRAD E FRUI T TREE S O N EAC H LOT , as 
well as A BEAUTIFU L SHAD E TREE , and we 
take care of the property and trees for FOU R 
YEAR S WITHOU T EXTR A COST . Whe n the 
fruit trees are in commercial bearing they should 
earn you EXCELLEN T YEARL Y RETURN S on 
your investment WITHOU T AN Y EFFOR T O N 
YOU R PART . 
The lots are sized 30 x 144 Fee t and have plenty 
of room for a house, garden, chicken yard, shed, 
etc., besides the fruit trees that we will plant 
and take care of on each lot. EAC H LO T IS 
GUARANTEE D T O B E HIG H AN D DR Y 
UNDE R A MONEY-BAC K GUARANTEE , AN D 
TH E CONTRAC T YO U GE T GIVE S YO U 
JUS T TH E PROTECTIO N YO U MIGH T 
WANT . 
The price of the lots, as stated above, is only 
$49.50 each, and the terms are only $3.00 a month. 
(Smaller terms when more than one lot is purchased.) N O INTEREST . 
Bear in mind that the NUMBE R O F LOT S IS 
LIMITE D and that it is a case of FIRS T COM E 
FIRS T SERVED . W e have a beautiful circular 
that gives you all the details of this offer and 
which you will find very interesting. Send for 
a copy TODAY . 
Simply write your name and address on the 
coupon attached below, mail it to us NO W and 
as soon as we receive it we will send yo u the 
circular without anv obligation to you. SEN D 
FO R I T RIGH T AWAY ! 
ADDRES S 
TH E SWAN-ARENSO N REALT Y & DEVELOPMEN T CO . 
19 SO . L A SALL E STREE T CHICAGO , ILL. 
WRITE PLAINLY 
TH E SWAN-ARENSO N REALT Y & DEV'PT . CO. , 
Chicago, 111. 
Dat e 1919, 
Gentlemen: — 
I a m interested in your Orchardvill e lot offer and would be glad to receive one of 
your circular s without any obligation to me. 
Nam e 
Address »••«•••#••*•«•»••••••. . 
Tow n State 
C. 10-19. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 317 
STATE ST. STYLES 
TAILORED - TO - MEASUR E 
At Agent' s inside Wholesale Price s 
Ne w Fal l and Winte r Sampl e Boo k No w Read y 
Bigger Samples 
Mor e Fabric s 
Additional Styles WithlnsideWholesalePricestoAgents 
Styles and Samples to please every taste, 
to look well on every age and build. 
Greater cash profits to agents 
Even if you don't want to be our Agent in your spare 
time, be sure to get our new FREE offer and learn how 
we save you one-half on your own clothes. 
TAILORING AGENTS—Be sure to write and 
get our new deal with Bigger Profits, 
Better Attention and Prompt Shipments. 
KNICKERBOCKE R TAILORIN G CO . 
Dept 290 , Chicago . ILL. 
SENT FREE 
AMAZING 
CASH PROFITS 
are being made In 
the delightful 
AGENC Y 
TAILORIN G 
BUSINES S 
Why Don't YOU 
Get into the same? 
YOU BET I WAN T THA T 
New SAMPLE BOOK 
please send it to me FREE 
and PREPAID. Here is mi/ address 
Nam e • 
R.F. D Bo x Postoffic c 
Stree t & N o Slat e 
Fill in name and address plainly—and mail AT ONCE 
If you can't be our Agent i n spare time, please hand this to some ambitious fellow 
Knickerbocker Tailoring Co., Dept. 290, Chicago, 111. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 318 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Clef Club 
Singers and Players 
Managing Corporation 
Incorporated 
A Clearing House for Artists Made in the U. S. A. 
Capital Stock $15,000 Par Value $10 per Share 
The business of making music for Ne w Yorkers is a growing one. W e 
desire to extend and enlarge the business of our corporation, to give the best of 
service to our long list of influential patrons and to bring the biggest returns to 
the members and stockholders of our organization. 
W e offer Seven Thousand Dollars ($7,000.00) worth of stock to persons 
with foresight and judgment who are interested in this growing enterprise. 
You r money will be invested in Ne w Yor k City real estate in the heart of the 
city where we plan to build a club hotel with all modern conveniences and comforts for its patrons and friends. 
Address all communications to 
Clef Club Singers and Players Managing Corporation, Inc. 
Deacon Johnson, President and General Manager, 
134 West 53rd Street 
New York, N. Y. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 31 9 
FLORENC E COLE-TALBER T 
Soprano 
" She baa one of ths best voices that Go d has given her 
raco."—Los Angeles Times. 
" Special praise must be given Mrs. Florence Talbert 
who beside her natural tart has already reached a high plane 
of professional aocuraoy."—Herman Dovrlea in Chicago American. 
Engagements aei-epted for Concerts, Recitals. Oratorio. 
Mrs. Talbert wil l make her first tour of the southern states 
beginning September first at Arkansas. Write for date now. 
659 Twent)-eighth Street. Detroit. Mich 
CLEOT A J. COLLINS 
Soprano 
She ha s a ver y lovely lyri c soprano voloe 
of beautifu l qualit y and sings songs wit h 
style and Intelligence. He r recitals are very 
interesting.— 
LIL A ROBESO N 
Qf the Metropolitan Optra Company oj New York 
103 W . 143d St., Ne w York , N , Y . 
Clarence Cameron White 
VIOLINIST 
"Critics ar e one in their 
high estimate of the splendid 
attainment* of Clarenc e 
Cameron Whit e and his Con ­
cert appearance in your city 
means the musical event o f 
the season." Fo r terms and dates address 
616 COLUMBUS AVENUE BOSTON, MASS. 
Roland W. Hayes Phonograph Records 
3 Warwick St., Boston, Mass. 
Recitals, Conceits, Oratorio , Opera 
Booking Engagements for Continental Tour 
Season 1919-1920 
Management: M . J . Minor , 2 Mills St., 
Roxbury , Mass. 
LUL A ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
Available for Concerts 
Telephone 6393 Morningside 
126 W . 134th Stree t Ne w Yor k N . Y . 
WILLIA M RICHARDSON 
Baritone 
Concerts—Recitals—Oratori o 
Joint concerts with 
Mau d Cuney Hare , 
Pianist 
Address : 
170 Walnu t Ave. , Roxbury , Kasr. . 
My courts ID Peominship' Bookkeeping, and Shorthiod 
through the ma<l will preparo you for the positioo worth 
while. Write for Information. 
D. A. Nolley, M. Pen., 519 Michigan Ave., Buffalo N.Y. 
KELLY MILLER'S 
Race Statesmanship 
Exhibited in Two Great Pamphlets 
1. "Th e Negr o i n th e Ne w Re ­
construction. " Considere d th e mos t 
powerfu l ple a tha t ha s ye t com e fro m 
th e author's pen . 10 cents. 
2 . "Th e Disgrac e o f Democracy. " 
Pronounce d i n Europ e an d Americ a 
a s on e o f th e mos t strikin g literar y 
document s produce d b y th e Worl d 
War . 10 cents. 
Agent s wante d everywhere . Rate s 
t o agents 5 cents a copy . Ad d 10 % 
t o bil l t o cove r postage . 
Address 
KELL Y MILLER 
Howard University Washington, D . C. 
JUDAS ISCARIOT 
AND OTHER STORIES 
b y Fedo r Sologub , Anto n Tchechov , 
Pete r Altenberg , Azo w Hauser , Maxi m 
Gorky , Car l Ewald , Stanisla w Przby -
szewsky , Catull e Mendes , Han s Poehl -
mann , Le o Tolstoi , Arthu r Schubart , 
Awertchenk o an d Fleuron . 
Translate d fro m the Origina l tongues by 
GU1DO BRUN O 
27 Cents Each 
PEARSON' S BOOKSHOP , 34 Union Square 
New York , N. Y . 
Would you like to know why (he Negro and Caucasian 
are mixing i n spite of prejudice ? Then, read 
" As Naiure Leads," by J. A. Rogers, author of " Prom 
.Superman to Man." Undoubtedly Uie most fearless analysis 
of the Negro-Caucasian situation by any author. The writer 
penetrates to the very heart of the subject and In a style 
bubbling with vigor bo puts In the clearest language thoughts 
nf your Innermost consciousness. Arguments supported by the 
world's greatest scientists and philosophers. Easily read. 
A bonk you will read and re-read and give to your friends. 
Price. $1.25: by mail. $1 35. Aoents wanted. 
Dept. A, Hayes Book Store, 3640 State Street, Chicago, III. 
MISSING Pages in AMERICAN History 
A book nf ninety-lwo panes, bound In paper, revealinu the 
services of Negroes In the early war B in the United States 
of America ; 1G41-1812. 
Pric e (U . S. money order) $1,09 
Address L. £. Wilkes 
1404 Frankli n St. , WASHINGTON , D . C . 
" It should be widely distributed,"—O. G. ViUard . 
" I wil l put this copy i n Harvard Library."—Prof. A B. 
Hart. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 320 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Scott's Official History 
of The American Negro in the Great War 
A Proud Chapter 
in the History of 
the Negro Race 
Th e official and authentic 
histor y o f the tru e part 
playe d b y the Negr o i n the 
grea t Worl d War , writte n 
b y a ma n whos e valuabl e 
experience , intimat e con ­
nectio n wit h ever y phas e o f 
the directio n o f the grea t 
struggle , make s it possibl e 
to publis h the tru e facts. 
A great historical volume 
tha t should be in every 
Negro home. Give s inside 
facts and accurate an d official data and pictures 
which will appear in no 
other book. Ever y chapte r 
is ful l o f the ver y informa ­
tio n whic h yo u hav e been 
anxiousl y waitin g to know . 
Thi s Grea t Boo k tells 
al l abou t th e Negr o Every ­
wher e i n th e Worl d Wa r 
— Ho w H e Di d Hi s Duty , 
i n ever y capacit y — fro m 
righ t u p i n th e fron t lin e 
trenche s an d o n th e battlefields — clea r bac k t o 
th e wor k o f keepin g th e 
hom e fires burning ; o n th e 
farms ; i n th e mill s an d 
munitio n plants; o n th e 
railroad s an d steamships; 
i n shipyard s an d factories. 
Me n an d wome n wit h th e 
Re d Cross , th e Y . M . C . 
A. , th e Y . W . C. A. , th e 
Wa r Cam p Communit y 
Service , th e Libert y Loa n 
Drives , etc . 
Scott's Officia l Histor y 
wa s writte n fo r th e Negr o 
b y th e Negr o tha t th e 
wonderfu l recor d o f darin g deeds, gallan t braver y 
an d undyin g herois m o f 
ou r blac k troop s migh t 
neve r perish . A grea t tri ­
but e t o th e patriotis m o f 
th e Negr o Race . 
Emmett J , Scott, 
A.M. , L.L.D . 
Written by 
Emmett J. Scott, A.M., 
LLD. , Special Assistant to 
Secretary of War, Newton 
D. Baker. 
Assiste d b y th e follow ­
in g notabl e individuals : 
Dr. Carter G. Woodson, 
Directo r o f Research , Th e 
Associatio n fo r th e Stud y 
o f Negr o Lif e & History , 
Inc . Ralph W. Tyler, Ac ­
credite d Representativ e o f 
th e Committe e o n Publi c 
Information , wh o accom ­
panie d th e colore d troop s 
t o wa r fronts i n France . 
William Anthony Aery , 
Publicatio n Secretary , 
Hampto n Norma l an d Ag ­
ricultura l Institute . Monroe N. Work, Directo r Di ­
visio n o f Record s an d Re ­
search , Tuskege e Norma l 
an d Industria l Institute . 
Mrs. Alice Dunbar Nelson (formerl y Mrs . Pau l 
Laurenc e Dunbar ) leade r 
i n th e mobilizatio n o f col ­
ore d wome n o f th e coun ­
tr y fo r wa r wor k unde r 
th e auspice s o f th e Wo ­
men's Committee , Coun ­
ci l o f Nationa l Defense . 
Miss Eva G. Bowles , Ex ­
ecutiv e Secretary , in 
charg e o f th e colore d 
wor k o f th e Youn g Wo ­
men's Christia n Associa ­
tion . Lieut. T. T. Thompson, Historia n wh o accom ­
panie d th e famou s pa d Di ­
vision , U . S. A . t o France . 
Over 600 large pages 
(equa l t o 800 ordinar y 
pages) . 
Profusel y illustrate d 
wit h nearl y 150 official 
Frenc h and America n 
Negr o Wa r photographs, 
showing al l sides of Wa r 
Activitie s and Negr o soldier Life , fro m the Cal l 
to the Color s on Throug h 
the Trainin g Camps . 
The n to th e Battl e 
Fronts and bac k to the 
Happ y Hom e Coming . 
Agents Wanted 
Mak e $8.00 t o $20.00 pe r 
da y — righ t no w — sellin g 
Scott's Officia l Histor y — 
best book , biggest seller, 
quickest money-make r fo r 
liv e agents. N e w fro m 
cove r t o cover . B e first i n 
you r territor y an d ge t th e 
orders. W e pa y yo u high ­
est commissions . 
FREE Write today 
for free outfit 
includin g agents' sampl e 
boo k an d ful l instructions. 
Sen d 25 cents t o prepa y 
postage . 
Copy mailed to any address 
upon receipt of $2.90 for 
cloth binding or $3.75 
for Morocco binding 
TH E NEGRO HISTORICAL PUBLISHING COMPANY 
P . O . Drawe r I WASHINGTON , D . C . St. Statio n 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 321 
NOW READ Y 
A Wonderfu l line of Ar t Calendar s 
with Negr o Subjects for 1920 
Mr. Business Man: No other Christmas gift will 
so please your trade as a beautiful Negro calendar. 
A* a business advertisement it is in a class by itself. Send for fUil line of samples. Enclose 50c. 
fur postage (M. O.. not stamps). 
Wanted: Salesman with experience. Write immediately for territory' and samples. Enclose 50c. 
for postage of samples. 
Notice: State whether you ar« a business man or 
•talesman. 
MERCANTIL E CALENDA R CO . 
413 Florid a Ave. , N . W. , Washington , D . C. 
TEACHERS A state supervisor ot scpuot> 
writes us: "Wil l you kindly 
furnish me a large list of teachers for our schools 
for the next year? I can have them appointed at once. 
We need them for all types of schools, but primarily 
for rural schools." 
We also have immediate calls for teachers of auto 
mechanics, carpentry, painting, agriculture, Spanish 
and French. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1403 Ne w Yor k Avenue Washine-ton. D . C. 
The Colored Teachers'Bureau 
Wil l Hel p Yo u Get a Better Paying Position. 
REGISTE R NO W REASONABL E TERM S 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Bo x 22, "Wilherforce, 0. 
O^T " Look! Free Free Look! 
(00 Artistic Calling Cards, 59 cents. 
This beautiful Bookform Card Case 
given A bso I u te ly F ree. Some thin n to 
keep your carda from being Boiled. 
(Bo surf an d write plain.) 
2-'n-l Foun'ain Pen and Pencil. Used in Col.ces and TFi-h 
S hoolfl everyday. The Combination U-JIave Been T>jr«kinw 
for with 14K Gold Pen Pont. Always Works at Both 
Ends. $2 50. Hard Work Made Easy: Everybody wants a 
pood receipt book; 500 sheets of orieinal and duplicate copies, 
w'tn ptTfrrated lines. One copy always remains in the book, 
si 1") rfsh is required with all orders. Postage paid. 
The Talbert Press-Nove'tv Co., 299 Walnut St., Buffalo, N. Y. 
OL D STAMP S WANTE D 
Wo want to buy nld used ami unused U. S. postage am1 
revenue. Confederate, and foreiini stamps, and original envelopes wi'h real old Btamps on them. What have you to 
sell? WRITE AND TEDD TJS. 
WM . H . WILKERSON , JR. , 
1423 Duncan St., N.E., Washington, D. C. 
COLORE D DOLL S 
29c, 39c, 69c EACH 
Thes e UNBREAKABL E Brow n Ski n Dolls 
are designed and made by Colored Girls In 
a Factor y Owned and Controlled by Colored 
People, 
"Berry's Famous Brow n Skin Dolls," are 
sold by large Department Stores: 
Littl e Bo y in Romper s $ .29 
Littl e Girl , neatly dressed 39 
Littl e Girl , wit h hai r .69 
Countr y Boy, overalls 69 
"Bab y Doll, " 14", hai r 1.60 
"Doris, " 16", long flowing curls 3.60 
So fa r as we know this is the only Negro 
Dol l Factor y in the World . 
CHILDREN' S DRESSE S AN D APRON S 
Th e "Berr y & Ross Company " is now also 
manufacturin g Children's Dresses and Bun ­
galow Aprons: 
Gingha m Dresses, 2 to 6 years, each..$1.36 
Percal e Dresses, 2 to 6 years, each... . 1.00 
Aprons, Percal e 1.36 
Ver y extr a size 1.98 
Postage , 10c. 
Berry & Ross Mfg. Co., Inc. 
Factor y 36-38 W . 135th Stree t 
NE W YORK , N . Y . 
Agents Wanted 
100 Fine Calling Cards 50 Cents 
Fashionabl e style s an d size s fo r ladie s an d gentle ­
men . N o extr a charg e fo r address o r postage . Agents 
mak e bi g profits takin g orders fo r ou r cards. Bi g 
deman d everywhere . Al l orders fille d promptly . 
Writ e no w fo r sample s an d terms. 
TH E HOUSE O F CHOWNING 
Indianapolis, Inch 
YOUNG'S BOO K EXCHANG E 
The Mecca of Negro History aud Literature 
Distributor s o f 
Scott's Officia l Histor y o f th e Negr o i n 
th e Worl d War . 
Cloth , $2.go ; Leather , $3.75, post-paid. 
YOUNG' S BOO K EXCHANGE , 
135 West 135th Street, Ne w York , N . Y . 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS . L . JONES , Pre.. 
N. E. Cor. 8th and Plum Sis., Cincinnati, Ohio 
Telephone, Baring 7794 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgages 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 322 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TAILOR=MAD E 
ONL Y $12.50 
EXPRESS PREPAID 
Decid e quick—becaus e thousand s wil l b e 
takin g advantag e o f this "unheard-of " 
pric e fo r a MADE-TO-MEASUR E tw o 
piec e suit, cu t i n th e latest styl e fro m th e 
finest grad e materials. 
GUARANTEE D 
FOR 2 YEARS ' 
SOLI D WEA R 
This "sacrifice-offer " is onl y mad e fo r a 
limite d lengt h o f time—just t o prov e ou r 
lo w prices. 
Satisfactio n guarantee d i n ever y way — 
yo u must b e please d t o th e highest ex ­
ten t o r "Bac k goe s you r money—quick. " 
NO EXTR A CHARGE S 
Selec t an y style , fanc y o r plain , extr a 
larg e o r stout , pe g tops, wel t seams, bel t 
lunnels, golf bottoms, fanc y pocke t flaps 
—YO U WON' T HAV E T O PA Y ON E 
PENN Y EXTRA . 
AGENTS WANTED 
EAR N $40.00 T O $60.00 A WEE K durin g you r spar e time—man y agents ear n more . 
It's a n opportunit y yo u can't affor d to overlook . Ou r money-makin g tailorin g outfi t 
tells yo u al l abou t it—writ e fo r it now—today . 
WONDERFU L TAILORING OUTFIT 
Thi s free money-makin g outfi t ha s just bee n completed—contain s dozen s of bran d 
ne w style s an d rea l clot h samples—als o quantit y o f supplie s t o start yo u i n a profit ­
abl e side-lin e o f you r own . Don t delay—writ e A T ONC E fo r samples. 
SPENCE R MEA D COMPAN Y WHOLESAL E TAILOR S 
DEPT . 981 CHICAGO, ILL. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 323 
Mrs. M . WATSON RUDD, 
154 West 131st St. Ne w York , N . Y . 
has placed upon the market her new 
ROSE NINON NUFEET POWDER 
It is especially recommended for soldiers, clerks, railroad and factory employees, dancers and all persons 
wbo are required to stand or walk to any extent. 
Afent a Wanted—Writ* fo r particulars. 
CHEMIS T AMAZIN G DISCOVER Y 
25 Miles on One Gallon Gas 
Tilif\Trwr\1 25 to 50% more miles per gat. 
WlKJ 1 yJt\.\JL, 25 to ZS'/o more power. 
Means Faster Ignition 
One Dolla r Uniform Combustion 
_ . No-Carbo n Deposits 
Postpaid Lcs 8 wea r and Tear on motor 
Agents Wanted Higher Test of Gasoline 
AUT O PRODUCT S CO . Dept. 72, 226 W . 138th St., N . Y . 
WANTE D 
Ambitious Men and Women 
T o Ope n a Cleaning , Dyein g an d Pressin g Sho p i n Ever y Neighborhood . W c 
Teac h Yo u How . Experienc e No t Nec -
essary . Particular s FREE . 
J . D . BEL L & CO. , R . 409 . 145 N . Clar k St. , Chicago , III 
Mentio n THE CRISIS 
4,000 Agents Wanted 
to sell Forte's Magi c Cor n Liniment . Give s relie f 
i n ten minutes. A tria l wil l convinc e yo u i n ten 
minutes. Pric e 25c, by mail , 30c. Rate s to agents, 15c. 
FORT E & CO. 
150 Dixwell Ave. New Haven, Conn. 324 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Doctors kno w tha t prematur e loss o f hai r is 
du e t o infectiv e germs. The y wil l tel l yo u 
tha t ordinar y lotions, pomade s an d bril -
liantine s ar e mor e likel y t o harbo r an d en ­
courag e th e germ s tha n destro y them . I f 
yo u reall y mea n t o sav e you r hai r whil e 
ther e is tim e yo u mus t us e INDOL , th e 
genuin e FASTES T GROWE R an d SURES T 
Dandruf f cure ; a nationa l hai r remedy , 
INDO L contain s a powerfu l bactericid e 
whic h exterminate s hai r germs. Its scien ­
tifi c formul a als o include s th e valuabl e con ­
stituents whic h fee d an d nouris h th e hai r 
an d stimulate s i t t o mor e luxurian t growth . 
Special Offer 
For One Dollar, Ten Cents 
A s a convincer we will send you prepaid, 
and war tax paid, one box Hai r Grower, 
one box Glossine and one Jar of Face 
Cream; value $1.45. 
Lear n th e Indo l Syste m o f Beaut y Cultur e 
b y correspondenc e course . Individua l lesson s i n Hai r Dressing , etc . Tak e th e opportunity—becom e a n exper t hai r dresse r fo r 
th e comin g winter . Diploma s given , Im ­
provements o n othe r systems. Investigat e 
b y writin g u s fo r literatur e an d particulars . 
Si x cents sen t u s t o cove r packin g an d postag e wil l brin g yo u ou r literatur e an d libera l 
sample s o f ou r hai r grower , I f you r drug ­
gist o r hairdresse r doe s no t carr y INDO L 
toile t preparations, orde r direc t fro m us. 
Specia l combinatio n offe r on al l INDO L 
preparation s this month . 
AGENT S WANTE D 
LIBERA L COMMISSION S 
INDO LABORATORIES, Corp. 
Dept. C-2 
2257 SEVENT H AVENU E 
New York, N. Y . 
FREE 
FASHIO N BOO K 
MAILED 
UPO N REQUES T 
Rea l Huma n Hai r 
A H our wigs are 
hand made and 
strictly to order, 
from maker to 
wearer. 
WIGS , Tran s 
formations, switches, and Braids and 
all other articles of 
hair goods. 
No . 604—Pric e $10.5 0 
We carry the largest selection of Hai r Dressers' Tools. 
The celebrated Mme. Baum's Preparations 
which make s the skin velvetlike , the hai r 
silklike . 
Mme. Baum's Mail Order House 
P. O. BO X 145. 
Penn. Termina l Station, New York , X . V . 
Whe n writing, mention this paper. 
Trained Engineer Wanted 
Graduate electrical engineer or mechanical engineer 
with machine shop experience. Also a thoroughly 
competent machinist of high school grade. Applicant must be able to teach his vocation. Good position for right man. Onl y competent man need apply. Furnish references. Writ e to Willia m W . 
Cooke, Director Vocational Department, C . N . & I . 
Dept., Wilberforce , Ohio. 
T O COLORE D NEWSPAPERS ! 
For one dollar weekly we will edit your New York column 
for you furnish'ng all the bright, snappy and interesting news 
of the metropolitan district We would also be pleased to 
act as your advertising and subscription agents. Send us 
yuur latcs to-day. 
The Newspaper Service Bureau 
Fiftee n telephon e 309 Broadway , 
connection s Ne w York , N . Y . 
_ , , 1 Central 26 6 
Telephones: [ Mai n 22 0 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
203-20 6 Engineer s Building Cleveland, Ohio 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
Offices: Suite 80 2 Sykes Block 
Near Thir d and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn . 
Agents Wanted 
to sell TH E CHICAG O ENTERPRISE , greatest of 
race newspapers. A n eight page, illustrated journal 
•with only the latest news and the most interesting 
features. Supreme in its reporting service and the 
reputation of its contributors. Sample copy 5c. 
J . TIPPER," Editor 
311G Indian a Ave . Chicago , 111, 
Mention TH E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 22 5 
Your Gold Tooth Polished 
Your White Teeth Bleached 
By Using Dr. WELTERS ' Antiseptic 
—TOOT H POWDER— 
Absolutely Free From Grit & Acid 
And Prevents Decay 
As k you r druggist. If he hasn' t got it , as k him" t o 
orde r it for you . Sen d 27 Cents i n Stamp s 
for a ful l siz e package . 
The E . A . Welters' Tooth Powder Co., Inc. 
410 BROA D ST. JACKSONVILLE , FLA . 
Agents and Distributors Wanted 
The Largest and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation Owned and 
Controlled by Negroes in the United States 
Not an Ordinary Dentifrice but a Scientific Preparation Specially Prepared for Polishing "GOLD" 
in the Mouth, -BLEACHING" the Teeth and Preventing Decay. 
Patents secured o n easy terms 
Write for particular,. 
JOS. H . STEWART , Attorney-at-Law, 
494 Louialan a Ave . N . W. . Washington , D . C -
Earn $35.to $100 WEEKL Y 
AL L O R SPAR E TIM E 
Guaranteed 
For Ten Years 
You—yon reel f—can positivel y mak e $35 t o WOO a week. I 
want men, hustling , energetic , ambitiou s fellows, anxious to 
mak e money, who or e willin g t o wor k wit h me . No t forme , but 
wit h me . Ajreyoo. tha t kind ? I want yo u t o advertise,sell an d 
appoin t loca l agents fo r th e biggest, most fensationa l selle r i n 
50 years-th e ROBINSO N FOLDIN G BAT H TUB . Demon -
strati n g Tu b Furnished . Here's a n absolutely new inventio n 
—nothin g lik e it . Make s instan t appeal. Bells easily . Give s 
every hom e a modern , up-to-date bathroom i n any part or the 
house . N o plumbing , n o water-works needed. Fold s i n smal l 
roll , hand y as umbrella - Self-emptying , positively nnleakaule . 
Absolutel y guaranteed fo r 10 years. Bemember, full y 70 pe r 
cen t o f home s have n o bath, rooms. 
Sensational Sales Successes 
Tw o sale s a da y means $300 a month . Breeze , of Idaho, made 
$400 profit i n 30 days. Rev . Ott o Hchul/.e, Mo. . gntSlGfjiJto date. 
Burkhnlder, Mont, , Orders $1012 i n 17 days. Hamlinton , o f 
Wyo. , mad e $60 first two dare. Hundred s lik e that. Pleasant, 
permanent, fascinatin g work . Writ e a post card . Le t me 
writ e yo u alon g letter. N o experienc e needed, n o capital . 
You i credi t Is good i f yo u mea n business. Bu t yo u most bo 
ambitious, yo n must wan t t o mak e money. Tha t sail . Writ e 
a postcard now. " I wan t t o pay yo u $35 t o $100 every week, 
H . S . Robinson, Pres. Th e Robinson Cabine t Mfg . Co . 
5045 Factorie s Buildintf Toledo , Ohi o 
Tel . 3437 For t Hil l Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLOR-AT-LA W 
34 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
Beautiful Idlewild 
The most wonderfully ideal spot where young and 
old east aside for the time all the earea and worries 
of their strenuous, nerve-racking routine lives and 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature In all her wondrous glory. The waters of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly 
teeming with game fish or the best varieties. 
D o you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting? 
D o you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries? 
D o you want a place to go where you can build up 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency ? 
D o you enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, 
progressive people of the day—people who do things? 
D o you believe In progrtss and do you want to 
have a part In one of the most progressive movements of the time? Surely 1 
Then you wil l be Interested in , and want to 
own a lot of your own In Beautiful Idlewild, 
Michigan, Tf yon net at on re vou can secure a beautiful lot for only $35.00 each; 
$6.00 cash; £1.00 per week. When your 
payments are completed the lot will be 
transferred to you hy an absolute 
warranty deed with abstract showing clear title. 
Good live energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 
1110 Hartford Bldg 
So. Dearborn Si. 
Chicago, ID. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 32 6 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TW O GREA T NEGRO BOOKS 
Emmett J . Scotts 
War History 
( A Few Interesting Chapters.) 
Colored Officers and How The y Wer e Trained. 
Treatment of Negro Soldiers in Camp. 
The Negro Combat Division. 
Negro Soldiers Overseas. 
Negro Heroes of the War . 
Negro Soldier as a Fighter. 
Th e Spirit of the Negro at the Front. 
Negro Music That Stirred France . 
When the Boys Came Home . 
German Propaganda Amon g the Negroes. 
Wha t the Negro Got Out of the War . 
Th e 38 chapters are interesting and instructive. Ther e are 600 pages, size 7x 9 inches; 
price $2.90. 
Emmet t 3. Scott, Autho r 
74 4 Pages, 
100 Pages of Negro Soldiers. 50 
Pages of other appropriate and 
interesting pictures. 
TH E KELL Y MILLE R HISTORY 
OF TH E WORL D WA R 
is all that the title can possibly mean. Th e 
author takes up the Great Conflict, following 
it step by step through the thirty excellent 
chapters, including the Term s of Peace. 
The Negro's Wa r for Democratization—He 
braces Himself and Claims to be the Champion 
of Democracy—Enter s the Aren a of Combat! 
The German Indigent—The South Sensitive— 
The North Quizzical—The Whol e Worl d Hesitant. 
Th e Negro Turn s the Tid e at Chateau 
Thierry—H e Helps Hur l Back the Horde s of 
the Hun—Win s Mis Place and Right to a 
Voic e in the Affairs of Mankin d against Prejudice. Ridicule, Race Hatred and almost Insurmountable Obstacles! 
Th e book is bound in durable cloth, with 
substantial head band, price $2.50. In Ful l 
Kerotol Morocco (similar to cut) $3.25. Copy 
mailed to any address upon receipt of the 
price. Satisfaction guaranteed or money refunded. 
Prof. Kell y Miller , Autho r 
Dea r Reader—W e have sold more of these great hooks than have heen sold hy al l other 
£?«J. ™P jobbers. If you want the books for your own use we wil l mai l you the two for 
$5.00. If you wish to sell books, send 25 cents in stamps for one prospectus, or send 40 cents 
and we wil l mai l both of them. Millions of these books are being sold, BI G MONE Y is being 
made hy our SALE S PEOPLE . Wil l you join us in the distribution of good helpfu l rac e hooks. 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO. 523 9th St., Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS , A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) $1.00 
TH E HEART OF A WOMAN AND OTHER POEMS. (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1.25 
NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY, (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
TH E LIFE AND TIMES OF BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. (B. F . Riley) 1.50 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W. E. B. DuBois) 1.25 
A CENTURY OF NEGRO MIGRATION. (Carter G. Woodson) 1.10 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) . . 2.00 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
THE NEGRO MIGRANT IN PITTSBURGH. (Abraham Epstein),.. .50 
GRANNY MAUMEE AND OTHER PLAYS FOR A NEGRO THEATRE. 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.50 
HALF A MAN. (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
MY LIFE AND WORK. (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 
TH E NEGRO IN LITERATURE AND ART. (B. G. Brawley) 1.50 
FIFTY YEARS AND OTHER POEMS. (James Weldon Johnson).. 1.25 
JOHN BROWN. (W. E. B. DU Bois) 1.50 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINCE HALL AND HIS FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford).. 1.00 
TH E HAITIAN REVOLUTION. (T. G. Steward) 1.25 
NEGRO CULTURE IN WEST AFRICA. (George W. Ellis) 2.00 
TH E NEGRO. (W. E. B. DU Bois) 75 
TH E EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861. (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.00 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R. Lynch) 1.50 
LIFE AND LETTERS OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR. (W. C. BerwickSayers) 2.25 
POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.25 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H. E. Krehbiel) 2.00 
OUT OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) 2.00 
Address, TH E CRISIS , : : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York NILE QUEEN 
PREPARATIONS 
FOR HAIR AN D SKIN 
"Better Than the Best" 
FRE E "NIL E QUEEN " BEAUT Y BOO K 
Just out Write for a Copy FRE E 
For sale at all Dru g Stores and first class Beauty Parlors. 
KASHMIR Chemical Co. 
Dept. K 312 So. Clark St., Chicago, Ill. 