A New Book by Dr. Du Bois 
THE NEGRO 
B y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS , autho r of "Souls of Blac k 
Folk, " "Quest of the Silve r Fleece, " "Selec t Bibliograph y of 
the Negr o American, " etc. 
This is the authentic romance of the black man. It is a 
history of him at once scholarly, earnest and eloquent. He is 
considered from the earliest times, and the thread of his fascinating story is followed in Africa, America, and wherever 
else it has appeared. To look at the Negro against the background of his history is to see him in a light fairer than that 
in which most Americans have seen him. 
25 6 Pages—3 Maps—Cloth Bound 
A t the low price of 50 cents net—By mail 56 cents 
Dr . D u Bois's new book is the latest additio n to a remarkabl e 
series of low-price d new books wit h whic h everybod y shoul d become acquainted . 
These books may be obtained from The CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Th e Hom e Universit y Librar y 
Is made up of new books by leading authorities. 
The editors are Professors GILBERT MURRAY , H. A. L. FISHER, W. T. BREWSTER 
and J. ARTHU R THOMSON. 
Clot h bound , goo d paper , clea r type , 25 6 page s pe r 
volume . Eac h complet e an d sol d separatel y - - 50c. net 
"A growing wonder of enterprise and sound judgment. 
Each volume, entirely new, is furnished by an acknowledged 
expert; is brief enough and plain enough to be readable or 
even fascinating, scientific enough to be a condensed authority 
—and at the nominal price of 50 cents."—Hartford Courant. 
SOME SELECTED EARLIER VOLUMES : 
EVOLUTION By J. A. Thomson LATIN AMERIC A By W. R. Shepherd 
TH E FRENCH REVOLUTION VICTORIAN LITERATUR E 
By Hilaire Belloc B y G. K. Chesterton 
ROME By W. Warde Fowler GERMAN Y OF TODA Y 
PROBLEMS OF PHILOSOPHY By Charles Tower 
By Bertrand Russell EURIPIDES AND HIS AG E 
NAPOLEON By H. A. L. Fisher By Gilbert Murray 
TH E CIVIL WA R By F. L. Paxson UNEMPLOYMEN T By A. C. Pigou 
94 volumes now ready. Send for a list 
HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY 34 W. 33rd Street New York 
Mention T H I CRISIS TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE . NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducted by 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOI S 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL, Business Manager 
Contents Copyrighted, 1915, by the National Association for the Advancement- of Colored People 
Contents for July, 1915 
PICTURE S 
COVER . Howar d P. Drew , Universit y of Souther n California . World's 
Champio n Sprinter . Photograp h fro m Life . 
Courtesy of The San Francisco Uniterm Page 
Thre e Senio r Bishop s 129 
Picture s of Eight y Graduate s of Colleges, Professional Schools and Hig h 
Schools 130ff 
ARTICLE S 
SOM E SCHOOLMEN * 118 
OU R FUTUR E LEADER S 137 
TH E COLORE D HIG H SCHOO L 142 
MR . B . T . WASHINGTO N I N LOUISIAN A B y V . P. Thoma s 
of Ne w Orlean s 144 
SPRING . A Poe m B y Mrs. C . W . Cliffor d 136 
DEPARTMENT S 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 111 
OPINION S 121 
EDITORIA L 129 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F COL ­
ORE D PEOPL E 147 
TE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIV E CENTS EXTR A 
RENEWALS : When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANG E OF ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 108 TH E CRISI S 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga . Th e courses of study include Hig h 
School, Norma l School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Amon g 
the teachers are graduates of Yale , Harvard , 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-five years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come fro m all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
Fo r further information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA, GA. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for self-help. 
Fal l Ter m Began September, 1914. 
For information address 
President R. W . McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVTLLE, TENN. 
ADVERTISE R 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerl y Atlant a Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA . 
College, Academy , Divinity School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negr o 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C . A. , 
athletics, all live features. 
Fo r information address 
JOH N HOPE , President 
ST . MARY' S SCHOO L 
A n Episcopal boarding and day school for 
girls, under the direction of the Sisters o f S t 
Mary . Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARG E 
611 N . 43d St. W . Philadelphia, Pa . 
AVOI D BA D SCHOOL S 
Educate your children at home under our expert teacher 
Course s fo r Adult s 
Pupils received at any time. Write to 
Educational Extension School, Box 3194 Station F, Washington, D. C. 
Highly Endorsed. Financially Responsible. 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL , TEXA S 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN , President 
FIS K UNIVERSIT Y 
NASHVILLE . TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thoroug h Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musica l and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negr o music. Special study in Negr o life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
Hig h standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. Fo r literature, etc., write 
C. W . Morrow , Actin g President 
State Summer School 
Sixteenth Annua l Session 
wil l begin July 5, 1915 at 
the Agricultura l and Technical College, (formerly 
A . & M . College) and continue five weeks. 
Writ e for catalog. 
Secure lodging in advance. 
Address 
J. H. BLUFORD, Director 
STAT E SUMME R SCHOO L 
GREENSBORO, NORTH CAROLINA 
JAS. B. DUDLEY, President 
Mention T H E CRISIS TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 109 
"Th e Whit e Man' s Burden " 
An Unusual Novel 
Would you like to read an interesting story of the day when the Negro 
race will lead civilization ? Then read 
The White Man's Burden 
B y T . SHIRLE Y HODG E 
Published by the Gorham Press, Bosto n 
PRIC E $1.00. Postage 6 cents 
Ca n be had at the office of 
TH E CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue 
" I have read this book with interest and recommend it to my friends. It 
has a fine lesson in its breast which is voiced in the concluding lines: 'The 
white man's burden is himself.' " W E . B. DuBois. 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNSYLVANI A 
Under the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, 
healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach of a great variety of educational institutions, public and private, extending from West Chester to 
Philadelphia; representing a wide range of educational problems and 
practice. 
This school offers to young colored men and women who have a reasonable 
secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to become teachers, 
carefully graded courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, 
manual crafts and agriculture. Summer school will not be held at Cheyney 
during 1915, but will open on an improved basis in 1916. Tuition is free. 
Board, lodging, heat, light and laundry privileges are offered for nine 
months for $100. The charge for the same during the summer-school 
course is $15. Write for particulars to 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , Principal 
Mention Tim Crisis 110 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
OF INTEREST TO VOCA L STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMEN T 
Points explained, viz,: Breath in 
Singing, Trying the Voice, the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto, Tenor Leggiero or High 
Tenor, the Baritone, the Bass, 
Parts of the Vocal Apparatus, the 
Mouth, the Tongue, Position when 
Practising, Position when Singing. 
How to Practice, Good Rules for 
Singing. 
Comment from the conductor of the Paulist Choristers, the celebrated choral society which received 
the first prize awarded at the International Singing 
Contest held in Paris on May 25, 1912: 
"Dear Mr. Tinsley: 
**I take great pleasure in commending your very 
useful and succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development.' Your own appreciation of 
the psychology of singing and the fundamental principles of the art you have cleverly reduced to a 
Sample svstem. Cordially yours, 
"Father WILLIA M J. FINN, C. S. P., 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N. Y.: "A very practical 
little book is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' 
by Pedro T. Tinsley. It contains some very excellent 
material and vocal exercises, and should be in the 
hinds of all vocal students." 
From "Music News," Chicago, Ill: "Accordingly 
his 'Practical Method of Singing is a most concise 
and practical little manual, containing many valuable 
vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be helpful to all 
ambitious vocal students." 
- HELPE D HIM GREATL Y 
"Since I practised your exercises of Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' my voice is more resonant 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a new voice." Prof, John T. Layton. 
Director Coleridge-Taylor Musical Society, 1722 10th 
St., N. W., Washington, D. C. 
PRICE $1.00 
Address the publisher: Pedro T. Tinsley, 6443 Drexel 
Ave,, Chicago, ILL: or Clayton F. Summy, 64 E. Van 
Buren St,, or Lyon & Healy, Adams and Wabash 
Ave., Chicago, Ill. 
TH E NATIONA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
Through us school authorities, without expense or 
delay, get into communication with the strongest and 
most carefully investigated teachers in all lines. 
Teachers who seek positions or advancement should 
register with us and avail themselves of our expert 
service. Prompt and courteous attention to correspondence. 
B. F. BOWLES , M ANAGE R 
2739 C ONVERSE A VENU E EAST ST. L OUIS , ILL. 
E . ALDAM A JACKSO N 
Graduate Institute of Musical Art, Organist and Director 
of Music St. Mark's M. E. Church 
Teache r of Theor y an d Pian o 
Theory course embraces elementary and advanced 
Harmony or Counterpoint. 
Private or Class Work 
Studio : 30 W . 132d STREET . NE W YOR K CIT Y 
CONCER T SOLOIS T 
LUL A ROBINSON-JONES , Sopran o 
For terms write 126 West 134 Street, New York City 
LINCOL N INSTITUT E 
Founded by Negr o soldiers—Supported by the State of Missouri. Fo r 
both men and women. Faculty of 34 
from the best schools and colleges of 
the country. College Department, offering four year's course with degree 
Bachelor of Arts : Normal Department, 
offering two years' course, followed by 
four years of Standard Hig h School 
work, and leading to the Degree 
Bachelor of Pedagogy: College preparatory course. Music , art. domestic 
science. elocution, agriculture, and 
trades courses. Normal diploma. Lif e 
certificate to teach in the public schools 
of Missouri. One of the best schools 
in the country for students of limited 
means. Catalog on request. 
Opens September 1st 
BENJAMI N FRANKLI N ALLE N 
President 
JEFFERSON CITY MISSOURI 
1 
Trade Mark 
School Teachers Wanted 
We can place 3000 school teachers who wish to 
be pleasantly and profitably employed during their 
vacation time. 
Write us today for full information and free cir ­
cular reproductions of our specialties. 
W e will appoint you our representative and show 
you how to make from $2.00 to $10.00 per day and 
be your own boss. 
Agents wanted everywhere. Special offer for 
ministers. 
DOUGLA S SPECIALTIE S CO . 
354 8 Verno n Ave . (Dept. K) Chicago , Ill. 
Mention T H E CRISIS TH E CRISI S 
Vol. 10 -No . 3 JULY , 1915 Whole No. 57 
IOW A CHAPTE R KAPP A ALPH A N U 
ALON G TH E COLO R LINE 
EDUCATIO N 
H P THE larger colored educational insti-
•*• tutions are endowed as follows: 
Hampton Institute, $2,709,344. It has 
1,050 acres of land and a total income of 
$408,785. Tuskegee Institute has an endowment of $1,942,112; it own., 2,400 
acres of land and received last year 
$463,294. Talladega has an endowment 
of $185,606, with 800 acres of land and 
total receipts of $45,215. Atlanta Uni ­
versity has an endowment of $101,863 
and a total income of $50,196. Leland 
University has an endowment of $115,-
000 and a total income of $17,100. Fisk 
University including the results of its 
recent efforts wil l have an endowment of 
$430,000; its total income was $96,298 
in 1914. Lincoln University has an endowment of about $700,000 and a total 
income of $43,000. Howar d University 
has an endowment of about $300,000 
and a total income of $158,000. Gammon 
Theological School has an endowment of 
about $500,000 and a total income of 
$26,000. • 
Three other schools, Lincol n in Ken ­
tucky, Bric k in Nort h Carolina and Calhoun in Alabama have endowments of 
about $100,000 each. The endowment 
funds of 20 other colored schools aggregate about $500,000. 
The Slater Fun d for Negro Education 
amounts to nearly $2,000,000 with an 
annual income of over $70,000. The 
Jeanes Fun d has an endowment of $1,-
000,000. This makes a total of ten and 
one-half millions. It would be fair to 
assume that about eleven million dollars 
of productive funds are invested to educate ten million American Negroes, outside the work of the public schools. Beside this, colored institutions including a 
few state schools have $17,810,000 invested in buildings, grounds, furniture 
and apparatus. 
C The enrollment of the Colored Hig h 
School, Baltimore, Md. , has reached 658 
during the last year. The school is 
ranked by the United States Bureau of 
Education in Class A of accredited high 
schools. Its graduate, are admitted to 
the best Ne w England colleges on certificate. 
C At the Brick School, N . C , three 
teacher's cottages have been erected during the year, a $15,000 building for 
academic work has been finished and a 
steam heating plant installed. 
UT At St. Augustine's School. N . C , a 
dormitory has been finished at a cost of 
$33,000. This is for girls and has every 
modern convenience. A n Industrial 
Buildin g has also been erected and a 112 TH E CRISI S 
water supply provided. The Rev. A . B . 
Hunte r who has been Principa l for 
twenty-five years has retired from administrative work. 
([Th e Southern Conference for Educa -
tion and Industry is the latest name for 
the organization started by the "Ogden 
parties." It wil l have, permanent headquarters in Washington and the United 
States Commissioner of Education is 
Chairman of the Executive Committee. 
([O f the 31 college graduates of Lincol n 
University this year, 13 wil l enter the 
ministry, 7 wil l study medicine, 5 wil l 
teach, 4 wil l take law, 1 wil l become a 
farmer and 1 an engineer. 
([Th e Class Report of the University of 
Kansas says that the first colored graduate of the University, B . K . Bruce, '85, 
has in the past fifteen years coached 105 
men for West Point, and 86 for Anapo -
lis : and also coached 120 soldiers and 
108 civilians for commissions in the 
Army . 
([Th e Negro Medica l Association of 
Kansas City, Mo. , gives a scholarship of 
$50 annually to the ranking graduate of 
Lincol n Hig h School. 
([ R. C. Giles is the first colored student 
to reach the Senior Class in the Cornell 
University College of Medicine . H e has 
done this in the face of requests for 
resignation, prejudice and other obstacles. 
([ Hilma r Jensen was the victor in an 
oratorical contest at Hamilto n College, 
Clinton, X . Y . H e went up from the 
Asbur y Par k Hig h School. 
([ I. T. Howe from Colby won the two 
first places, in the 100 yard dash and the 
220 yard dash at a large track meet of 
the Ne w England Intercollegiate Asso ­
ciation at Cambridge. 
([ The Atlant a University Conference 
celebrated its twentieth anniversary at 
the recent commencement of the school. 
The publications of the conference are 
invaluable to those wishing information 
about the America n Negro. 
C Solomon Butle r of Rock Island, Ill., 
was the chief factor in the defeat of 18 
high schools and 200 athletes at Evanston. Ill. H e equalled the world's record 
in the 60 yard dash and in the high 
hurdles. H e made four first places and 
received four medals. Butler will enter 
Northwestern Universitv in the Fall . 
d i n Spokane, Washington, the Holme s 
School won first place over nine other 
schools chiefly through the wor k of 
Gomez Simpson, a colored boy who 
scored ten of the sixteen points. 
C In the Playground Championship 
Meet in Ne w Yor k City, P . Bolin , a 
colored boy, made an excellent showing, 
ti n the meet between the teams of the 
Rose Polytechnic Institute and the Indiana State Norma l School at Terr e 
Haute, L . Blake , a colored boy took first 
place in every event whic h he entered. 
(T J. A . Martin , President of Alcor n 
University, Miss. , is dead and has been 
succeeded by L . J. Rowan . Alcor n has 
just completed a new dinin g hall worth 
$12,000 and a new steam laundry. 
([ A graduate from the M Street Hig h 
School, Washington, has written the 
Freshman Class Song at Radcliffe. 
Other graduates have received special 
honors this year at Harvard , Yal e Wil ­
liams, Amherst and Bowdoin . 
([A t the West Virgini a Collegiate Institute a new dining hall has been erected 
at a cost of $40,000. It has a capacity 
for 500 students and is fireproof. The 
first floor is used for a storeroom and 
the third floor for dormitory purposes. 
([Th e State Supervisor of Norma l 
Schools of Ohio has placed the Combined Norma l and Industrial Department at Wilberforc e on the list of approved normal schools for the training 
of elementary and special teachers. 
Graduates of this Department now receive a four years' provisional state certificate, and after two years' successful 
teaching a life certificate without further 
examination. This life certificate is 
recognized i n thirty-five states. 
C There are twenty-seven colored students at the State University of Iowa. 
([Th e Bellevue Cash Priz e for the best 
work in surgical anatomy was won by 
the only colored student at Bellevue 
Medica l College, Ne w Yor k City, Arthu r 
E . Kennedy. 
([A t the annual meeting of the Georgi a 
Educational Association, at Macon , Mr . 
L . M . Brittai n urged more effort on the 
part of the state to secure understanding 
between the races and better citizenship 
among the colored people. 
([Th e new principal of Manassas In ­
dustrial Institute. Manassas. Va., is Fre d ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 113 
GENERA L HOSPITA L FOR NEGROES . KANSA S CITY , MO. 
D . Morton , formerly secretary to Roscoe 
C. Bruce. 
C Plans are complete for the opening of 
a Native College in South Africa . It 
wil l be ready to receive students July 1. 
C The results obtained, after six weeks' 
work with Negro adults, in what are 
called moonlight schools, near Winchester, Ky. , were most encouraging. 
SOCIA L UPLIF T 
"R. S. L . Jepson of Wheeling has been 
made State Commissioner of 
Health in West Virgini a by the governor. 
C The bill introduced by Senator Hitt in 
the Tennessee legislature to segregate 
Negroes in certain cities of the state has 
been killed. 
#J A n organization of colored people 
which owns a tract of land in Scioto 
County. Ohio, is working for funds to 
establish there a Home for Age d Colored 
People. 
C Atlanta, Ga., has two playgrounds for 
the use of colored children during the 
summer. 
C A n Ohio election bill which required 
voters to state their color, has been 
amended so that the word "color " is 
omitted. 
C A colored baby, George E . M . Cannady, two years old, scored 96.3 per 
cent, at the recent Oregon Congress of 
Mothers' baby contest in Portland. 
([ A one-armed Negro, who pushes a 
chair on the Atlanti c City boardwalk, 
went to the aid of a young woman in a 
dangerous undertow. Though nearly 
exhausted he saved her. Several ablebodied white men hesitated. The hero's 
name was John E . Stoner. 
C Last month Mr . Nathaniel Gu y and 
his company presented at the Howar d 
Theatre, Washington, D . C , a play 
called "The Exile, " by E . C. Williams. 
The entire production including scenery 
and training was by colored people. The 
performance was pronounced a success. 
C The General Hospital for Negroes of 
Kansas City, Mo. , has 250 beds and 
5,000 patients a year. The medical staff 
has 15 colored and 16 white physicians. 
There are 6 colored internes and 30 
colored nurses. The hospital is 
thoroughly equipped and graduated 
three nurses this year from its training 
school. Dr. W . J. Thompkins is surgeon-in-charge. 
C Lemue l Googins who died in Baltimore left an estate of $200,000. 
C Afte r a desperate struggle, William 
Sumpter, a colored boy living in Corona, 
X . Y. , rescued from drowning a white 
boy whose canoe had capsized. 
C On learning that the colored people of 
Nort h Adams, Mass., and vicinity objected to his proposed production of 
"The Nigger, " Manager Taylo r cancelled the engagement. 
C Effort is being made to get government aid for a group of people in Nort h 
Carolina known as Croatan Indians. 
They are said to be a remnant of 
Raleigh's lost colony and to have Negro 
and Indian blood. Senator Hira m 
Revels came from this group and also 
Lewis Sheridan who was with lohn 
Brown at Harper's Ferry. 114 TH E CRISI S 
C A daily newspaper of Tampa , Fla. , in 
an effort to call attention to the business 
possibilities in the town, issued a booklet. Fou r pages in this were given to the 
social and industrial advancement of the 
colored population of Tampa . 
C In a tornado which swept over the 
southern part of Louisiana the people 
killed were largely Negroes. There is 
much consequent suffering there. 
C Because of . the recent barbarous 
lynching at Somerville, Tenn., a mass 
meeting of prominent white women was 
held at the Nineteenth Century Club of 
Memphis, to protest against this lawless 
practice. 
C The University Commission on 
Southern Race Questions has been meeting in Montgomery, Ala . The Commission visited Tuskegee and spent a 
day there. 
C The game of '"Hit the Nigger " which 
has been popular at summer amusement 
resorts, has been forbidden in Ne w 
York , by the state legislature. 
C The mayor was the principal speaker 
at.the laying of the cornerstone of the 
Negro Methodist Church, at Thirteenth 
Street and Broadway, Louisville , Ky . 
C Before the Philadelphia Association 
for the Protection of Colored Women , 
Dr. Ann a H . Shaw pleaded for suffrage 
for colored women as well as white. 
Colored women she said labored under 
the double handicap of sex and race. 
C Dr. Jacob Feitlovitch of Abyssini a has 
brought to the Jews of Americ a a plea 
for spiritual aid for the black Jews of 
that country. 
C The Civi l Rights Bil l which passed the 
lower house of the Pennsylvania legislature has been amended in Senate committee. The penalties for violation have 
been made much less severe. 
C The mayors of both Nashville and St. 
Louis have declared publicly that they 
are opposed to any movement which 
tends to segregate the colored people. 
C Colored people of Louisvill e are setting aside the first week i n Tune as ten 
cent week. Th e monev collected in that 
time will be used for the colored 
orphans' home. 
C A concert was given in Beth-Phillah 
Fourt h Moravia n Church, Ne w Yor k 
City, which is a colored congregation, by 
the choir and orchestra of an Italian 
Presbyterian Churc h i n the neighborhood. 
C Publi c spirited colored people of 
Denver are workin g hard to establish a 
sanatarium for the consumptives of the 
race in that city. 
C "Th e Clansman" by T. Dixo n has 
been removed from the shelves of the 
Publi c Librar v of Bemidi. Minn . 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
T" \ DAVI D MANNES , the distinguished 
America n violinist has resigned 
from the directorship of the Musi c 
School Settlement of Ne w York , because of the pressure of his concert 
work. Mr . Mannes says: "Wha t extra 
time I may gain now, I must devote to 
the Musi c School Settlement for Colored People which I founded and which 
is doing such noble work under the direction of J. Rosamond Johnson. I feel 
that there too, are virtually unlimited 
possibilities and they must be looked 
after." 
C Prince Alfre d Ilma, baritone, of the 
Yo n Ende Musi c School faculty, who is 
related to Kin g Meneli k of Abyssinia , 
appeared in a song recital on Apri l 26th 
at the Waldorf-Astoria . Musical 
America says: "'Huge, swarthy and 
Orientally impressive the Princ e brought 
forth a baritone voice mighty in volume." 
CTh e closing Recital of the Howar d 
University Conservatorv of Musi c was 
held early in June. Miss Lampton, the 
first graduate. showed considerable 
musical ability. 
C Mrs. Carolyn Bland-Shele r was the 
soprano soloist at the recital given at the 
Fait h Presbyterian Church. York . Pa., 
on Ma y 27th. and at a recital at Harrisburg, Pa., on June first. Mrs. Sheler 
was assisted bv Mrs. Fran k M . Hyder. 
accompanist. 
C The Ricord i Company has lately published a group of songs called "Passionale," the sympathetic lyrics of which are 
by James Johnson and the music bv 
Harr y T. Burleigh . The songs are dedicated to tenor singers of prominence. 
C The John Churc h Company has issued 
a new part song for male voices written 
bv Carl Hahn . The song is a setting of 
Pau l Laurence Dunbar's " A Song of the ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E US 
Main, " and is said to be one of the most 
admirable of this American composer's 
compositions. 
C A set of excellent violin studies by 
Clarence C. White , violinist, has been 
announced by C. W . Thompson & Company, music publishers of Boston, Mass. 
|[ "The Children's Crusade" was the 
oratoria given by the Howard University 
Conservatory of Musi c at the third annual Ma y Festival on May 6th at Howard University, Washington, D. C. Miss 
Lul a V . Childers was the director and 
Mr . Roland W . Hayes of Boston, Mass., 
the tenor soloist. 
C The Business Clerks' Association of 
Philadelphia, Pa., presented "The 
Egyptian Princess," an operetta in two 
acts, at St. Peter Clayer's Auditorium, 
Philadelphia, late in April . The role of 
"Alva " was sung by Miss Blanche E . 
Williams, soprano. 
MEETING S 
T> BY an annoying error the Crisis 
stated last month that the Eman ­
cipation Celebration, which is to take 
place in Chicago, would begin in Au ­
gust, "1916." This, of course, was a 
mistake. The exposition opens in Au ­
gust this summer, 1915. 
C The meeting of the Tri-State Dental 
Association of the District of Columbia, 
Marylan d and Virgini a will be held at 
Buckroe Beach in July, and not in June 
as stated last month. 
C The Georgia State Association of 
Colored Physicians has met in Augusta, 
and the Palmetto Medica l Association 
of South Carolina at Greenville, S. C. 
C The Negro Business League of Illinois met in Springfield in June. 
C Unde r the auspices of the Negro Historical and Industrial Association a 
National Negro Exposition wil l be held 
in Richmond, from July 5 to 27. It 
will commemorate the emancipation of 
the Negro. The committee in charge 
will gather industrial exhibits from the 
schools of the country. Congress has 
appropriated $55,000 for the occasion. 
The Common Council of Richmond has 
given $5,000 and the State of New York , 
$7,500. 
C The Georgia Federation of Women's 
Clubs, of which Mrs. Alic e D. Gary is 
president, held its animal meeting in Columbus, O., June 10, 11. 
C Gov. Willis will make the address of 
welcome on behalf of the state to the 
Knights of Pythias at Columbus, O., at 
the 18th biennial session. Maj.-Gen. K. 
R. Jackson expects not less than 7,000 
men in camp. Mr . Robert D. Barcus is 
chairman of the local committee. 
C Unde r the auspices of the Northeastern Federation of Colored Women's 
Clubs a large mass meeting was held at 
Bethel A . M . E. Church in New YorkCity. 
C Whit e and colored people took part in 
the Southern Sociological Congress, held 
at Houston, Texas. The speakers discussed the condition of the Negro from 
many points of view. The attitude of 
the white speakers was encouragingly 
sympathetic. 
C The Negro Land Grant Colleges will 
hold a conference in Cincinnati this 
month, where also the National Association of Teachers in Colored Schools will 
meet. 
TH E CHURC H 
BISHO P RHINELANDE R presided 
at the third annual conference of 
church workers among colored people in 
St. Barnabas Episcopal Church, Germantown, Pa . 
C People attending the West Virgini a 
Sunday School Association in Charleston, W . Va. , were delighted with the 
singing of the students of the W . Va . 
Collegiate Institute, a school for colored 
youths. They had been invited and attended in a body. 
C The mission department of the Meth ­
odist Church South, held an ..Institute in 
June for the colored ministers of the 
church. 
C The bishops of Mombassa and Ugan ­
da have been adjudged not guilty in the 
Kikuyu case, by the Archbishop of Canterbury. 'They have been admonished 
however, not to repeat the act which 
caused so much comment in England 
among churchmen there. The trouble 
arose when these two bishops met with 
workers from other churches in a missionary conference. 'There it was proposed to work- for a united Christian 
Church in Africa . The archbishop says 
such an end is to be desired but the time 116 TH E CRISI S 
is not yet ripe. H e gave them very definite rules for their guidance when in 
formal meeting with other ministers. 
ECONOMIC S 
A N unfortunate occurrence is the attempt of a part of the stockholders 
of the Dixi e Industrial Company to oust 
Willia m E . Benson, founder and president. This company was founded sixteen years ago. It is worth about $400,-
000 and has been a notable undertaking. 
Mr . Benson charges that a "Negro Edu ­
cation Trust " has been opposing him. A 
white man has been nominated to succeed him. 
C J. H . Kelly , a colored man, who has 
been employed by the Illinois Central 
R. R. for 42 years, is chief train dispatcher at Carbondale, Ill. 
C The National Publishing Co. has appointed Joseph E . Howard,,, a colored 
man, who has been with them 15 years, 
manager of the Chicago branch of the 
firm. 
C The People's Co-operative Dru g & 
Mercantile Co. has been formed at 
Unio n Springs, Ala . 
C The Africa n Unio n Co., a colored 
importing company, wil l sell to American merchants, 18,000 mahogany trees 
which they have purchased in Liberia . 
C Mr . M . A . Hawkin s of Baltimore has 
invented a music cabinet which will accommodate the largest number of music 
rolls to a given space. It has other novel 
features. 
C A recent bulletin by the Nationa l 
League on Urba n Conditions Amon g 
Negroes treats of housing conditions 
among the colored people in New York . 
Some of the evils mentioned.are municipal indifference, high rents and so many 
old fashioned, dark houses. 
C The National Association of Negro 
Mechanics has been organized in Ne w 
Yor k City. R. W . Fearing and fourteen 
other mechanics were the founders and 
nearly one hundred members have been 
enrolled. 
PERSONA L 
r
 I 1 THE contest for councilman in Baltimore was very bitter, at the last 
election, but Hon . Harr y S. Cummings, 
who has served many years, was reelected. 
C Mr . Henr y Tones, who has been with 
the International Harveste r Co. fortytwo years, has been retired on a pension. 
([James V . Herrin g of Syracuse Uni ­
versity wil l conduct an art studio in 
Greensboro, N . C , during the summer. 
C Father Tolton, the first Negro Catholic priest in the Unite d States wil l have 
his grave in St. Peter's Cemetery 
marked by a monument, which wil l be 
paid for entirely by colored Catholics. 
C Mr . J. D . Baltimore, teacher of machinery in the Armstron g Technical 
Hig h School, Washington, D . C , has 
been elected a Fellow of the Roya l Society of Art , London , England. 
C Abram Smith, a colored merchant of 
St. Thomas, D . W . I., has been elected 
crown member of the legislature in Denmark. 
C Mrs. Clar a Fountain of Hastings, 
Neb., recently passed her 115th birthday, and is still active. She says she 
expects to live to be 125, the age at 
which her mother died. 
C Senor J. P . Santamarina of Argen ­
tina, spoke at the colored Moravia n 
Church in Ne w Yor k Cit y on how Central and South Americ a had solved the 
race problem. 
C Miss Haze l Hunches, a colored -girl 
of Glenwood, Ia., drew an automobile 
in a contest conducted by the.merchants 
of Glenwood. 
C Majo r Wilso n Ballar d has resigned 
from the Liberia n Constabulary. Wit h 
Mrs. Charles Youn g and Mrs. Ballard 
he left Liberi a for Spain i n April . 
COURT S 
THE Supreme Court decided against 
Aubur n Railroad which refused Carroll Johnson the right to dance i n a pavilion in Lakeside Par k in Auburn . The 
railroad wil l appeal. 
C J. S. Anderson, a Negro who has seen 
healing people i n Kingston , Tenn., by 
giving herbs in Indian fashion, has been 
enjoined from practising i n Tennessee. 
He is reported to be wealthy. Man y 
persons wish the decision had been 
otherwise, as they say his treatment was 
in most cases quite helpful. 
C Tw o colored men who were refused 
meals by James Poutos, a restauranteur 
of Chicago, have sued for $500 each. 
C Isaac Collins, Justice of Peace i n Pat-ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 117 
terson, and real estate broker, Wm . Hopper, lumber manufacturer and Mr . T. 
H . Williams, have been chosen for the 
Grand Jury of Passaic County. This is 
the first time that colored men have 
ever served in this capacity in the 
county. 
C Three white men have been sentenced 
to life imprisonment in Arkansas for the 
murder of an aged Negro, Angus Neelev. The people in the community said 
he carried a good deal of money on his 
person. Whatever money he had was 
taken by his murderers. 
TH E GHETT O 
Betty HICKS , a colored woman of 
*** Lucy , Tenn., who worked on the 
farm of H . H. Jennings and bore him 
eight children, has been declared his 
rightful heir by jury. His relations produced another will, but this was shown 
to be forged. Jennings left $80,000. 
<[ Fa r seeing natives, who wish that the 
ruinous consumption of brandy by colored people in South Afric a might be 
stopped, are not hopeful that the present agitation wil l be effective. They 
point to the small tax on brandy and the 
indifference to the illicit trade which 
goes on to prove that the manufacturers 
have the protection of the government. 
C Pau l Rader, pastor of the church 
which Dwight Moody founded in Chicago, objects to colored people in his 
church. 
C A Negro convict who, according to 
custom, was hired out by the Slate of 
Alabama to N . B. Burton, a white farmer, was beaten to death while ill with 
pneumonia. 
C The Colored citizens of Roslyn, L . I., 
are making a determined light to have a 
small school set apart for their children, 
closed. 
([ Many colored men living in one district in Kansas City were registered 
from another and so were., unable to 
vote. This has been explained as a clerical error. The colored people have 
brought charges and an investigation is 
being made. 
M 
CRIM E 
r
 THE following lynchings have taken 
place since our last record: In 
Alabama, Jesse Hatch, for assault on a 
woman ; at Princeton, Ky. , Arthu r Bell, 
accused of assault on a woman; at Pinewood, S. C , Joel Green; in Kempe r 
County, Miss., a colored farm worker 
accused of writing a note to a white girl ; 
Sam Stephens at Yoccoa, Ga., accused 
of attacking a white girl ; Utes Smith at 
Winnboro, S. C , charged with attacking 
a white woman. 
JUBILEE HALL , FISK UNIVERSITY , "BUILDE D OF SONG " COLORE D YALE , 1915 
SOME SCHOOLME N 
WIT H the resignation of James M . 
* ' Gregory of the Bordentown M . 
T. & I. School, a veteran passes from active work. Mr . Gregory was born in Ken ­
tucky in 1849. He was educated in 
Cleveland and Oberlin and after being 
refused entrance to West Point on account of color finally graduated at How ­
ard in the first college class, 1872. H e 
became teacher of Lati n at Howar d immediately after graduation and taught 
there twenty years. In 1896 he took up 
the work at Bordentown where he has 
served eighteen years. Mr . Gregory was 
for years a member of the Boar d of 
Education of the District of Columbi a 
and chairman of the committee which 
examined all applicants for positions 
both white and colored. 
Mr. W . R. Valentine succeeds to the 
principalship at Bordentown. H e was 
bora in Virgini a in 1879 but came to 
Ne w Jersey in infancy. He was graduated at Harvar d in 1904 and began work 
in the colored public schools of Indianapolis. Here a s principal and supervising principal he has served eleven years. 
Whil e here he developed a social center 
and vocational school of such a character 
as to attract considerable attention in the 
Middl e West. The Popular Educator 
for June, 1914, published an article concerning the work. Dr. John Dewey of 
Columbi a University in his new book, 
"Schools of Today, " devotes considerable space to a description of the work. 
The Indianapolis Star says editorially: 
"His labor and influence have been 
felt in every direction and he has made 
many friends among white as well as 
colored people of the city. His appointment as principal of the State Industrial 
and Agricultura l School of New Jersey 
is a deserved recognition, and his zeal, 
enthusiasm and fine executive ability 
should make for efficiency in that position. " 
The Kansas City Journal had recently 
an editorial on another veteran educator. 
"Th e retirement of Professor George 
N . Grisham after a life time spent in the 
education of the Negro children of 
Kansas City is an incident that may well 
be regretted, not only by the Negro 
people of this community but by all 
friends of education. Professor Grisham, during his long years of modest but 
effective service, has labored earnestly SOM E SCHOOLME N 119 
M R JAMES M . GREGOR Y 
tor the advancement of the intellectual 
interests of his people. H e is recognized 
as one of the most prominent Negro 
educators of Americ a and has always 
represented the best elements of his race, 
both here and throughout the country. 
"A s principal of the Lincoln high 
school for many years Professor Grisham has raised that institution to the 
front rank among the Negro high 
schools of the country and has made it 
the center of the educational interests of 
the race in Kansas City. His friends, 
of both colors, will join in hoping that 
the popular instructor's enforced rest 
will be beneficial to him and that in at 
least an advisory capacity he may continue to serve his people for many years 
to come." 
Principa l E . C. Williams of the M . 
St. Hig h School, Washington, D. C , is 
a versatile man. H e has recently staged 
a drama, he has served as librarian of 
one of the largest American universities 
MR. W. R. VALENTIN E 
and he is principal of one of the largest 
colored high schools in the land. 
He was born and educated in Cleveland. He attended Western Reserve 
University, received the key of the Ph i 
Beta Kapp a in his junior year and 
played on the Varsity base ball team and 
on other teams. Afte r graduation he 
was made librarian and afterward 
organized the instruction in library 
methods. 
He was a charter member of the Ohio 
Library Association, and in 1905 was 
chosen as lecturer on reference work 
before the Ohio Librar y Institute. Mr . 
Williams has been called upon frequently to act as translator of documents from 
French, German, Italian and Spanish, 
and was offered a post as translator of 
Italian and Spanish documents for the 
collection on the Philippine Islands 
published by the A . H . Clark Company. 
In 190 9 he was offered the principalship 
of the M Street Hie h School, in Wash ­
ington. D. C. This post he accepted and 
now fills. Since coming to Washington 120 TH E CRISI S 
LIEUT. B. O. DAVIS, 10th CAVALRY , U.S. A. MR. E. C. WILLIAM S 
he has been asked to consider a position 
as organizer and head of the department 
of library science in a large state normal 
school in the West. 
In 1902 Mr . Williams married the 
eldest daughter of Mr . Charles W . 
Chesnutt, the author. Mrs. Williams is 
a graduate of Smith and has one son. 
The national government has reassigned Lieut. B. O. Davis to Wilberforce as Militar y instructor, giving that 
school again the unique distinction of 
being the only Negro institution with a 
military department recognized and 
maintained by the Unite d States Government. 
The military instruction given is to 
qualify students to be company officers 
of infantry, volunteers or militia . The 
course consists of three years' work. 
TH E HOSPITA L A T TUSKEGE E NATIONA L MEDICA L ASSOCIATIO N A T MEHARR Y 
OPINION S 
CHRISTIANIT Y FO R BLACKS . 
TW O The white southern editor of 
ARRAIGN - the Elizabeth City, N. C. InMENT S dependent certainly has courage. Representing as he does 
the great white laboring mass of the 
South, his words are peculiarly significant : 
"W e have exploited and oppressed 
every weaker people with whom we have 
come in contact. W e send missionaries 
ostensibly to educate and uplift the 
heathen, whereas in fact the missionary 
is more often just another tool of our 
rich manufacturing and mercantile class, 
to open up new markets for their goods. 
Wher e the missionary fails with his 
spiritual dope, we send in liquor and 
opium or some other brand of dope. In 
the case of the American Indian we used 
liquor. In China we used opium. W e 
have nearly succeeded in exterminating 
the Indian. The Chinaman has worsted 
u s however by putting a ban on opium 
and abolishing its cultivation and use in 
his domains. God help the poor Indian ! 
The Chinaman seems to be helping himself. 
" I say we have got to adopt a different 
policy in our dealings with all colored 
acres. Retribution is waiting for us just 
around the corner, with a terrible club. 
I have been wanting to say, for some 
time, that we may have attempted to exploit one race of colored people too 
many and we arc beginning to find out 
our mistake. No t satisfied with our extermination of the red man and subjection of the black man. we set in to 
despoil the yellow man. The yellow man 
is beginning to bother us. 
"Fo r untold centuries Japan was a 
hermit nation. He r people kept to themselves on their own little island and 
managed somehow to keep the rest of 
the world out. They would not build 
ships to sail the seas because they did 
not want their people to venture into 
lands from which they desired no visitors. But in 1853 our president Millar d 
Fillmor e sent Commodore Perry with a 
fleet of warships to Japan. W e forced 
these little yellow men, at the point of 
our terrible guns, to open their country 
to our ships and our commerce. I have 
heard preachers piously proclaim that 
Commodore Perry opened the door of 
Japan to Christianity. Perhaps he did. 
But what was the result, to Japan ? 
"Havin g forced an entrance to the 
country we flooded its markets with our 
cheap machine made goods, something 
to which Japan was not accustomed. 
Japan was a land of arts and crafts. 
Labor had not been debased and prostituted by machinery- Japanese wares 
were made by hand and every workman 
was an artist. They could not compete 
with our cheap machine methods. The 
result was that the arts and crafts in 
Japan were nearly destroyed. Annie s 
of honest, peaceful Japanese workmen, 
unable to compete with us, were thrown 
out of employment and threatened with 
starvation. 122 TH E CRISI S 
"This story of the panic and hardship we imposed upon this little country is not generally known. W e 
are ashamed to put the facts in our 
school books. But what Japan did when 
she woke up, is quite another story and 
now generally well known. Japan has 
appropriated our Western civilization 
and western business methods and is 
beating us at our own game. No w our 
Hobsons are running up and down the 
country yelling for us to stop the 'Yel ­
low Peril, ' and out in Californi a and 
other Western States white folk are 
passing laws to keep these yellow men 
from owning land. An d we would pass 
laws to keep them out of the country 
entirely if we had the nerve. But in 
dealing with the yellow men we are not 
dealing with blacks. There are only 
twelve million black men and we can 
give them hell; but there are six hundred 
million yellow men all told and their 
numbers compel a hypocritical respect. 
"The whole history of our dealings 
with the colored people of the world is 
a hideous phantasmagoria of colossal 
errors. In the name of Christianity 
and Civilization we have conquered and 
oppressed them and a few o f our 
wealthy class have reaped rich financial 
reward in the process. But for the 
dirty dollars a few o f our rich manufacturers, exporters, bankers and railroad men have made from this oppression and exploitation, the bone-headed 
mass of us have inherited a world of 
trouble." 
m 
TH E RIGH T T O WOR K 
NORT H In the South the Negro may 
AN D work for the lowest wages; in 
SOUT H the Nort h he is barred from 
work or works for wages lower 
than white men. The Providence, R. I. 
Tribune says: 
"The son of Abraham Lincol n sat in 
Washington the other day and discussed 
the Negro problem. It was fitting that 
the son of the man who gave his life to 
liberate the Negro race from slavery 
should speak on that subject, and what 
he said deserves more attention than it 
has received. 
"Whe n he spoke from the witness stand 
under oath at a meeting of the Federal 
Commission on Industrial Relations, that 
he spoke as the Chairman of the Boar d 
of Directors of the Pullma n Ca r Company and that he spoke of a social rather 
than a constitutional slavery only adds 
to the ironic significance of it all. 
"Robert Lincol n conceded that the pay 
of Pullman porters is at its maximum 
just twenty-seven dollars and fifty cents 
a month. H e was irritated when asked 
if he thought that this wage was enough 
to support a family in decency, and he 
answered with a vigorous negative. H e 
admitted that the corporation i n fixing 
the wage scale calculates the gratuities 
which passengers are accustomed to pay, 
and he took credit for the corporation 
from the fact that the original wage was 
only fifteen dollars a month. Finall y he 
declared with emphasis that 'the one element in the uplift of the colored race 
was its service with the Pullma n Company.' 
"The shade of the martyred emancipator must have writhed when this testimony was made part of an official record 
taken in the shadow of the Capitol by a 
Federal Commission. A s the most responsible officer in a corporation which 
has never paid less than six per cent, 
dividends, with net profits amounting to 
one hundred and sixty million dollars, 
Abraham Lincoln's son asserted that the 
greatest thing accomplished for the betterment of the Negro race has been its 
employment at a wage beginning with 
fifty cents a day and never passing the 
dollar mark, on a system which, in the 
eyes of the worl d outside the Pullman 
offices, does more to degrade the employe than any other allowed by the law 
of the land. " 
A writer in the Scranton, Pa . Telegram adds this: 
"Rev . G. W . Williams, pastor of the 
Africa n Methodist Church, calls our attention to a fact that is not creditable 
to the humanitarian or the Christian side 
of the people of this city, and it is that 
while we are sending money to Africa , 
India and China to Christianize heathens 
we are giving no help to the Negr o at 
our door. In fact, we have locked the 
doors of our homes, our offices, our 
stores and our factories against the 
Negro and at the same time we insist 
that he be a law abiding, honest gentle-OPINION S 
man like our hypocritical selves. W e 
are such a liberal white people that we 
open the schools to the Negro child and 
we educate it, and then we refuse to give 
employment to the Negro boy or girl we 
have fitted for a successful career. Some 
years ago we graduated two Negro girls 
from our high school and then we turned 
our backs on them, and refused them 
places in store or in offices and forced 
them back to poor colored people who 
are illiterate. One of the girls killed the 
other and put a bill of costs on us that 
we well deserved. 
"W e brag about freeing the Negro, 
yet in this valley we give him no chance 
to rise. W e even now refuse to permit 
him to shine our shoes. Let us tell the 
Negro the truth. W e are prejudiced 
against him, because there is more prejudice than charity in our make-up. W e 
shout and yell, and enact pulpit stunts, 
for the Christ who died to free all people, and then we bar ourselves against 
any relations with the Negro. Wha t 
must Go d think of us when li e knows 
how we treat the colored people?" 
We cannot refrain from quoting another bit from the Elizabeth Citv, N . C. 
Independent: 
"The other flay I heard a bulletheaded white man who works in a sawmill, make a sneering remark after reading an editorial in which I had insisted 
that we must adopt a different policy in 
our treatment of the Negro race and 
give the Negro a chance to rise instead 
of keeping him down. That bulletheaded poor white man working himself 
thread-bare in a lumber shed ten hours a 
day for a pitiful pittance of $1.25 a day 
couldn't see a pitfall ten feet ahead of 
him if it were posted with animated 
DANGE R signs as big as box cars. 
"Emerson said that you can't build a 
wall to shut the other fellow out, without shutting yourself in. The same proposition has been stated in another way 
by a prominent educator: 'To keep a 
fellow human being in the ditch, you 
have got to stay in the ditch with him.' 
That is everlastingly true. An d so the 
poor bone-headed white man who works 
ten hours a day at back-breaking labor 
in a saw mill and who has to support his 
wife and children in squalor on this 
miserable wage, is getting only a $1.25 a 
day because the saw-mill man can hire 
'niggers' for the same work fo r $1.25 
a day. An d the saw mill men encourage 
the poor white man to hate the 'nigger' 
and help keep the 'nigger' down. The 
saw mill man living in comfort has the 
leisure to figure ou t fo r himself that just 
so long as he can keep the Negro down, 
he will not have to bother about keeping 
the poor white man down. I f this isn't 
as true as any gospel that ever circulated 
in an Oxfor d binding, then I'll eat the 
Lizar d and risk a violent death from old 
fashioned cholera morbus." 
S i 
RAC E PREJUDIC E 
FOUR The New Yor k Cull relates 
POINTS OF this incident: 
VIEW It was near the close of 
the noon hour and the 
pupils of one of our biggest public 
schools clustered about the gates waiting for the fatal moment when it 
would become imperative for them to 
leave the joyous freedom of the street 
and hurry back- to their cabined and conlined life of the classroom. A s we approached the surging, shouting, gesticulating mass of youth we were struck by 
a sight which mafic us stop short and 
gaze our till before going on again. 
"Leaning against the steps of the 
school were two young girls of about 15 
years of age. Their arms were lovingly 
intertwined and their hands tightly 
clasped. One of them was a lovely 
creature with the fairest skin, big blue 
eyes and blond curls caught back with a 
big pink bow that matched her tasty pink 
dress. The other was a Negress, black 
and uncomely as can be imagined, with 
her kinky hair brushed into an orderly 
pig-tail, and her costume a cheap white 
shirt-waist and rusty black skirt. There 
they stood with that air of ecstatic intimacy that marks the friendships of 
girls in their teens, the white hand clasping the black, the blond curls blowing 
tenderly against the despised 'wool.' 
" A painter should have immortalized 
them as they stood there and called them 
'America'—the Americ a of our dreams. 
Fo r they were a symbol of all Americ a 
could be and some day wil l be—a real 
democracy that knows not race nor color 
nor creed nor class. Already they sit 124 TH E CRISIS 
together, the black girl and the white, in 
that great institution of democracy, the 
free school, that first, faint promise of 
all the state wil l one day do, collectively, 
for its own. 
"It was a sight good for the soul in 
these troublous days, infinitely suggestive and hope inspiring. It was an 
earnest of the Huma n Sisterhood that 
is to be." 
This arouses the ire of the Louisville , 
Ky. , Times: 
"Wit h hysterical sentimentalists writing in this fashion, of what avail are 
the words of Booke r Washington, the 
Mentor of the black race, who only a 
few days ago said to an audience of 
Negroes in Ne w Yor k that the chief 
drawback to the colored man in the 
Unite d States is that he 'doesn't want 
to be black and can't be white.' He proceeded further to admonish the Negro 
to stick to his race and not try to 'ape 
white folks.' 
" 'If one of your race opens a store,' 
Washington told them, 'patronize him, 
bring others to him and help him push 
his business.' 
"There is sound sense in that argument, but we can only pity the misguided humanitarians ( ? ) who see in the intimacy of the black and the white girl 
the augury of a beautiful 'human sisterhood' to be. Booker Washington's 
theory of the ultimate salvation of the 
Negro is hard work and the faculty of 
keeping out of the white man's territory. 
The blacks may achieve a great deal if 
they pursue the course mapped out for 
them bv the Tuskegee educator, but if 
they listen to the siren songs of writers 
who prate of the 'ecstatic intimacy' of 
the white girl and the Negro they will 
fall short of their goal, at least so far 
as the South is concerned with their 
case. 
1. D. Barry, the widely known syndicate writer says in the San Francisco 
Bulletin: 
"Several weeks ago I printed an 
article on the magazine for colored people. T H E C RISIS , published in _New Yor k 
and edited by Willia m E . Burghardt D u 
Bois, speaking of its literary excellence 
and of the interesting way it reflected 
the steadily increasing development of 
the colored people in this country. Somewhat to my surprise I received from 
many colored people letters of thanks, 
some of them pathetic in their eagerness 
to respond to a friendly wor d from one 
outside their race. Those letters gave 
me a sense of the isolation of the colored 
people in this country, the loneliness, the 
feeling of being shut out from so much 
in life that ought to be within their 
reach. 
" I suppose there are few forces in the 
world so hard to deal with as race prejudice and few forces so harmful to individual character and to social co-operation. Behind the war of 1914, which 
looks as if it might be the war of 1915, 
too, and of several more years, works 
this terrible force, creating, sustaining, 
and trying to justify the havoc. Its being so insidious makes it hard to reach. 
Somehow it is in the air. Children draw 
it in with their breath 
"Wit h many of us the prejudice 
against the Negroes is due to unfamiliarity. It is likely to be fortified by prejudices of association, not unrelated to 
economics. Generally speaking, the 
Negroes are poor. They live apart. 
Fro m the point of view of conventional 
prosperity, they belong among the alien 
people. It is natural, then, for those 
who seldom see them and never see them 
at close range to regard them as humanly 
different from themselves, perhaps as 
not quite human. This kin d of false 
thinking is common. It prevails often 
among people of the same race, the same 
kind of inheritance, living under more or 
less similar conditions, perhaps in the 
same town. 
"One often hears successful people, 
tor example, say of servants something 
like : 'They don't feel as we do. They 
are not like us.' 
"Often they are right. Bu t if the diferences and distinctions were to be examined credit would not always go to 
the successful. Moreover, the contrasts 
would be found to be largely superficial, 
due to the effect of conditions outside. 
"There are those now who frankly 
say of the Negroes that they are fundamentally and essentially different from 
the white people and must always remain 
so. Some of them used to go so far as 
to declare that the Negroes were incapable of being highly educated and OPINION S 125 
thoroughly civilized. They have ceased 
to make themselves heard. They know 
that their arguments would be shattered 
by example after example drawn from 
colored people of at least two generations. Moreover, even while statements 
of that kind were freely made in this 
country, there were throughout the 
world plenty of examples of women and 
men who showed that the statements 
were wholly gratuitous and absurd. 
"Man y of us who have known colored 
people are aware that, like all the downtrodden races, they have been slandered. 
The very people who have helped to debase them have declared that the debasement was according to nature. In a sense 
they were right. But the debasement 
was according to the nature, not of the 
colored people, but of the white people. 
"Nothin g is easier than to attribute to 
Go d iniquities that are encouraged by 
men, except, possibly, attributing to God 
superiorities that are the result, not of 
inherent merit, but of the culture resulting from worldly advantage. 
"The prejudice against color in skin 
is one of the most peculiar of all prejudices ; but it has got such a hold on us 
that many people cannot see even its 
peculiarity. They, too, confuse it with 
what is natural, with instinct. An d yet, 
if they stop to think, they must see how 
absurdly it can contradict itself. Fo r 
example, among white people there is no 
prejudice against other white people who 
happen to be of very dark complexion, 
with black hair and black eyes, and with 
brown skin. O n the contrary, members 
of this type are often considered fine 
looking and greatly admired. Besides, 
what is there in a white skin that establishes its pre-eminence? W e actually 
have a kind of feeling against it ourselves when it is very white. Certain 
kinds of whiteness we associate with 
weakness and disease. W e hear mothers 
lamenting because their children are so 
pale and we hear expressions of concern 
over pallor in grown-ups. 
"Is it not possible that the time wil l 
come when whiteness of skin wil l be considered a mark, not of superiority but of 
inferiority? " 
T o this we may append a frank letter 
sent to the St. Louis Post-Despatch by a 
defender of a proposed Negro ghetto: 
"Woul d you care to have your 
daughter or son placed in the same seat 
at the same desk in school with a Negro 
boy or girl, as is done in some Eastern 
cities? Woul d you care to share your 
family pew in church with a Negro 
family? Yet that is practically what 
your advocacy of your colored brethren 
will lead to if continued to its final analysis. There is an article in a morning 
paper written by a lady living at the 
Buckingham Hotel, condemning 'class 
legislation,' as she calls it. I'll venture 
to assert she would scorn a seat at the 
same table or occupy a suite of apartments next to a Negro family, yet that 
is just what you and she are asking of 
the white residents of St. Louis. Re ­
member, I am not opposed to Negroes in 
an educational or any other sense—in 
their proper place. Man y Negroes undoubtedly are far better educated than 
the undersigned. Man y have accumulated more wealth (which would be extremely easy). But I vehemently protest against recognizing them as my 
social equal. Educate them to the utmost—the better education the better the 
man, but let them live in their own communities. 
"Miscegenation is unlawful in this 
country. Thus by law the Negro is declared to be inferior to the white. 
Socially the law should draw the same 
distinction." 
m 
TH E WA R 
EFFEC T O N Wha t effect will the Great 
PREJUDIC E Wa r have on color prejudice? Saint Niha l Singh, 
writing in the Southern Workman, says: 
"The necessity that has led to the employment of colored soldiers on the Continent of Europe, deals a shattering blow 
to racial prejudices. Afte r the war is 
over, the position of the dark people in 
the political economy of Greater Britain 
and Greater France wil l never be the 
same that it was before the conflict took 
place. The destiny of the Indian subjects of the British Empir e and the 
Negro citizens of the French Republic 
is bound to be completely re-shaped as 
the aftermath of the war. Hints of it 
have already begun to appear in the 
British and French press, even though 
both the nations are engaged in a life 126 TH E CRISI S 
and death struggle and have no time to 
think of any constructive work. 
"In thus writing about the issues that 
have led to the employment of darkskinned soldiers on the Continent, and of 
their behavior on the battlefield, I have 
not sought to glorify war. Carnage is 
utterly repugnant to every humanitarian. 
Al l I have attempted to do is to show 
that good may come to the colored races 
out of this ghastly struggle in Europe. 
The war which has stirred up strife between white man and white man, may 
serve to reconcile the Caucasian to his 
dark-faced brother." 
Joseph Edga r Chamberlin in the Ne w 
Yor k Evening Mail doubts this conclusion : 
"Alas! Negro troops have done all 
this, or as much, before, and their 
courage has availed them little in the 
way of social advancement. Fro m the 
earliest dawn of history, j n ancient 
Egypt, Negro troops have been celebrated for intrepidity in battle; but they 
have achieved no equal position with all 
their fighting. It may be said that our 
own civil war advanced them greatly, 
and that the ballot was the answer to 
their fierce bravery, their perfect sacrifice, in the pit of death at Fort Wagne r 
and on other fields of battle. But when 
the war was over, this service was soon 
forgotten, and the Negro race in 
Americ a has lost the boon of the ballot 
in about half of the United States. 
"Negro troops, with splendid courage 
and coolness, saved the day at La s Guasisimas, in the Spanish war. and fought at 
San Juan Hil l and E l Caney with heroism unsurpassed by any white organization. But it would he hard to say in 
what place or in what manner that record of intrepidity has socially or politically advantaged the race. 
"France is about the only country that 
gives equality to the colored man ; and 
presumably, in that country, the service 
of the Senegalese will not be forgotten. 
But in the white world at large, no shattering blow will be dealt to racial prejudice as a result of it." 
The Ilanga Lase Natal, a native paper 
of South Afric a says: 
"The enormous quantities of gold that 
have been sent from South Afric a to 
England have materially affected the 
issues of the greatest war on record. No 
wonder that prince of financiers, the 
Right Honorable Lloy d George, _ refers 
to it as substantial aid ; and we join with 
the millions of Britis h subjects in expressing satisfaction in using it for suppressing the enemy of the World's 
peace. But there is a phase of the subject that should be noted, and that is the 
mass of Africa n labor that has made it 
possible to wi n so much gold from 
mother earth, that labor has made it 
possible to apply the great means of exchange to the great national purposes 
that are now demanded of Britain . An d 
as that giant native labor has so faithfully served, and is still serving, shall 
no notice be taken of it, shall not a word 
of recognition be made? Fo r just one 
reason, that Britons show that they do 
not wish to foster meanness." 
The Toronto Globe says, finely : 
"There must be no world-mastership 
by any nation: not German, nor Russian, not Oriental, not American , and, 
please God, not British. N o nation is 
good enough to stereotype the national 
aspirations of humanity. N o race is 
pure enough to make its life blood the 
motive power of all the world. N o people are so near perfection that their culture is fit to dominate civilization. Whe n 
any nation sets itself to mold all peoples after its own fixed type the Great 
Lor d God does as H e has done many 
times i n history: H e smashes the pattern and begins again. 
"Partnership, not antagonism! Cooperation, not conflict! Law , not force ! 
Justice, not power! Equality for all, because mastership for none! Fo r that 
Britain is ready to die. Fo r that America ought to be lit to live. Nothin g less 
is worth while. Nothin g else matters." 
TH E WRITHIN G SOUT H 
CROS S The South cannot remain 
CURRENT S foreve r provincial. Evi ­
dences of moral "Sturm und 
Drang " multiply. The Houston, Texas, 
Post says : 
"The Shreveport Times is greatly disappointed that the investigation into the 
disgraceful lynchings that occurred in 
Caddo parish last December has been OPINION S 127 
without results up to the present time. 
A t the time of the crimes, which aroused 
the indignation of the good people of 
Shreveport, it was declared that nothing 
would be left undone to bring the members of the mob to justice. A public inquiry was instituted by the attorney 
general of Louisiana and this was supplemented by the secret investigation 
of two grand juries. 
"The Times tells us that neither grand 
jury returned- indictments and it is 
feared the probes are at an end and the 
matter will be dropped. 
"O f course, the whole matter will be 
dropped. That is exactly what the 
Post said in discussing the lynchings at 
the time of their occurrence. That always happens. Lynchin g probes always 
prove fruitless, and after the first wave 
of public indignation subsides the officers quickly cease their efforts. That 
is not all. If the grand jury had returned indictments, the members of the 
mob would not have been convicted. 
"An d be it known that the failure of 
justice in these mob murders is in no 
sense due to mystery. W e daresay that 
hundreds of men in Caddo parish know 
the men who are responsible for the 
murder of the victims. The officers, or 
some of them, know at least some of the 
men who were implicated. Fo r reasons 
satisfactory to themselves they simply 
prefer to let the matter drop. 
"A n officer who would run down 
lynchers, secure the evidence and put 
them in jeopardy, would risk his official 
tenure. The lynchers, their families and 
friends would not only be able to defeat 
officers of diligence, but the witnesses 
would know that their testimony might 
subject them to serious trouble at the 
hands of their guilty neighbors. 
"There are people who seem to think 
that a large number of men have some 
sort of right to take the law into their 
hands and execute men suspected of 
crime or known to be guity of it, and 
men in office feel that it is not safe to 
attempt to convict an entire community. 
Moreover, when the victims of the mob 
happen to be Negroes this question is 
occasionally heard: 'Wh y should substantial white men be hanged or imprisoned for putting a Negro criminal 
to death, anyway? ' 
"An d yet a Negro has just as much 
right to a fair and impartial trial as a 
person of any other race. N o mob has 
a right to execute him. . . . 
"Caddo parish and the State of 
Louisiana stand before civilization doubly disgraced, first, because of the 
brutal lynching and, second, because 
they have permitted the cowardly murderers t o go unpunished." 
The same paper commenting an a 
speech by a Southern man says: 
"The white people o f the South are 
gradually reaching this wise and Christian attitude toward the Negro race, and 
they must press on until they attain the 
full measure of duty to the 9,000,000 
people of Africa n origin who inhabit the 
South. 
"W e are beginning to see that neglect 
of the Southern Negroes is as injurious 
to the whites as it is to the blacks, that 
it is to our moral, material and economic 
interest to conserve their welfare and to 
aid them in every possible way to attain 
better standards of living. 
"Bu t it is the debt of justice that 
strikes the high note of Christian duty. 
It is wicked to be unjust to anybody, 
but it is wickedness compounded to be 
unjust to the weak, the humble and the 
helpless. 
"There are no two standards of justice. There can never be but one standard that God, conscience and history 
will approve. These few sentences we 
quote from Dr. Riley's address were 
worthy the great and brilliant preacher 
that he is. " 
The Mobil e (Ala.) Register strikes 
the same note, quoting a third paper: 
"It is a timely appeal the Vicksbur g 
Herald makes to the while men of Mississippi, and, incidentally, to the white 
men of the South, to take a broad view 
of the so-called Negro question, recognizing that where two races must continue to live side by side, sound reason 
dictates that the true modus vivendi be 
found and followed. 
" 'In Mississippi, and the whole South 
practically, the Negro millions have 
been, and rightly, eliminated from politics—wisely for him and the whites, the 
door of public affairs has been closed on 
the descendants of the slaves. The 
Herald's regret is that the same law of 128 TH E CRISI S 
the color line does not prevail over the 
whole nation. But when this is said, 
when all the evil that was forced on the 
whites in the name of race equality has 
been undone, is not the South's case in 
equity won and closed ? In view of the 
successful modus vivendi set up by the 
constitutional convention of 1890, its 
subsequent affirmance by the United 
States Supreme Court, with the virtual 
acquiescence of the Republican Party, 
should not right and just thought be enlisted in giving to the Negro millions 
over whom white laws and white officials rule, a square and kindly deal? Is 
this not self-interest as well as duty; 
moral and political? Is not the contentment of the Negro with his lot in the 
South's social and industrial life, his 
friendly regard for the superior race, a 
proper thing for a self-respecting and a 
Christian people to cultivate?' " 
Three extraordinarily pig-headed, but 
equally striking quotations follow : 
"The day is coming in the South when 
every community wil l have an industrial or training school for Negroes. 
Untol d energy now lying dormant can 
then be utilized, energy that is now being wasted. Trained, capable servants 
are a great blessing to a country, while, 
on the other hand, untrained and incapable servants are a burden upon the 
people. 
"Bu t whose fault is it that the Ne ­
groes are not being so trained ? No t 
theirs, surely. Ever y county in the 
South should establish a school in which 
the Negroes would be taught how to 
scientifically cook, sew, care for children, plant and harvest a crop, or to 
follow the many other vocations of, the 
Negro. Whe n this is done, the Negro 
people will be much happier, much more 
contented, and a much better people 
mentally, morally and physically than if 
they spent their school years trying to 
find out why Napoleon was defeated or 
why Brutus came to bury Caesar and 
not to praise him. 
"No w and then through life we have 
seen a cat that would cross a body of 
water by swimming ; but rarely have we 
ever seen a Negro whose head was filled 
with Lati n and Greek that didn't look 
like a bull frog that had swallowed a 
frying-size chicken. 
"It is truly the duty of the southern 
people to establish these training schools, 
unless they want to try the experiment 
of making preachers and professors out 
of every member of the Negro race. N o 
one has ever yet found that bag of gold 
at the end of the rainbow, and it is time 
that the human race evolved out of that 
stage of the experimental."—Quitman 
(Ga.) Advertiser. 
"In making an unfavorable report on 
the bill which seeks to prohibit Negroes 
from practising law in the courts of 
Florida , which passed the house by a 
large vote, senate judiciary committee B 
acted wisely and fairly. It is probable 
that a majority of the senators hold the 
same attitude and wil l kil l the bill. 
"There is no valid reason why an 
honest Negro should not be allowed to 
practise law or any other profession in 
Florida , and there is every reason why 
he should be encouraged to develop his 
talents along professional and other 
lines. In case a Negro lawyer acts dishonestly with his clients, he is invariably 
disbarred on short notice. It is cause 
for regret that, for the benefit and honor 
of the profession, white lawyers of the 
'shyster' class—and there are many of 
them—are not dealt with as summarily. " 
—Tamp a (Fla.) Times. 
"Althoug h in some quarters, and in 
other sections of the country, there is a 
disposition manifested to glaze it over 
and make out as if it were non-existent, 
the fact is that racial difference and 
racial feeling, tracing their origin from 
a remote ancestry, are among the most 
powerful feeling's and motives that actuate mankind to-day. The men of the 
South frankly recognize this fact, and 
they have relegated the Negro to a 
sphere where they are willin g to help 
him to work out his own salvation, but 
at the same time they have erected and 
set a line and a mark across which the 
Negro shall not cross save at his peril. 
They believe that their attitude is correct and it is right, and certainly the 
southern people have happily shown no 
sign of abandoning or of weakening one 
jot or tittle their hereditary and their 
traditional policy that they received 
from their chivalric forbears—those 
cavaliers of the antebellum days."—El 
Paso (Tex.) Morning Times. EDITORIA L 
THRE E SENIO R BISHOP S 
THE power of the archepiscopate in the Africa n 
M . E . Church depends 
almost entirely on the 
personality of the Senior 
Bishop. Legally the 
bishop longest in service simply has the 
power of presiding at the bishops' council, which is the highest permanent tribunal in a church of 600,000 members. 
In fact, however, length of service and 
the power of presiding added to a character like that of the late Daniel A . 
Payne gives to the senior bishop large 
and controlling influence in church circles. It is not too much to say that 
Bishop Payne became in his late years a 
real archbishop of the church. 
None of his successors have wielded 
so great power. The late Henr y McNei l 
Turne r who recently died at the ripe age 
of eighty-two was a man of tremendous 
force and indomitable courage. As army 
LEE PAYN E TURNE R CRISI S 
GRADUATE S O F LEADIN G COLLEGE S 
1. H. S. KEELA N 2. D. E . RIVER S 3. C . H. HOUSTO N 4. J . W . E . BOWEN , JR . 5. W . R . R . 
GRANGER , JR . 6. WILLI S N . HUGGIN S EDITORIA L 131 
GRADUATE S OF LEADIN G COLLEGE S 
1. MIS S M . S . BEC K 2. E . A. BROW N 3. G . A. JOHNSO N A. F. M . SUMMER S 
5. MIS S G . HODGE S 6. E . M . A. CHANDLE R 132 TH E CRISIS 
chaplain, pastor and bishop he was always a man of strength. H e lacked, 
however, the education and the stern 
moral balance of Bishop Payne. In a 
sense Turne r was the last of his clan: 
mighty men, physically and mentally, 
men who started at the bottom and hammered their way to the top by sheer brute 
strength: they were the spiritual progeny of ancient Africa n chieftains and 
they built the Africa n church in 
America . Danie l A . Payne on the other 
hand represented the spiritual purity and 
high ideals of this church and by his own 
wish his successor and rightful heir 
is the present Senior Bishop, Benjamin 
F . Lee. 
Benjamin Lee was born in the celebrated Gouldtown Settlement of New 
Jersey in 1841 and was President of 
Wilberforc e University and editor of 
the Christian Recorder before he was 
raised to the bishopric twenty-three 
years ago. It is to be hoped that under 
Bishop Lee we may see the power of the 
archbishop of Africa n Methodists raised 
and expanded. 
EDUCATION 
The Persistent Onslaught 
THE quiet insidious persistent attempt to keep 
the mass of the Negroes 
i n Americ a in just sufficient ignorance to render them incapable of 
realizing their power or resisting the position of inferiority into which the bulk 
of the nation is determined to thrust 
them was never stronger than to-day. 
Le t us not be deceived. It is true that 
our illiteracy has decreased enormously 
and is decreasing and that the number 
of our children reported to be i n school 
is larger than ever before. A t the same 
time our illiteracy has not decreased as 
quickly as it might have and it is doubtful if the proportion of our population 
i n school is as large to-day as it was ten 
or twenty years ago. A s a race we are 
still kept i n ignorance far below the 
average standard of this nation and of 
the present age, and the ideals set before our children i n most cases are far 
below their possibilities and reasonable 
promise. 
This is true not by accident but by 
design, and by the design not so much 
of the laboring white masses of the nation but rather by the design of rich and 
intelligent people, and particularly by 
those who masquerade as the Negroes' 
'"friends." Their attack on real education for Negroes is i n reality one with 
their attack on education for workin g 
men i n general and this is part of the 
great modern attack upon democracy. 
O f course, this movement masquerades as industrial and vocational training in an age which is preeminently in ­
dustrial and busy. It is thus difficult 
for the average colored man to descry 
its persistent and tremendous dangers to 
our ultimate surviva l as a race and as 
America n citizens. 
The Basic Injustice 
NO one denies that beneath 
the basic demand for in ­
dustrial and vocational 
training lies truth and 
fundamental truth, but 
that on this truth is being built to-day a superstructure of 
falsehood and injustice also too clear to 
the thinker. It is the duty of all men to 
work and this wor k usually renders a 
service to the community for which the 
community is willin g to pay wit h services and materials i n return. Sometimes, 
to be sure, the community does not recognize the value of valuable work ; 
sometimes it pays ridiculous pittances 
for work of the very highest value and EDITORIA L 133 
unfitted thereby from continuing his 
education at any recognized modern inon the other hand it again and again 
pays extortionate returns for services 
that are negligible or even absolute disservice. Nevertheless the average man 
must be trained for work which the 
average community will reward with a 
living wage. In these days of intricate 
technique such training cannot be acquired by chance or as a side issue or 
as an after thought. It must form an 
integral part of every person's education. "Therefore," says the principal of 
the school with the largest Negro attendance in Harlem, " I am going to 
train these Negroes as cooks and garden1 
ers." 
m 
The Basic fallacy 
BUT wait; is work the object of life or is life the 
object of work? Ar e 
men to earn a living or 
simply to live for the 
sake of working? Is 
there any justice in making a particular 
body of men the drudges of society, 
destined for the worst work under the 
worst conditions and at the lowest pay, 
simply because a majority of their fellow men for more or less indefinite and 
superficial reasons do not like them? 
Manifestly life, and abundant life, is 
the object of industry and we teach 
men to earn a living in order that their 
industry may administer to their own 
lives and the lives of their fellows. If, 
therefore, any human being has large 
ability it is not only for his advantage 
but for the advantage of all society that 
he be put to the work that he can do 
best. To assume that ability is to be 
measured by so-called racial characteristics—by color, by hair or by stature 
is not only ridiculous but dangerous. 
To-day we can afford to look carefully 
day are for men and not men for machines, while on the other hand because 
of the mechanical and industrial age 
through which we have passed there is 
grave lack' of deep intelligence and character. Whil e then we teach men to earn 
a living, that teaching is incidental and 
subordinate to the larger training of intelligence in human beings and to the 
largest development of self-realization 
in men. Those who would deny this to 
the Negro race are enemies of mankind. 
S i 
The Result 
H E result of limiting the 
education of Negroes 
under the mask of fitting 
them for work is the 
slow strangulation of the 
Negro college. Howar d 
to-day is dependent upon the precarious 
support of the majority in Congress ; Fisk 
has an endowment which looks ridiculous 
beside that of Hampton and Tuskegee. 
Atlanta has almost no endowment. None 
of the five major Negro colleges have 
today any solid financial prospect for 
growth and development. Not only that 
but they are regularly sneered at by men 
who dare not raise their arguments 
above a sneer. W e hear again and again 
repeated the usual lie that these colleges 
are persisting in the curriculum of fifty 
years ago. A s a matter of fact practically all of these colleges arc conforming 
to the standard of education as laiddown by the highest authorities in this 
country. Wha t they are really asked to 
do is to adopt a course of study which 
does not conform to modern standards, 
which no modern system of education 
will recognize and which condemns the 
student who takes it to end his education 
in a blind alley. It is the unforgivable 
sin of some of the greatest so-called industrial schools that the boy who is induced to take their course is absolutely 134 TH E CRISI S 
NORTHER N COLLEG E GRADUATE S 
1. MIS S WOODSON , CINCINNAT I 2. WHITEHEAD , WESTER N RESERV E 3, MISS WILLIAMS , 
CINCINNAT I 4. CARSON , OHI O STAT E 5. TYLER , OHI O STAT E 6. WRIGHT , HARVAR D 
7. HUNTER , ANTIOC H S. STEWARD , ARMOU R 9. JEFFRESS , TUFT S 10. BURCH , OHIO 
11. STRADFORD , COLUMBI A 12. HAYES , BROW N EDITORIA L 135 
NORTHER N COLLEG E GRADUATE S 
1. ADAMS , DARTMOUT H 2. MIS S MILLER , KANSA S 3. McGRUDER , DARTMOUT H 4. MIS S 
McDANIEL , KANSA S 5. BROWN , SYRACUS E 6. MIS S CARTER , KAN . STATIC AO . 7. MIS S 
GILLESPIE , ALLEGHAN Y 8. ROSS , NEBRASK A 9. MIS S CHRISTBURGH . KNO X 10. FREE ­
MAN , WILLIAM S 11. MIS S GREENE , WESTER N RESERV E 12. DONALDSON , HILLSDAL E 136 TH E CRISIS 
unfitted thereby from continuing his 
education at a recognized modern institution. This is a crime against childhood for which any nation ought to be 
ashamed. 
Wh o are the men who are planning 
the new Negro curriculum ? Ar e they 
educational experts learned in the theory 
and practise of training youth? No , 
most of them never taught a child or 
held any responsible place in a school 
system or gave the subject any serious 
study. Ar e they friends of the Negro 
desiring his best interests and development? No , they are friends of the 
white South and stand openly committed 
to any demand of the white South. 
The latest attack on Negro education 
comes from Philadelphia. Ver y adroitly 
and cunningly the Negroes have been 
massed in segregated schools. No w 
"industrial training" is to be introduce! 
the Negro schools and a representative of a leading southern industrial 
school is on hand to advise! 
Do Negroes oppose this because they 
are ashamed of having their children 
trained to work ? Certainly not. But 
they know that if their children are compelled to cook and sew when they ought 
to be learning to read, write and cipher, 
they will not be able to enter the high 
school or go to college as the white 
children are doing. It is a deliberate 
despicable attempt to throttle the Negro 
child before he knows enough to protest. 
m 
The Excuse 
EVEN in industrial training 
the white authorities are 
persistently dishonest . 
They will not train our 
children in good payingtrades and respectable 
vocations. They want them to be servants 
and menials. The excuse which is continually brought forward, particularly i n the 
North , is that there is "no opening" for 
them in the higher ranges of the industrial world ! Fo r this reason opportunities even for the best industrial training 
are persistently denied colored students. 
Trade schools in many of the large cities 
have the habit of forcing colored students who apply into the courses for 
domestic service or sewing on the plea 
that millinery, carpentry and various 
lines of mechanical work offer no opportunity for colored folk. Surely this reduces the argument for industrial training to rank absurdity and the cause of 
real, honest industrial training deserves 
more sensible treatment than this. 
Our Attitude 
N all these arguments and 
actions there blazes one 
great and shining light: 
the persistent army of 
Negro boys and girls 
pushing through high 
school and college continues to increase. 
Negro mothers and fathers are not beinentirely deceived. They know that intelligence and self-development are the only 
.means by which the Negro is to win his 
way in the modern world. They persist 
in pushing their children on through the 
highest courses. Ma y they always continue to do so ; and may the bright, fine 
faces on these pages be inspiration to 
thousands of other boys and girls in the 
coming years to resist the contemptible 
temptation so persistently laid before 
this race to train its children simply as 
menials and scavengers. 
SPRIN G 
B Y M RS . C. W . C LIFFOR D 
Spring, thou wilful, changeful maid, 
Venturesome, yet half afraid 
Kin g Winte r to defy ! 
Come, with all thy airs and graces, 
Perfumes sweet and flower-laces; 
Whe n thy beauty rare he faces, 
H e of love wil l die. ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y 
OUR FUTUR E LEADER S 
AS nearly as we can calculate from 
imperfect records there were 281 
colored men and women who received 
the Bachelor's degree in arts and science 
this spring as compared with 250 reported at this time last year. 
Beginning with the larger universities 
we note four graduated from Harvard : 
Harr y S. Keeland was graduated from 
college wit h a record of excellent work 
in Chemistry ; W . T. Cunningham graduated in Business Administration; and 
L . T. Wrigh t became a Doctor of Med ­
icine after a successful course; F . D . 
Brown received his degree in Dentistry 
in March . 
J. W . F . Bowen, Jr., A . B. , Wesleyan, and A . M. , Harvard , has just been 
appointed Fellow of the American Uni ­
versity at Washington, D. C . with a 
stipend of $400 a year. He will continue his work in History and Economics at the Harvard graduate school for 
the degree of Ph . D . 
There were in all last year nineteen 
colored students in Yale , three in the 
Scientific School, three in College, one 
in Law , two in Music , two in the Business College and eight in the School of 
Religion. O f these seven were graduated. 
Francis E . Rivers was the only graduate from Yal e College. H e was an excellent student,—among the first thirty 
in his class—and may make the Ph i Beta 
Kappa . H e was prepared at the M St. 
Hig h School, Washington, D . C. 
The other men were graduates of the 
School of Religion as follows: 
N . B. Allen . A . B. , Wilberforce ; A . 
W . Ward , A . B. , University of Denver ; 
E . B. Smith, B. D., Howar d University ; 
B. Elliot, A . B., Virgini a Unio n University ; D . G. Monroe, S. T. B. , Lincoln 
University ; J. W . Anderson, A . B. , Wil ­
berforce. 
Fro m Columbia University: W . N . 
Muggins received the Master's degree; 
C. S. Stradford graduated in La w with 
the Master's degree ; and L . S. Tines in 
Divinity with the Master's degree. 
The University of Chicago sent out 
two graduates: Miss Geraldyne Hodges 
as Bachelor in Philosophy and Julian 
H. Lewis as Doctor of Philosophy in 
Pathology and Physiology. Lewis was 
a member of the Sigma X i and won the 
Rickett's prize for research. 
The University of Illinois had three 
graduates: H . H . Harris, Bachelor of 
Science in Agriculture ; E . A . Brown , 
Bachelor of Science in Electrical En ­
gineering; and Miss M . S. Beck, Bachelor in Arts. St. Elmo Brady, a student 
in the graduate school, has been elected 
to the Sigma Xi . 
Four colored men graduated from 
Ohio State University: W . W . Tyle r in 
Pharmacy; E . L . Carson, M . L . Weave r 
and R. M . Winkfield in Veterinary Med ­
icine. 
There was one college graduate from 
the University of Michigan, H . A . 
Phelps. Fro m the professional schools, 
M . Patterson and A . B . Persley gradu-TH E CRISI S 
HONO R GRADUATES , LEADIN G COLORE D COLLEGE S 
1. MIS S COLSOM , "SUMM A CU M LAUDE, " FIS K 2. PETERS , "HIGHES T HONORS," ATLAN ­
T A 3. MIS S PORTER , "CU M LAUDE, " HOWAR D 4. HOLMES , VALEDICTORY , LINCOL N 
5. MIS S SANDERS , "MAGN A CU M LAUDE, " WILBERFORC E 6. FOWLER , KNOXVILL E 
7. AD KINS , VA . UNIO N 8. CALLAHAN , BENEDIC T 9. McDOWELL, TALLADEG A 10. BREWER , 
BIDDLE 11. MISS CHARLTON , SHAW 12. HAYNES , MOREHOUS E OU R FUTUR E LEADER S 139 
HONO R GRADUATES . COLORE D INSTITUTION S 
1. COLLINS , STRAIGH T 2. MIS S YANCY , HARTSHOR N 3. MIS S HUNT , WILE Y 4. BEL ­
CHER , TUSKEGE E 5. NEAL , PHILANDE R SMIT H 6. TOLIVER , HOWAR D TEACHER' S 
7. MIS S CHANDLER , MINN . SO. HIG H 8. ADAMS , GREENSBOR O 9. ROGERS . OA. STAT E 
10. MIS S JONES , C N . & I., WILBERFORC E 11. MIS S SOLOMON , MORRI S BROW N 12. CLARKE , 
CENTRA L TEX . 13. MIS S D E MOSS , G. R. SMIT H 14. MIS S BURWELL , SELM A 15. JOHNS ­
TON , VA . SEMINAR Y 16. MIS S MORRISSEY , ST. AUGUSTINE ' S 140 TH E CRISI S 
NORTHER N COLLEG E GRADUATE S 
1. JACKSON , PITTSBURG H 2. MIS S REID , SIMMON S 3. JEFFERSON , PITTSBURG H 
4. MORRIS , CREIGHTO N S. WEAVER , OHI O STAT E 6. CROGMA.N , TEMPL E 
ated i n Medicine ; J. P. Rodgers in La w 
and S. P . Sparks in Dentistry. 
A t Indiana University two college 
graduates: G. A . Johnson and F . M . 
Summers, who made "very creditable 
records." 
Fro m Cornell University L . H. Russell received the Master's degree ; M . F . 
Staley became a Bachelor of Science and 
J. H . Moor e graduated in Veterinary 
Medicine. 
A t Western Reserve University A . 
G . Whitehead graduated in Dentistry; 
C. W . Green in Pharmacy; and G. PI. 
White , Jr., in Law . 
Charles H . Houston, who graduated 
from Amherst was elected to the P i Beta 
Kapp a and also selected as one of the 
fifteen students of high standing from 
whom the Bond orators are chosen. 
Brow n University sends out G. E . C. 
Hayes; and Williams College graduates 
I. W . Freeman. The latter took the 
book prize for classics and won a scholarship. 
Fro m Dartmouth College W . R. R. 
Granger graduated; he was an athlete of 
unusual ability, maintained good standing in college work and "carried himself with a great deal of self respect." 
G . W . Adams, C. M . Wilde r and W . F . 
McGrude r also graduated. 
The University of Cincinnati sends 
out three Bachelors: N . E . Woodson, R. 
Belsinger and Miss S. M . Williams. The 
Case School graduated E . A . Davis; 
Antioc h College graduated H . Hunter, 
"one of our best students." Alleghany 
College graduated Miss M . Gillespie, a 
girl of "fine promise" with a "creditable 
record." Syracuse University graduated W . J. Baker. 
The dean of Colgate writes: " A very 
fine student indeed, Newto n Lloy d Gil ­
bert by name, was with us for three 
years and would have been graduated 
wit h honor if he had lived. " Fro m Pratt 
Institute, Miss E . L . Hudso n finished in 
domestic and art. She is an A . B . from 
Morehouse College. OU R FUTUR E 
DR. W. A. S. BROW N 
Northwestern University graduates 
one B . A. , J. N . Goddard : and two lawyers, J. C. Judkins and R. H . Gillum : 
and two dentists, S L . Aute r and A . W . 
Brooks. 
Tw o colored men graduate from 
Drew Theological Seminary: H . A . 
Brooks, A . B. , Howar d ; C. F . Flipper, 
A . B. , Shaw. Mr . Brooks becomes assistant pastor at Sharp St. Memorial, 
Baltimore. Miss Maude Wanze r graduated from the Musica l Conservatory of 
McAleste r College, St. Paul, Minn , at 
the age of nineteen. 
From the University of Pittsburgh 
came two graduates in Pharmacy, J. A . 
Jackson and S. W . Jefferson. From 
Ohio University, C. H. Burch graduates 
in Electrical Engineering. He had a 
"very good record in scholarship." From 
Oberlin College Miss A . E . Burwell and 
M . B. Gray graduated in Arts; and II. 
C. Collins and C. W . Kell y graduated in 
Divinity. 
Fro m other Northern colleges there 
were graduates as follows : 
Ne w Yor k University, F . A . Manson, 
A . B. ; Hillsdal e College, U . S. DonaldLEADER S 141 
v. -->* 
J 
DR. ISABELL A VANDEVAL L 
son, A . B. , "with highly creditable standing, " and first prize in debating. Tufts 
College, J. A . Jeffress, A . B. Simmons 
College, the Misses F . M . Reid and L . 
Brown both Bachelors in Science. Kno x 
College, Miss D. H . Christburgh, B . A . 
Armou r Institute, W . H. Steward, Me ­
chanical Engineer. Temple University, 
C. A . Webster, W . H . Montague, F . M . 
Slaughter, G. T. Walke r in medicine, 
W . L . Brandon and P. A . Diggs in Pharmacy, L . C. Crogman and 1. A . Thompson in dentistry. The last two were 
"above the average in scholarship." 
The University of Nebraska graduated C. Ross in Law. He was for three 
years guard on the 'varsity football team 
and three years weight man and high 
jumper on the 'varsity track team. When 
Kansas University drew the color line 
on Ross, Nebraska forced them to yield 
by threatening to break athletic relations. 
The University of Southern California 
graduated II. S. Prince, "a very good 
student." 
Kansas Stale Agricultural College, 
Miss C. D. Carter; Creighton University, Craig Morris in Dentistry, who 142 TH E CRISI S 
".stood at the head of his class." Miss 
F . F . Kealin g whose picture was on the 
Easter cover of the CRISI S is one of the 
three graduates of the University of 
Kansas in Arts. The other two are the 
Misses H . D . McDanie l and T. A . Sums. 
Miss E . L . Mille r received the degree of 
B. M . 
Tw o cases deserve special mention: 
Dr. Isabella Vandervall graduated at the 
head of her class at the Ne w Yor k Med ­
ical College. She was the youngest student and the only colored one in a class 
of ten and maintained an average of 
97.8% during her course. She has been 
appointed interne at the Hospita l for 
Wome n and Children at Syracuse, Ne w 
York. 
W . A . S. Brow n of Kingston, Jamaica. graduated in medicine at McGil l Uni ­
versity, Montreal. He received the 
Holmes gold medal for highest standing 
in the five year course. H e had previously won the Sutherland gold medal 
at the end of his third year. 
Fro m colored institutions there have 
been graduate d 243 Bachelor s i n Art s 
an d Scienc e as follows: 
Howard . 70 Georgia State. 4 
Lincoln, 32 Knoxville , 4 
Biddle. 26 Sam Houston. 3 
Benedict. 13 Bishop, 3 
Talladega, 12 Florid a A . and M „ 3 
Atlanta. 9 G. R. Smith, 2 
Wilberforce , 8 Shaw. 2 
Philander Smith, 7 Morgan . 2 
Virgini a Union. 6 Straight. 2 
New Orleans, 6 Central Texas. 2 
Wiley, 6 Morris Brown , 2 
Morehouse, 5 Virgini a Seminary, 2 
Bennet, 5 Greensboro, 2 
Spellman. 4 Arkansas Baptist, 1 
Fro m colore d professiona l schools 
ther e hav e been 247 graduates: 
Howard : Dentistry, 32 
Medicine, 20 Pharmacy, 8 
Dentistry', 24 Nurs e Training , 5 
Pharmacy, 13 Morris Brown : 
Law, 21 Theology, 2 
Theology, 10 Wilberforce : 
Lincoln : Theology. 8 
Theology, 16 Morehouse : 
Virgini a Seminary : Theology, 5 
Theology, 9 Virgini a Unio n : 
Meharry : Theology, 4 
Medicine, 70 
Thi s make s a tota l recor d o f 570 college an d professiona l graduate s fo r 1915. 
Omission s wil l easil y rais e this to 650. 
TH E COLORE D HIG H SCHOO L 
No exhaustive study of the colored 
pupils in high schools can be made 
in this sketch, but there are a few facts 
of such interest that we present them. 
Nearlv all the colored colleges have 
Hig h School departments which form 
usually the main part of their work. A s 
nearly as we can learn there were 1.764 
Hig h School and Highe r Norma l graduates of these institutions : 
HAMPTO N INSTITUT E TH E COLORE D HIG H SCHOO L 143 
Emerson. Ala. . 163 
Tuskegee. Ala . 126 
Virgini a N . & I., 76 
State Normal, N . C 
76 
New Orleans Univ , 
68 
Orangeburg State, S. 
C. 67 
Atlanta, Ga.. 62 
Hampton. Va. , 59 
Benedict S. C , 55 
Howard D. C , 54 
Fisk, Tenn.. 53 
Florida N. & I.. 50 
Wiley, Tex., 49 
W . Virgini a Collegiate, 41 
Straight. La. . 38 
C. N . & I. Wilber -
force, O., 37 
Avery, S. C . 34 
Virgini a Seminary, 
33 
Talladega. Ala.. 31 
Alcorn, Miss.. 25 
Biddle. X . C . 25 
Ballard, Ga., 25 
Philander Smith, 
Ark. . 25 
Le Moyne, Tenn., 25 
Storer, W . Va. . 24 
Arkansas Baptist, 23 
Virgini a Union. 21 
Howe Inst., Tenn., 19 
Knoxville., Tenn. , 18 
Henderson, N . C , 18 
Tillotson. Tex., 17 
Morgan, Md. . 17 
Quindaro, Kan., 17 
Bishop, Tex., 16 
Morehouse, Ga., 16 
Florida Baptist, 16 
Spellman. Ga., 16 
St. Augustine, N . C , 
16 
Utica, Miss., 15 
Georgia Slate. 14 
Fort Valley, Ga., 13 
Edward Waters, Fla., 
13 
Christiansburg, Va., 
12 
Miss. Industrial, 11 
Morris Brown, Ga., 
11 
Bennet, N. G , 11 
Brick, N. C , 10 
Roanoke. X . C , 10 
Hartshorn, Va. , 10 
Wilberforce, O., 10 
Jackson. Miss.. 9 
Knox , Ga., 9 
Greensboro' A . & T. 
N . C . 8 
Shaw, N. C , 8 
National Religious, 
N . C . 8 
Voorhees, S. C , 6 
Shorter, Ark. . 6 
Okolona. Miss., 6 
Central Tex.. 5 
G. R. Smith, Mo. , 4 
Houston. Tot. , 4 
There arc 156 colored public Hig h 
Schools. Some of the largest of these 
graduated students as follows : 
M Street, Washing ­
ton, 117 
Baltimore. 75 
Kansas City, Kan. , 56 
Armstrong, D. C , 55 
Mine r Xormal . D. C , 
46 
Sumner, St. Louis, 
31 
Lincoln, Kansas Citv, 
Mo. , 31 
Central, Louisville, 
27 
Wilmington, Del , 20 
Colored Normal, 
Louisville. 18 
Baltimore Xormal , 18 
Garnet, Charleston, 
W . Va. . 16 
In the Nort h where colored pupils 
attend mixed high schools there have 
arisen in the past many difficult problems. Often the colored pupils arc not 
encouraged. In other cases they enter 
poorly prepared and they feel the handicap of poverty and prejudice. This for 
a long time made the number of colored 
high school pupils very small. Gradually, however, this is being improved. 
In Indianapolis for instance, out of a 
total school enrollment o f 3,70 0 among 
colored people there were this year 36 
colored graduates from the two City 
High Schools, about seven o f whom 
completed the lour years course in three 
years. Of one of these students the 
Indiana Daily Times says in an editorial: 
"Miss Merle Stokes, a colored girl, 
not yet 15, ranks fourth on the roll of 
honor of Shortridge high school, completing a four-year high school course in 
three years, with an average of 94.28 
per cent. Miss Stokes offers something 
hopeful to her people. Here is a record 
of progress based on sheer hard work 
and self-reliance. It means racial advancement. It means betterment, it 
gives promise for the future and it offers 
cheer to all citizens who have at heart 
the well-being of the state and the wise 
adjustment of civic problems." 
In Cincinnati there are 14 colored 
high school graduates of whom three 
were graduated without examination on 
account of high scholarship: Miss Mar y 
Holloway, Robert Ranki n and Tourgee 
Tull . 
There have been many cases of individual excellence, for instance: W . G. 
Jefferson stood second in a class of 
forty-seven at the Steelton, Penn. Hig h 
School and was salutatorian. He excelled in mathematics. From Minne ­
apolis, Minn. , South Hig h School, Miss 
Malvenia Chandler was graduated 
among the first three of a class of 127. 
In Brookline, Mass., Archi e Ridley, a 
grandson of the late Judge Ruffin, won 
the Murra y Ka y prize for oratory and 
was one of the team who won the interclass debating championship. 
N o attempt has been made to collect 
data of the colored graduates of the 
high schools in Boston, New York , 
Philadelphia, Chicago and other large 
cities although there is a considerable 
number of such graduates. 
In the above record 2,126 colored high 
school graduates are noted. A complete 
record would bring this to the 3,00 0 
mark. 144 TH E CRISI S 
MR . B. T . WASHINGTO N I N LOUISIAN A 
H M By V . P. THOMA S of Ne w Orleans §§§ gg 
The Facts 
Probably you have heard something of 
the tour Dr. Booker T. Washington 
made in Louisiana. It was a roun d of 
grand receptions for him everywhere he 
went. Thousands saw and heard him 
speak in Burn's Arena . Thousands saw 
and heard him speak in the Dauphine 
Theatre, and as big a crowd as 5.000 saw 
and heard him speak at Violet, a settlement in St. Bernard Parish, 18 miles 
from this city. A t New Iberia thousands saw and heard him there, as did 
thousands at Baton Rouge. Lafayette, 
Crowlev. Lake Charles, Alexandria , 
Shreveport and Gibbsland. and all applauded his addresses on industrial and 
agricultural training for the Negro, and 
their accompanying anecdotes. 
A n account of his first speech will il ­
lustrate the general tenor of his remarks 
in the various places. This speech was 
made at Violet. 
The party was met bv a crowd estimated to number about 5,000 people, 
including colored school children of all 
the colored schools of the parish, which 
were closed by order of the parish 
superintendent for the occasion. In the 
gathering was the superintendent of 
HIG H SCHOO L HONO R GRADUATE S 
1. RANKIN , CINCINNAT I 2. MIS S STOKES . INDIANAPOLI S 3. MIS S INBORDEN , BRIC K 
•1. JEFFERSON , STEELTO N 5. MIS S CASH , CHARLESTON , W . VA . MIS S MATTHEWS , 
LOUISVILL E 7. MIS S SHEPARD , DURHA M S. MIS S MAXWELL . BALTIMOR E MR . B. T. WASHINGTO N IN LOUISIAN A 145 
schools himself and other officials of the 
parish, as well as other white citizens. 
To this meeting Dr. Washington 
made the first address of his tour, He 
expressed gratification at the evidences 
of the friendly relations existing between the two races living side by side 
in the parish of St. Bernard, He said 
he had long wished to see for himself 
the actual attitude of the white people 
and the Negro people toward each other 
in Louisiana, and that what he had 
seen on his way from New Orleans to 
Violet of the wealth of opportunities 
fully pursuaded him that the Negro 
people needed only to be thrifty, industrious and law-abiding in their habits 
to help the white people make that section one of the most prosperous and 
happy in the country, He commented 
on the apparent fertility and productive 
quality of the land and urged the 
Negroes to stick to the farms and farm 
life and away from the bigger cities. 
Dr. Washington thanked the white 
officials for what was being done for the 
industrial education of the colored children of the parish and admonished the 
colored people to take advantage of the 
opportunities given them to benefit by 
it. H e told them that there was nobody 
that can get what he wants out of white 
people easier than a Negro, and that it is 
seldom, indeed, that a Negro goes after 
something he wants to get from white 
people that he fails to get it. He said 
the white man or woman may swear or 
fuss at the Negro for bothering them, 
but the Negro usually gets what he 
wants just the same. 
The inimitable way in which Dr. 
Washington told this part of his knowledge of the traits of the Negro and the 
white man tickled the risibles of everybody who heard him ; laughter was general. Other amusing anecdotes, the 
butt of which was Negro character were 
frequently told to illustrate or emphasize an idea by Dr. Washington during 
the delivery of his advice and admonition. 
Dr. Washington confined his advice 
wholly to the idea of industrial and domestic training for the Negro, on the 
theory that an education that is not useful is useless to any boy or girl of the 
race and that the Negro is adapted especially to agricultural and domestic service, He did not once, in the slightest 
way, suggest the need o f preparation of 
Negroes lor the business of banking, 
the profession of law. medicine, pharmacy, leaching or the ministry. An d 
the characters he held up as deserving 
the confidence and admiration of the 
while people were always such as Uncl e 
Tom, Aunt Chloe, old Aunt Mary , or 
old Uncle |oe. Men o f the Negro race 
like Frederick Douglas, Crispus Attacks, Langston, Revels and others, 
whose worth and characters first opened 
the eyes of conscience and the world 
upon the possibilities of the Negro were 
never mentioned. No r did he think to 
choose any of the number of living men 
and women of the race to set up as examples before the school children he addressed to emulate. 
He said, "The Negro is just 50 years 
old, and his history in this country is 
yet to be made." 
This speech, with local variations, 
was made throughout the State of 
Louisiana to thousands of white and 
colored people. 
Comment 
There is no doubt that agricultural 
and industrial training is one of the 
needs of the Negro, just as it is one of 
the needs of every race ; but to hold up 
this one training as practically all the 
training the Negro in this nation needs 
is to close the door of initiative to the 
Negro and put him in the class of the 
domestic animal that is broken or trained 
to perform one useful service alone. 
The theory that an education that is not 
useful is useless is true ; but to assume 
that the only education that is useful to 
the Negro is agricultural and industrial 
is to deny that the Negro is a human being. 
The advocates ot the industrial and 
agricultural system of education for 
Negroes use the arguments that buying 
and owning homes, growing crops, saving the earnings, living in the open air 
of country life, modesty of dress and 
pretentions, cleanliness of person and 
home and its surroundings and neighborly disposition, (things which this 
system of training, like other educational systems include in their teaching), 146 TH E CRISI S 
insure respectability, health and standing to individuals in every community. 
This is true; but there is not a scintilla 
of evidence to show that the increase in 
these ventures and in property owning 
by Negroes is due solely or even mainly 
to the influence of industrial and agricultural education. A s a matter of fact 
while general industrial training of colored children is hardly begun, the homeloving Negro has been breeding in the 
race for more than a century, beginning 
by buying himself, his mother, his 
father, his wife, and his children, and 
property on which to live even in slavery times, and since freedom buying not 
only homes, but every comfort that his 
earnings could command. 
Whil e preaching to Negroes to stay 
in the country, to buy and occupy 
homes there, it is a notorious fact that 
Air. Washington and others rarely, if 
ever, point out in their addresses the 
real reasons why Negroes find it very 
difficult to live in the country on account 
of the trying and troublesome conditions for thrifty Negroes out there. 
They never appeal to the white people 
of the country in their speeches to afford the Negroes the same protection of 
the laws against malice, abuse, unjust 
treatment, overbearing conduct, false accusation, summary punishment, lynching, confiscation or usurpation of property, expulsion from the community for 
trivial offenses that the white man enjoys. 
Mr . Washington forgot to tell his 
white audience that thirteen Negroes 
were lynched, in Louisiana last year 
alone and not a single person punished 
for these mob murders. 
Takin g advantage of the complacency 
with which colored people (long in the 
habit of taking abuse) received denunciation, the advocates of industrial training for Negroes do most of their preaching on the shortcomings of the black 
people. Ever y shortcoming of the Ne ­
gro, whether real or imaginary, is described with great emphasis and every 
good quality is treated with silence. The 
Negro that is lazy and good for nothing, 
is described with minuteness and with 
indignation. Right by the side of this 
worthless Negro may be four decent 
Negroes about whom these industrial 
preachers never say a word, never describe with the same minuteness or with 
any applause i n their public addresses. 
Abuse and denouncing of Negroes 
for political purposes and to help men 
into office got fresh impetus after disfranchisement had followed Reconstruction. It became the most popular thing 
in the South for helping white men to 
office. Practically all Negroes in the 
South were driven out of the electorate 
and politics, as a result of this wholesale denunciation of the race. Practically nobody was brave enough to defend the race and the whole race passed 
for a lot of vicious, ignorant, barbarous 
people, fit only for menial service and 
the laborious work of the plantations. 
Ma y we not well fear that, because 
of the demoralized state into which the 
race was unmercifully thrown by this 
denunciation, the beginning of the propaganda of industrial training for Ne ­
groes with all of its fault finding of the 
race was planned by Negroes who saw a 
chance to become popular with the white 
people of the South? 
The Louisvill e Courier-Journal says: 
"The workers for Negro welfare in 
this country are divided into those who 
believe that the Negro's destiny and 
salvation lie in manual labor and menial 
service, and those who claim that his 
potential capabilities are no more restricted than those of his white neighbor." 
As k any intelligent well balanced Ne ­
gro to which group of these two he belongs and he wil l declare himself forever on the side of the group who believes in the capabilities of the Negro. 
By so declaring himself on this question 
the Negro but proves that he is human, 
that he is a man like other men ; that 
he believes that what thousands of the 
Negro race builders, dead and living, 
have done for race uplift and advancement can be done, is being done and 
will continue to be done by the Negro 
as long as a provident Ruie r of all 
things spares the Negro to live upon the 
face of the earth. In a word, he but 
proves his faith in his race and refuses 
to do what no other race ever has done 
against itself—preach its own inferiority at the suggestion of its enemies. MEMBER S 
Durin g the month of Ma y 465 new 
members were added to the Association, 
making a total enrollment of over 7,500. 
O f the many contributions which have 
recently come to the Association none is 
more eloquent of the spirit which animates the organization than a contribution from the colored sailors of the U . 
S. Steamship "Nebraska: " 
U . S. S . NEBRASKA , 
SOUTHER N DRIL L GROUNDS , 
Apri l 25, 1915. 
GENTLEMEN : 
Enclosed you wil l find fourteen dollars which we the members of The 
Nebraska Social Club contribute to the 
N . A . A . C. P. to be used as_you see fit. 
W e are interested in the wor k of the 
N . A . A . C. P . and trust this mite wil l 
be a help to the cause. W e represent 
the full number of the Negroes attached 
to this ship. 
Wit h best wishes for success in your 
work, 
Respectfully, 
TH E NEBRASK A SOCIA L CLUB . 
BRANCHE S 
Te n new branches in the Middl e West 
have been chartered by the N . A . A . C. 
P. : In Illinois, Cairo, Carbondale, 
Evansville, Jacksonville and Peoria ; and 
Champaign and Urbana , forming the 
Twi n City Branch ; Columbus and Dayton, Ohio ; and Terr e Haute and Vin -
cennes, Indiana. 
Ou r branches continue to work to 
suppress the photoplay based on Dixon's 
"Clansman. " Fro m a reliable source we 
hear that protests against Sheldon's play 
"Th e Nigger, " made by our Ohio 
branches, Mr . Harr y C. Smith of the 
Cleveland Gazette, and the Ministers' 
Alliances, not only prevented the production of the play but discouraged the 
owners of the "Clansman" film from 
continuing their preparations to produce 
the latter in Ohio. 
Boston was victorious in its effort in 
the Legislature which finally passed the 
bill creating a Boar d of Censorship consisting of the Mayor, the Chief of Police 
and the Chief Magistrate. A bitter 
fight was made over an amendment 
which the Branch and other friends 
finally succeeded in adding to the bill and 
which provided that a majority rather 
than a unanimous vote of the Boar d was 
necessary for a decision. The moving 
picture interests made desperate efforts 
to kil l this amendment. 
Immediately upon.its appointment the 
new Board was petitioned for a public 
hearing against further production of 
the play in Boston. The Board decided 
that the license of the theatre should not 
be revoked or suspended but gave no 
reason and declined to state whether all 
three of its members agreed or whether 
there was a dissent. The Boar d rendered 
its decision without having given any 
public hearing except to hear arguments 
relating to the scope of its power and the 
rules which should govern its determination in cases which might come before it 
under this new act. 
Tt is reported that the management is 
losing money on the production and that 
the attendance represents largely paper 
houses. That the Abolition spirit, however, is not rlead in New England is indicated by the decision of the Mayo r of 
Springfield who said he would license 
the play for that city only when the 
colored people had consented. It has 
been barred by the District Police in 
every city in Massachusetts for Sunday 
performance. 
In Wilmington, Del., City Councilman 
John O. Hopkins, the only Negro member of that body, introduced an ordinance to prohibit the exhibition of any 
National 
assn for 
the 
Advancement of 
Colored 
People 148 TH E CRISI S 
moving pictures likely to cause ill feeling between the white and colored races. 
Mr . Hopkin s explained that in drawing 
up the ordinance he had in mind two 
photoplays which had been prohibited i n 
some other cities and said that his ordinance had been inspired by the Wil ­
mington Branch of the N . A . A . C. P. 
The ordinance has been given its final 
reading and referred to the Mayo r for 
approval. It makes the Boar d of Police 
Commissioners the censors of questionable shows and gives them authority to 
stop them. It provides a fine of fifty 
dollars for every offense. 
The Northern Californi a Branch exhausted every means to suppress the 
picture in Oakland but was unsuccessful. 
In their effort they had the assistance of 
Mr . Sledge and Mr . Clarence Darrow, 
attorneys. 
Last month we published a telegram 
from our Chicago Branc h just as we 
went to press giving the news of Mayo r 
Thompson's refusal to license "Th e 
Birt h of a Nation. " The play had already been licensed by his predecessor. 
Commenting on this the N . Y . Evening Post said: 
"The promoters had made a barefaced 
plea that the spectacle has 'a note of 
optimism, brotherly love, and readjustment of racial conditions intended to 
soothe and brighten,' but this the press 
and the Mayo r riddled. The play's exclusion must also assist in defeating a 
bill pending at Springfield to abolish the 
Chicago Boar d of Censorship, which has 
a reputation for great watchfulness and 
efficiency." 
Meantime we regret to learn the matter has been thrown into court bv an injunction against the mayor. 
St. Pau l at its annual meeting voiced 
protests against motion pictures discriminating against colored people, special mention being made of Sheldon's 
"Nigger " and "The Birt h of a Nation. " 
The meeting was held in the Plymouth 
Congregational Church, the chief address being made by Governor W . S. 
Hammond . 
m 
MEETING S 
In addition to the protest meetings 
against "The Birt h of a Nation " many 
other meetings have been held : the meeting in connection with the Nationa l Con ­
ference of Charities and Correction at 
Baltimore where Miss Ovington, Pro ­
fessor Pickens and Professor Cook 
made addresses; meetings under the 
auspices of the Distric t of Columbia , 
Philadelphia and East Orange Branches 
at which Professor Pickens spoke; a 
Memoria l Da y meeting in Harrisburg ; 
a mass meeting in San Francisco arranged by the Northern Californi a 
Branc h with the Ho n J. Kah n as 
speaker ; and a meeting to commemorate 
the birthday of John Brow n held by the 
Toledo Branch . General Isaac Sherwood, a Democratic Unite d States Con ­
gressman, in the course of his address at 
this meeting read an editorial written by 
himself fifty years ago in which he predicted that the name of John Brow n 
martyred for the freedom of slaves 
would stand out i n history long after 
the name of Governor Wis e of Vir ­
ginia, the man who executed Brown , was 
forgotten. General Sherwood at that 
time was editor of a paper at Bryan , 
Ohio, known as "Th e Williams County 
Leader. " H e stated that his was the 
only paper i n the Unite d States, except 
Abolitio n papers, that went into mourning over the death of John Brown . Mr . 
Albertus Brow n presided at the meeting, 
explaining the purposes of the N . A . A _ 
C. P . and stating that the Toledo Branch 
now numbers over 135 members. Ad ­
dresses were also made by Fathe r 
O'Brie n and by the Hon . Wilbu r E.. 
Kin g whose speech on "America n Citizenship" was a splendid plea for equal 
rights. 
The President of the Decatur, Ill.,. 
Branch, the Rev. E . M . Antrim , said in 
a Memoria l Day address: 
"Ou r work for the colored-man is still 
incomplete. He was emancipated fifty 
years ago, but still lacks much of that 
larger freedom and opportunity which 
are inseparable from America n ideals 
and citizenship—what we must give him 
is a place in the sun—freedom of life 
and limb, freedom to toil and think, freedom to love and aspire. Man y opportunities of labor and law are still denied 
him, and it remains for us who are fifty 
years away from the ideals and motives,. 
the feelings, and sympathies of long ago,. 
to see to it that, like every other citizen. N. A. A. C. P. 149 
of the .United. States, he gets a. square 
deal." 
Representatives of our Association 
have been heard before the following 
conferences: at the Ne w England Baptist Missionary Convention held in the 
Mount Olivet Baptist Church, Ne w 
Yor k City, where Mr . Dodson spoke on 
the work of the Association before the 
Sunday School Department, Miss 
Ovington before the Women's Department, and Miss Caroline M . Dexter before the General Convention. Miss 
Dexter and Dr. Y . Morto n Jones represented the Association at the Ne w Yor k 
Annua l Conference of the A . M . E . 
Church held at the Bridge Street 
Church, Brooklyn, and Miss Ovington 
spoke before the Ne w Yor k Annua l 
Conference of the A . M . E . Zion Church 
held at the First A . M . E . Zion Church, 
Brooklyn . 
SCHOLARSHIP S 
Recently the office of the N . A . A . C. 
P. was asked to make recommendations 
for scholarships which the Ethica l Culture School offers annually to colored 
children. The names of the children 
recommended are included in the announcement of results given below: 
The following children were awarded scholarships in the Ethica l Culture 
School for the year 1915-16. These 
scholarships were granted to those children who seemed to offer the greatest 
promise intellectually, or who had some 
unusual gift by which they would render 
service to the world. 
Victori a Rich , whose father is a 
nephew of Victoria Earle Matthews, 
was admitted to the Kindergarten; 
Walte r Handy, who has stood at the 
head of his class in the public schools for 
some time received a scholarship in the 
Open Ai r School, V I Grade ; Spencer 
McEvoy , of Brookly n has been admitted 
to the V Grade and Langton Daniel, the 
son of the curate of St. Philip's P. E . 
Church, to the V I Grade, Open Ai r Department. It is also expected that 
Eugene Marti n will gain a scholarship 
in the Y . Grade of the indoor department. Eugene is the son of Mr . and 
Mrs. Marti n of the Martin-Smit h Musi c 
School. 
In the graduating class of the Ethica l 
Culture Ar t Hig h School, Albert Smith, 
a colored boy, carried off the highest 
honors of that department, the Henr y 
Ollesheimer scholarship, which is given 
to that student who ranks highest as a 
student and as an individual. This 
means uniformly high work in all his 
studies, academic as well as art. H e will 
continue his work next year in the 
Academy of Design. 
OFFICERS , COLLEG E CHAPTE R No. 1. N.A.A.C.P 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y 
And so ends the Education Number of God, Nineteen Hundred and Fifteen 
of T H E C RISI S dedicated to the aspiring and of the regained freedom of our 
youth of our ancient race, in the Year fathers, the fifty-second. 15 0 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Is He Insured? 
"It is the general consensus of opinion that a man's duty to his family includes a reasonable 
provision for the future. To die with the wolf so near the door that he is certain to be found 
waiting at the portals when the funeral procession returns from the cemetery is about as serious 
a crime as a man can commit i n this life. It makes no difference how carefully the man may 
protect his loved ones during his lifetime, if he leaves them without protection at his death he 
has failed in his duty woefully. 
Strangely enough it sometimes happens that the wife herself is partly to blame for the 
negligence of the husband. Of course, it should be the husband's business to attend to such 
matters without a reminder from anybody, but when we are in perfect health and the blood is 
pulsing vigorously through our veins, death is one of the possibilities to which we give little 
thought. Die? Wh y should we think about dying when we have so many useful and profitable 
years before us? 
Lots of men who really intend to insure their lives some day put it off until it is too late 
simply because they do not realize the immediate need of such a step and it is in such cases 
that the wife's duty is to interpose with a plea that this important matter shall be no longer 
postponed. 
Many women hesitate to do this. There are women who even feel that it is improper for 
them to "suggest the subject of insurance to the husband. They seem to feel that they are in 
danger of exciting suspicion that they desire to profit by their death—that they are imbued with 
a mercenary spirit that is thoroughly selfish and unwomanly. 
Nothing could be further from the truth, and the quicker the wives and the mothers get rid 
of this erroneous idea the better it will be for them and those dependent on them in such a 
time of emergency. Instead of deeming such ideas selfish and unwomanly, she should apply the 
ordinary rules of logic to the situation and abide by the results. 
If the husband and father should announce his intentions of going upon a long journey— 
say, to Afric a or Australia, for example—she would not think of permitting him to leave her 
without making proper provision for her support during his absence. If he showed a disposition 
to do this highly improbable thing she would not hesitate to call him to account, and she would 
feel that she was justified in going to any extreme to compel him to make such arrangements that 
neither she nor the children might suffer for the necessities of life while he was traveling to 
the other end of the earth. 
If you—my dear fellow who reads this—go away for a week, is it not your first thought 
to leave sufficient money at home to meet the little expenses that are certain to arise even within 
so brief a space of time as a few days? Woul d you think of taking even the shortest tripwithout leaving a few dollars that the wife might use in case of emergency? Yet; any day—any 
hour—-you may be called upon to take the longest journey of your life—the journey from which 
you will never return—that journey to the land from which you send no remittances! If your 
common sense tells you that the little woman at home may need some money when you make 
these short trips, what do you think will happen to her if you go out into the great unknown 
with no other provision for her than an oft-repeated intention to insure your life? Little good 
will your intentions do her when the landlord comes to inquire about the rent. 
As a matter of fact, no woman has the right to let her husband neglect this important duty. 
If he does not seem to realize his great responsibility it is her place to tell him about it and 
keep on telling him day by day until he brings home the policy as evidence that her efforts have 
borne good fruit. A n insurance policy on the husband's life is one of the rights of which no 
woman should allow herself to be deprived. She owes it to herself and children to see that 
this wall ot protection is placed between them and immediate want, and this is especially true 
when the husband has no other estate to leave. So, ask him, Mrs. Wife—make sure today— 
IS H E INSURED ? 
Take this insurance in a strong, well managed company owned 
and operated by our people. The only old-line legal reserve 
Life Insurance Company of the Race. 
STANDAR D LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
200 Auburn Avenue, ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
Capital Fully Paid - - $100,000.00 
Ove r One Million and a Half Insurance in Force 
issues Policies from $250.00 to $5,000.00 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
HEMA N E . PERRY , President 
HARR Y H . PACE , Secretary 'C. July, 1915) 
Please 
send me *»# 
particulars 
about 
insurance. 
Amount $. . 
Sex 
Age 
Weight 
Occupation. . 
Name. .... . 
Address... . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 151 
IHIIIIIIIIIHIIIIIJIIIIIIIIIIIIIffl 
Normal Work at Wilberforce Approved by the State 
EXTENSIV E IMPROVEMENT S T O B E MAD E 
Summer Term 1915 to be Omitted 
T
H E Norma l an d Industria l Departmen t at Wilberforc e is no w one o f the institu ­
tion s i n the state o f Ohi o approve d by the Superintenden t o f Publi c Instructio n 
fo r the trainin g o f teachers fo r elementar y an d specia l work . 
Teachers graduatin g fro m this departmen t will , withou t examination , be entitle d to a 
state certificat e goo d i n Ohi o an d recognize d i n thirt y othe r states. 
T o bette r equi p the departmen t fo r its work , extensiv e improvements an d addition s to 
building s wil l be made ; shops fo r the mechanica l trades; a hospita l building ; gym ­
nasiu m an d additiona l accommodation s fo r teachers. 
The Summer Term wil l be omitte d durin g the presen t summe r whil e these improve ­
ments ar e bein g made . I n future , summe r students wil l hav e advantag e o f these 
improvements an d summe r wor k wil l hav e ful l value , entitlin g graduate s to certificat e 
withou t examination . 
No Summe r Session 191 5 
REGISTE R NO W FO R SESSIO N 191 6 
3C 
l.^il,;!,.^. I..NJI ; I,.,;,.., I.. 11.: 11 • i t. i! i I ,,l 11:1 III 11,: 11J11,11M nl I!;! i i: I,! II,!!, il I, I! !:l III t, ii.l i] J1 11., 1,111.1 l.i I.. I„ i,. 11,,!.., I, I, i,. I., I.. I ;i I, I., I i.,;., I il.,l„l.i i:],!:,,]:,!:.!!.,!-,,;.!!.,!:,!: ,1.11, i I., I], 11^7 
Free to every Woma n 
^ ™ ^ ™ copy of "Ladies 
Cyclopedia of Health and 
" " B "™B Beauty." This book contains information indispensable to every 
woman; on every subject women are most interested 
in. Tells how to cultivate health and beauty, what 
to use and how to use it. 
LOUI S M CCREAR Y 
1312 Farna m Stree t Omaha , Neb . 
"THE LIFE AND WORKS OF PAU L 
LAURENC E DUNBAR" 
Containing his COMPLETE POETICA L WORKS, his best short stories, 
numerous anecdotes and a complete 
biography by Lida Keck Wiggins. This 
great book should be in every Negro 
home. Dunbar was the World's Greatest Negro Poet and his work stands in 
a class alone. Contains 430 pages—60 
full-page illustrations Price $1.75 net. 
Postage extra 15c. AGENTS WANTED. 
TEXA S COLORED TEACHERS' 
AGENCY 
Book Department, Desk D 
1025 Boll St. Dallas, Texas 
Note to Teachers—A post card will 
bring information concerning our teachers* placing agency. We recommend 
competent teachers to positions all over 
the South. Address inquiry to Registration Department. 
Mme. Cornelia's Brown Improved Face Powder 
is made of the best and purest materials in three 
brown shades. Price , 25c. Tria l size, 15c. 
Samples, 4c. Agents wanted. References and 
terms. 
Mme. CORNELIA 
Box 36. West Farms Station New York City 
Agents wanted b y the EARL E PERFUM E 
CO . Send 2c . stamp for price list. 
P. O . Bo x 39 0 Newport, R. I. 
COLORE D AGENTS WANTED 
Liberal commission; a postal brings particulars. 
TH E PATRICK-LEE REALT Y CO . 
Dept. O. . 2743 Welton Street. Denver, Colo . N. E. Corner 
Mention TH E CRISIS 
A GOO D BARGAI N 
Imported linen tablecloth made by French Nuns, 
72 x 72 inches; suitable for daily service. Beautiful 
centre with border of magnificent renaissance lace. 
Al l hand made'; $8.00, worth $50.00 if made by any 
American woman. Wit h tablecloth I send free of 
charge my famous oil painting 41/2 x 8 inches: Moonlight on the Potomac, Washington, D. C , in Distance. 
All sent you at my expense for full examination. 
No obligation to you whatever. Mrs. Sparks, Artist 
Suite 29, Astoria, Washington, D. C. 
WANTE D 
A position as laundress, instructress or plain sewing teacher, by September or October 1st. Referenccs. 
MRS. L . M. B. . 205 Hickory Street. Orande. N . J . 
REGALI A 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalog upon request. 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
8th and Plum Streets, Cincinnati. Ohio 1S2 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
TEACHER S The new efficiency era calls 
for the modern way of 
selecting teachers, through a live agency that furnishes 
the connecting medium in a business way, saves time 
of school officials, relieves teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting and covers the whole country. 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode 
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia 
and West Virginia. 
Our list of teachers covers even a wider territory. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1335 T Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
You can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU . Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Why can't you? By our method you can 
start with $5 and up. We offer you thirty live, 
money-making mail order plans. You can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. We furnish circulars, printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today—Now! 
MAI L DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
517 Dearborn Street . Chicago, 111. 
Mak e Extr a Mone y Eac h Wee k 
Light, pleasant and very profitable work. Take 
orders for our high grade calling cards at 50 for 25 
cents with name and address. Big demand everywhere. Large commissions. Exclusive territory. 
Write now for samples and terms. 
TH E HOUSE O F CHOWNING, Indianapolis. Ind. 
Wealth is Powe r 
The Unio n Development Company's 
stock is a wealth producer. $40,000.00 
of stock for sale at $10.00 per share. 
Stock is now paying 7%. Ever y dollar 
invested in first class improved business 
property, located i n the heart of the city ; 
no risk, no failure. Company duly 
chartered under the laws of Georgia ; is 
composed of some of the most successful 
and influential business men and women 
of the city and has great earning possibilities. Send at once for free circular 
giving full information. 
Union Development Co. 
45 8 West Broad Street Savannah, Ga . 
The Virginia Normal 
and 
Industrial Institute 
Petersburg , Va . 
Healthful location, competent 
faculty, new dormitory for 
boys, new course of study in ­
cluding four years of Hig h 
School wor k and two years 
of Norma l School training. 
Courses offered i n agriculture, domestic science, manual training, business and 
• music. Thirty-thir d session 
begins September 13th. Fo r 
further information address 
JOH N M . GANDY , Presiden t 
Pianos-Player Pianos 
Factory to home 
B Y M Y PLA N 
of selling direct from factory to home. I can save you 
from $110 to $200 on my celebrated Evans Artist 
Model Pianos. 
Two to Four Years to Pay 
The easiest kind of terms, weekly, monthly, quarterly or yearly payments to suit your convenience. 
Al l middlemen, jobbers, dealers and agents 
profits cut out. No charge for salesroom expense for my 
office Is in my factory. These are some of the reasons 
why I can sell the Evans Artist Model Pianos for such little 
money. Let me send you the other reasons Write today. 
30 Days Free Trial 
We allow all freight charges, let you use the 
beautiful Evans Artist Model Piano for thirty days,
 y 
free. If you are not entirely satisfied, we will take JV, 
it back without any cost to you—you are the sole Ay 
judge to decide. If you want to keep it, you may /ityyzrJ* 
do so on our low factory wholesale price on/^V& 
most convenient terms. ^ 
Free Music Lessons 
Mention T: H E CRISIS 
H.GEO.DAVENP0RT. 
commercial artist 
letter heads 
ENVELOPE DESIGNS newspaper 
work 
studio 
1819 De la chaise st. 
New Orleans, LA. 
CARTOONS, ETC. 
envelope covers 
book Illustrations •Business CARDS 
TO EVERY CUSTOMER we will give a two year* come of piano 
Instruction free. Ask about our Insur 
ance plan and our method of saving 
you money. Write today. 
F. O. Evans Piano Co. 
chicago dept. 81 
mail this coupon today 
P.O. Evans Piano Co., Dept. 81 ChicTH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
WESTER N UNIVERSIT Y 
and the 
State Industrial Department 
Quindaro, Kansas City. Kansas 
Ideally located with city advantages and country 
surroundings in "free Kansas." A good, wholesome 
atmosphere tor the growing student. Strict discipline. 
Good literary course. Splendid Trades Department. 
Faculty of 24 members. Modern conveniences. Unusual advantages in all branches of school work. 
Music department second to none in this section. A 
Commercial Course giving superior training in banking and business principles. A bank in connection 
with the department. Special course in military band 
and orchestra music will he given in along with 
trades. Terms reasonable. Write for catalog. 
20th Annual Opening, September 13, 1915 
DR . H . T . KEALING , Pres., Quindaro, Kansas 
Pau l Quinn College 
WACO , TEXA S 
(Establishe d i n 1881) 
Motto: Efficiency 
Excellent 
Industrial and Business Courses 
J. K. WILLIAMS W. L. SIMMONS 
President Secretary 
SAMUEL HUSTON COLLEGE 
AUSTIN , TEXA S 
Phenominal Progress During Last Fifteen Years. 
Christian Hom e for Youn g People without 
regard to Sex or Church . 
Propert y Valuation , $150.000 
24 Teacher s 523 Pupils 
Strong Faculty Especially Selected for Classical 
Work . 
Healthful and Inviting Invironments. 
Lowest Rates Possible for Best Accommodation 
Address: R. S. LOVINGGOOD. Pres., Austin, Texas 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits System! 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August 
Box 25, Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, O. 
153 
MORGA N COLLEG E AN D BRANCHE S 
All Schools Open September 24, 1915 
JOH N O . SPENCER , Ph.D. , President 
Morgan College, Baltimore, Md . 
Location! Central in great college town between 
North and South. Courses: Preparatory, Normal, 
Music Advanced Education, Collegiate, Appropriate 
degrees. Instructors: Seven Colleges and Universities represented in Faculty, Dormitories: For a 
limited number, steam heat, furnished. Terms: Very 
reasonable. Dean; Rev. Charles Edmund Young, 
D. D. 
Princess Ann e Academy , Princess Anne , Md . 
(Eastern Branch of Maryland Agricultural College) 
Location: The famous Eastern Shore of Maryland, Somerset County. Courses: Preparatory, 
Normal, Industrial, Domestic Science, Music Instructors: College and technically trained. New 
Dormitories: Furnished, steam heat, carefully supervised. Terms: Tuition free; other expenses 
moderate. SUMME R SESSION: .Tune 28 to Aug. 
6, 1915. Special training in Domestic Science, Rural 
Education, Nature Study, School Organization, School 
Management, etc. Terms: Ent. fee, $1.00. Board, 
$3.00 per week; no other charges. Principal: Rev. 
Thomas H. Kiah, A. B. 
Virginia Collegiate and Industrial Institute 
Lynchburg, Va. 
Location: On beautiful hill in suburbs of growing city. Courses: Preparatory, Normal, Domestic 
Science, Gardening, Music. Instructors: College 
trained, carefully selected. Dormitories for fifty 
girls; furnished, steam heat, electric light, carefully 
supervised. Terms within reach of all. Principal: 
Frank Trigg, A. M. 
LEGA L DIRECTOR Y 
Telephones: {Central 104-W Main 61 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW NOTARY PUBLIC 
1607 Williamson Building Cleveland. Ohio 
Office L. D. Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L. D. Telephone 5277-M Market 
GEORG E A . DOUGLA S 
COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis Minn. 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
Offices: Suite 802 Svkes Block 
Near Third and Hennepin 
Minneapolis Minn. 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia Pa. 
Tel. 5437 Fore Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
34 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N . 
ATTORNEYS-AT-LAW 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
Mention T H E CRISIS 154 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
17 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY :: ATLANTA , GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F . Morton, Jr., A . M . 
A n aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send order to 
JAME S F . MORTON , JR. 
211 West 138th Street -:- Ne w York , N . Y . 
"GLEANING S FRO M DIXIE-LAND** 
Ten poems by 
EFFI E T. BATTLE, A.M . 
"Mrs. Battle has an individual gift of melody." 
—Springfield Republican. 
"You owe it to your race to publish your poems in 
book form."—Editor, Southwestern Christian Advocate. 
"Verses are smooth, graceful, high-minded and clear, 
reverent to all truth, appreciative of all beauty and 
true inspiration."—George W. Cable. 
PRICE 25 CENTS . 
ADDRESS : OKOLONA INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL, 
Okolona, Miss. 
$25.00 PER WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handlin, 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish- America 
War" combined with "History of the Negro Race. 
400 pages* 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A. JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street NEW YORK 
JAC K JOHNSON 
Should have as respectable a place in literature as 
Goliath or Willard . . .The poem, "Jack Johnson, 
Worl d Champion Pugilist " gives him this. Suitable 
for your libraryCLEAN—CLASSY—RAC Y 
Price 25 cents cash—Not Stamps. 
Address: J . F. CATHEY . Pub.. Reotlesvllle. Okla. 
AGENT S WANTE D FOR 
W . T. McKissick & Co s 
FAMOUS 9 0 DAYS TREATMENTS 
No . 1, No. 2 an d No . 3 
For Scalp , Hair and Ski n 
P. O . Box 102, W ILMINGTON , D EL . 
YOUNG' S BOO K EXCHANG E 
(George Young) 
Novel Souvenir Post Cards 
Colore d Author s and Books on Rac e Problems 
a Specialty. 
135 W. 135th Street New York City 
Opens- July, 1. The Ocean House Better 
known as 
SEA ISLE CITY 
N. J. 
Closes Sept. 15 
Th e Gordo n Sea View , 
Personally managed by Mrs. Luc y Lee. This is 
the only property we own on the Atlantic Beach 
front. Every room opens on the ocean. Bathing, 
boating, fishing, music, dancing. A beautiful view of 
the ocean while dining from our new conservatory 
dining room. 
Special rates to school teachers for July. 
Writ e for rates. Address: 
MRS. LUC Y LEE, 5 Plain St., Elmhurst, N. Y. 
After July 1st, The Ocean House, Sea Isle, N. J. 
Season, June 1st to September 30th 
MILLER' S COTTAGE , Luray, Va . 
In the heart of the mountains; an ideal resort 
uniting all city gayeties with the quiet of the country. Every summer comfort; cool, airy rooms; within five minutes' walk of the great Lura y Caverns; 
tempting table, tennis courts, fishing, music, dancing. 
Booklet on request. 
MRS . ALDIN A HAWKIN S HAINES 
Luray, Virginia . 
HOTE L LINCOL N 
(American or European Plan) 
Open s Ma y 15th under new manag
Combines the restful 
quiet of the country and 
sea-shore with the gayeties of a great city. Only 
a few minutes' ride by 
train separates New 
York City from this delightful spot. HOTEL 
LINCOLN is within 
three minutes' walk of 
the beach where there 
are bathing, boating and 
fishing. 26 magnificently appointed rooms, 
single or en suite. Every 
convenience to suit the 
most exacting. 
EXCELLENT CUISINE—MODERATE RATES—BEST OF SERVICE 
For information write C. A . BRECKENR1DGE, Prop 
Telephone 1417 Hammels Arverne, Long Island 
PERSONA L CARD S 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR . GERTRUD E E . CURTI S 
SURGEON DENTIST 
188 W. 135th Street New York City 
WILLIA M L. BELL ERNEST W. KING 
Associate Architects 
300 Odd Fellow Bldg. ATLANTA , GA . 
Mention TH I CRISIS Attention , Masons ! 
A New Book of Interest to You 
Prince Hall and His Followers 
A carefully argued defense of the legitimacy of Negro Masonry in the 
United States, with notes and documents, by 
GEORG E W . CRAWFORD , 32° 
A graduate of Tuskegee, Talladega and Yale , formerly clerk of the 
Probate Court of New Haven and now a practicing lawyer there. Mr . 
Crawford is one of the best informed Masons in the country. 
COMMENT S 
Fro m Jame s F . Rikards, 33°, Most Puissant Sovereig n Gran d Commander , 
A . & A . Scottish Rit e : 
"'Princ e Hal l and Hi s Followers, ' writte n by a scholarl y Afro-American , pre ­
sents to the Masoni c worl d a treatis e o n the legitimac y o f Negr o Masonr y that 
shoul d he i n the hand s o f ever y Maso n seekin g fur Truth . Th e informatio n 
containe d in the chapte r devote d to Princ e Hal l is alon e wort h to the youn g 
Maso n the pric e of the hook. Brothe r Crawford's easy an d pleasin g style 
creates i n the reade r a desir e to complet e the volum e befor e puttin g the boo k 
out o f his hands. " 
Fro m Henr y A . Spencer , 33° , Gran d Maste r an d Gran d Commande r o f 
Knights Templa r o f Ne w Yor k : 
"Th e boo k tills a long-fel t wan t amon g intelligen t Mason s o f ou r Race . 
T o kno w that we are right, an d to substantiat e tha t fact by intelligen t researc h 
an d logica l statements, is wort h mor e to us tha n wha t the othe r fello w ma y 
say. This is wha t Brothe r Crawford's boo k does; an d it shoul d be i n the hand s 
of ever y Maso n o f ou r Race. " 
Fro m Jos e H . Sherwood , 33° , Past Gran d Maste r o f Minnesot a an d 
Deput y Imperia l Potentat e o f Shriners: 
" A ver y stron g brief, settin g fort h plainl y the legitimac y o f Princ e Hal l 
Masonry , and , as well , a ster n cal l to al l Xegroe s to assume ful l prid e i n the 
happ y possessio n o f a Rit e whic h ca n sho w suc h clea r proofs o f its contentions. " 
Fro m Willia m H . Grimshaw , 33° , Past Gran d Maste r o f the Distric t o f 
Columbi a an d autho r of " A Histor y o f Colore d Freemasonry " : 
" I hav e rea d wit h grea t pleasur e 'Princ e Hal l an d Hi s Followers. ' Th e boo k 
is wel l written , containin g clea r an d convincin g diction . Th e impartia l accurac y 
wit h whic h the facts ar e marshalle d make s the boo k a ver y valuabl e asset 
t o Masons. " 
Price One Dollar. Postage Extra. 
ORDE R NO W AGENT S WANTE D 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: New Yor k 
Mention TH I Cutl l A VALUABL E BOO K 
The Education of the 
Negro Prior to 1861 
The History of the Education of the Colored People of the 
United States from the Beginning of Slavery to the Civil War 
By 
CARTER GODWIN WOODSON, Ph. D. 
(HARVARD) 
460 pp. $2.00; By mail $2.15 
"This book is neither a controversial treatise on Negro education nor a 
study of recent problems. Dr. Woodson has given us something new. H e 
has by scientific treatment amassed numerous facts to show the persistent 
strivings of ante-bellum Negroes anxious to be enlightened. Wha t they 
accomplished is all but marvelous." 
The author aims to put the student of history in touch with the great 
movements which effected the uplift of the Negroes, and to determine the 
causes which finally reduced many of them to heathenism. 
The titles of the chapters are: "Introduction, " "Religio n with Letters, " 
"Education as a Right of Man, " "Actua l Education, " "Better Beginnings, " 
"Educating the Urban Negro, " "The Reaction," "Religio n without Letters, " 
"Learnin g in Spite of Opposition, " "Educating Negroes Transplanted to 
Free Soil, " "Highe r Education, " "Vocationa l Training, " "Education at 
Public Expense." In the appendix are found a number of valuable documents. The volume contains also a critical bibliography and a helpful index. 
OPINIONS 
" I lik e it ver y much . Yo u seem to hav e loosene d up o n you r styl e a bit an d yo u hav e don e 
an excellen t piec e o f research . .. . I hope tha t you r boo k wil l hav e a goo d sale."—Edwar d Chan -
nin g McLean , Professo r o f Ancien t an d Moder n History , Harvar d University . 
"It seems clea r to me tha t yo u hav e mad e a substantia l contributio n to the subjec t an d I kno w 
I shal l profit b y it."—Frederic k .T. Turner , Professo r o f History , Harvar d University . 
" I though t at first it woul d be ou t o f m y line , bu t o n turnin g its pages, I discovere d tha t 
it ma y wel l hol d the attentio n o f everybod y wit h a n intelligen t interest i n the colore d people . 
Yo u writ e easil y an d flexibl y an d hav e certainl y compile d importan t materia l i n the tru e spiri t o f 
scholarship . I congratulat e yo u sincerely."—Ferdinan d Schevill , Professo r o f Histor y i n th e Uni ­
versit y o f Chicago . 
"It seems to me tha t yo u hav e take n a hel d o f whic h littl e ha s bee n know n an d develope d 
i n it a most interestin g an d valuabl e book. I am gla d to hav e it i n m y librar y an d rejoic e tha t I 
hav e ha d the privileg e of some persona l acquaintanc e wit h the author."—Franci s W . Shepardson , 
Professo r o f Histor y i n the Universit y o f Chicago . 
" I am delighte d wit h the thoroughl y scholarl y wa y i n whic h it ha s bee n pu t togethe r an d I 
kno w enoug h abou t the subjec t to appreciat e wha t it ha s cost yo u i n tim e an d effort to perfor m 
this work."—D,- . Rober t E . Park . 
"It is the stor y o f the effort o n the part o f certai n agencie s to educat e the Negro . It is abov e 
all the stor y o f the striving s o f the Negr o himsel f unde r tremendou s difficultie s an d opposition , to 
lear n things, , to kno w more , to be more . . . . Apar t fro m the fun d o f informatio n o n the subjec t 
whic h Dr . Woodso n has her e offered , the suprem e poin t o f this stud y is the unconquerabl e wil l o f 
the Negro . . . . Th e book , as a whole , is a n illuminatio n o f the recen t developmen t o f educatio n 
amon g the colore d people."—Th e Washingto n Star. 
THIS BOOK MA Y BE OBTAINED FRO M TH E AUTHO R 
2223 Twelfth Street, Northwest Washington, D. C. 
Mention T m Cuii i 