THE CRISIS 
MARCH 
1915 "Out of the House of Bondage" 
The latest and greatest book from the pen of 
PROFESSOR KELLY MILLER 
"N o man of his race has so sure a power of prunning falacies with passionless 
intellectual severity."—Boston Transcript. 
"Th e man searches deeply into underlying causes."—St. Joseph, Mo., News-Press. 
" A philosophic treatise."—Charlotte, N. C , Observer. 
"N o student of social conditions of America at the present time will want to fail to see 
it on his shelves."—Southern Workman. 
242 Pages. Price $1.50. 
Agents Wanted Everywhere 
Address: Prof. KELLY MILLER, Howard University 
Washington, D. C. 
A Life of 
NORRIS WRIGH T CUNEY 
By 
MAUD CUNEY HAR E 
(His Daughter) 
Would you like to read about a red-blooded man who was one 
of the great leaders of Negro Americans? Would you like to inspire 
your children with the life of this "Tribune of the Black People"? 
250 pages. Postpaid, $1.50. Best terms to agents. 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue New York City 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D OF TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T O F 
COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 7 0 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Conducted by 
W . E. BURGHARD T DU BOIS 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , Business Manage r 
Contents Copyrighted, 1915, by the National Association (or the Advancement or Colored People 
Contents for March, 1915 
PICTURES 
COVE R DESIGN. Photographed from Life. By L. H. Miner. Page 
ERNEST EVERET T JUST. Spingarn Medalist 248 
ARTICLES 
TH E WHIT E WITCH . A Poem. By James Weldon Johnson 239 
LINCOLN. By T. J. Calloway 240 
A N OLD FOLKS' HOME 242 
A N OPEN WINDOW . By Agnes P. Berry, M. D 244 
PAEAN. A Poem. By Otto L. Bohanan 245 
DEPARTMENTS 
COLOR LINE — 215 
MEN OF TH E MONT H 221 
OPINION 225 
EDITORIAL 235 
TH E BURDEN 250 
TEN CENTS A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWAL S : Whe n a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the wrapper. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York. N. Y. 212 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High 
School, Normal School and College, with 
manual training and domestic science. Among 
the teachers are graduates of Yale, Harvard, 
Dartmouth and Wellesley. Forty-five years 
of successful work have been completed. 
Students come from all parts of the South. 
Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWARD T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. Noted for Honest and Thorough 
Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for self-help. 
Fall Term Began September, 1914. 
For information address 
President R. W. McGRANAHAN 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
The Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
Maintained by the governments of North Carolina and 
of the United States. Open 
all the year round. For 
males only. Fall term began September 1, 1914. 
Board, lodging and tuition, 
$7 per month. Best opportunities for Negro youth. 
Night school for indigent 
but ambitious young men. 
For catalog or further information, address 
PRESIDEN T DUDLE Y 
A. & M. College Greensboro, N. C. 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA, GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A , 
athletics, all live features. 
For information address 
JOHN HOPE, President 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding and day school for 
girls, under the direction of the Sisters of St 
Mary. Address: 
THE SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
611 N. 43d St. W. Philadelphia, Pa. 
AVOI D BA D SCHOOLS 
Educate your children at home under our expert teachers 
Course s fo r Adults 
Pupils received at any time. Writ e to 
Educational Extension School, Box 3194 Station F, Washington, D. C. 
Highly Endorsed. Financially Responsible. 
WILEY UNIVERSITY 
MARSHALL, TEXAS 
Recognized as a college of the First Class 
by Texas and Louisiana State Boards of 
Education. Harvard, Yale and Columbia 
represented on its faculty; students gathered from ten different states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M. W. DOGAN, President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 C. W. MORROW, Dean 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational 
and Social Science Courses. Pioneer in 
Negro music. Special study in Negro history. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 213 
The National Religious Training School 
"I CORDIALLY commend the school's interest and needs to all who believe 
in the Negro race and in our obligation to help promote its intellectual, moral 
and religious uplift." 
—REV. DR. CHARLES H. PARKHURST, New York City. 
IT IS MORE THA N A MERE SCHOOL 
IT IS A COMMUNITY OF SERVICE AND UPLIFT 
Its influence is destined to be felt in all sections of the country in improved 
Negro community life wherever our trained workers locate. 
Settlement workers, missionaries for home and foreign mission fields, Y. M. C. A. 
and Y. W. C A. secretaries and district nurses receive a comprehensive grasp of their 
studies under a Wellesley graduate and experienced co-workers and actual every-day 
practice through the school's SOCIAL SERVICE DEPARTMENT. 
We aim also to create a better qualified ministry. 
Industrial training, advanced literary branches, business school. 
Thirty-two acres; ten modern buildings; healthful location. 
We can accommodate a few more earnest, ambitious students. 
Communities requiring social workers should write us. 
For catalog and detailed information address: 
PRESIDENT JAMES E. SHEPARD 
National Religious Training School Durham, N. C 
The school has no endowment fund and must raise a yearly maintenance fund 
of $15,000 for running expenses. Won't you help us this year? 
The Cheyney Training School for Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNSYLVANI A 
Under the management of the Society of Friends. Beautifully located, 
healthful, well appointed, and within easy reach of a great variety of educational institutions, public and private, extending from West Chester to 
Philadelphia; representing a wide range of educational problems and 
practice. 
This school offers to young colored men and women who have a reasonable 
secondary school preparation, and who earnestly desire to become teachers, 
carefully graded courses in academic work, domestic science, domestic art, 
manual crafts and agriculture. Summer school will not be held at Cheyney 
during 1915, but will open on an improved basis in 1916. Tuition is free. 
Board, lodging, heat, light and laundry privileges are offered for nine 
months for $100. The charge for the same during the summer-school 
course is $15. Write for particulars to 
LESLIE PINCKNE Y HILL, Principal 
Mention TH E CRISI S 214 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
OF INTEREST TO VOCAL STUDENTS 
TONE-PLACIN G AN D 
VOICE - DEVELOPMEN T 
Points explained, viz.: Breath in 
Singing, Trying the Voice, the 
Soprano, the Mezzo-Soprano, the 
Contralto, Tenor Leggiero or High 
Tenor, the Baritone, the Bass, 
Parts of the Vocal Apparatus, the 
Mouth, the Tongue, Position when 
Practising, Position when Singing, 
How to Practice, Good Rules for 
Singing. 
Comment from the conductor of the Paulist Choristers, the celebrated choral society which received 
the first prize awarded at the International Singing 
Contest held in Paris on May 25, 1912: 
"Dear Mr . Tinsley: 
"I take great pleasure in commending your very 
useful and succinctly written book on 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development.' Your own appreciation of 
the psychology of singing and the fundamental prin 
ciples of the art you have cleverly reduced to a 
simple system. Cordially yours, 
"Father WILLIA M J. FINN , C. S. P., 
Director Paulist Choristers of Chicago." 
From "Musical Courier," N . Y. : " A very practical 
little book is 'Tone-Placing and Voice-Development,' 
by Pedro T. Tinsley. It contains some very excellent 
material and vocal exercises, and should be in the 
hands of all vocal students." 
From "Music News," Chicago, Ill.: "Accordingly 
his 'Practical Method of Singing' is a most concise 
and practical little manual, containing many valuable 
vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be helpful to all 
ambitious vocal students." 
HELPE D HI M GREATL Y 
"Since I practised your exercises of 'Tone-Placing 
and Voice-Development' my voice is more resonant 
than it has been for years. It seems to me that I 
am getting a new voice." Prof. John T. Layton, 
Director Coleridge-Taylor Musical Society, 1722 10th 
St., N . W. , Washington, D. C. 
PRIC E $1.00 
Address the publisher: Pedro T. Tinsley, 6448 Drexel 
Ave. , Chicago, Ill.; or Clayton F. Summy, 64 E. Van 
Buren St., or Lyon & Healy, Adams and Wabash 
Ave., Chicago, Ill. 
THE NATIONAL TEACHERS' AGENCY 
Through us school authorities, without expense or 
delay, get into communication with the strongest and 
most carefully investigated teachers in all lines. 
Teachers who seek positions or advancement should 
register with us and avail themselves of our expert 
service. Prompt and courteous attention to correspondence. 
B . F. BOWLES , MANAGER , 
273 9 CONVERSE AVENU E EAST ST . LOUIS , ILL. 
WANTE D 
Agents for THE CRISIS. Dignified work . 
7 0 Fifth Avenue , New York . 
E. ALDAMA JACKSON 
Graduate Institute of Musical Art, Organist and Director 
of Music St. Mark's M . E. Church 
Teacher of Theory and Piano 
Theor y course embraces elementary and advanced 
Harmony or Counterpoint. 
Private or Class Work 
Studio : 30 W . 132d STREET , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Th e Poem s o f Phillis Wheatle y 
the early Negro poetess collected by 
RICHAR D R. WRIGHT , JR., and 
CHARLOTT E CROGMA N WRIGH T 
Price, One Dollar 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenu e :: :: :: Ne w Yor k 
"GLEANING S FROM DIXIE-LAND " 
Ten poems by 
EFFI E T. BATTLE , A.M . 
"Mrs. Battle has an individual gift of melody." 
—Springfield Republican. 
"You owe it to your race to publish your poems in 
book form."—Editor, Southwestern Christian Advocate. 
"Verses are smooth, graceful, high-minded and clear, 
reverent to all truth, appreciative of all beauty and 
true inspiration."—George W . Cable. 
PRIC E 25 CENTS . 
ADDRESS : OKOLON A INDUSTRIA L SCHOOL, 
Okolona, Miss. 
PHOTOGRAPH S ENLARGE D 
W e produce the finest enlargements ever made at 
reasonable prices, dealing directly with the consumer. 
Our original patented process brings out in lifelike 
fashion all the shades and tints of colored people. 
Writ e us today. W e guarantee return of original 
pictures. Frames at factory prices. 
TH E DOUGLA S SPECIALTIE S CO. . 
DEPARTMEN T K 
354 8 Vernon Avenue Chicago, Ill. 
$25.0 0 PER WEEK 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
"History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: E. A . JOHNSO N 
154 Nassau Street NE W YORK 
What Salary Do You Earn? 
If you are making less than $3.00 per day, we can help you to make more. Our agents 
average from $3.00 to $10.00 per day easily, and you can do the same. Pleasant dignified employment for men or women, boys or girls. W e want one agent in every town. Be a step 
ahead of the crowd and write us today for free information. 
DOUGLAS SPECIALTIES COMPANY 
354 8 VERNON AVENUE Department K CHICAGO . ILL. 
Mention TH E CRISI S THECRISI S 
Vol. 9 -No . 5 MARCH, 1915 Whole No. 53 
MUSIC AN D ART 
TH E Drama Committee of the N. A. 
A. C. P. authorized by the national 
body for the purpose of studying ways 
and means of utilizing the stage in the 
service of our cause, has been at work 
for several weeks. The committee is 
anxious to have race plays submitted for 
examination. Manuscripts should be 
typewritten, or, if not typewritten, submitted in legible handwriting, should be 
fully postpaid, and should contain the 
name and address of the sender. To 
avoid the embarrassment of a possible 
loss in transmission, authors are urged 
to keep a copy of manuscripts submitted. 
Address all communications to the 
Chairman, Mrs. L. B. Glenn, 941 S St., 
N. W., Washington, D. C. 
Mr. H. T. Burleigh's recently published sacred song, "His Wor d Is Love, " 
is spoken of with favor in leading music 
journals. Of one of the two short songs, 
the words by W . R. Henley, Musical 
America says: "Here Mr. Burleigh is 
writing seriously and when he does that, 
he is always interesting. One can recall 
nothing that he has done recently that is 
as pure and fine as his 'Bring Her Again 
to Me,' in which he seems to have caught 
completely the spirit of Henley's lovely 
poem." 
Ricordi & Co. announce a new song, 
"Mem'ries of Violets," by J. Rosamond 
Johnson. 
At the third of the "Chansons en Crinoline," given at the Plaza Hotel, New 
York, in January, a special feature was 
called "The Story of a Cotton Gown." 
Mme. Frances Alda, the Metropolitan 
Opera soprano, sang Southern melodies 
and Mr. Harry T. Burleigh, baritone, 
with a quintet of colored singers sang 
Afro-American folk songs. 
At Dayton, Ohio., Miss Kitty Cheatham gave an interesting talk to 1,000 
young women employed at the National 
Cash Register Co. 
In appreciation of Miss Cheatham's 
enthusiastic espousal of the preservation 
of Negro melodies, a quartet of colored 
singers were engaged to sing folk-songs. 
The singing did not meet with the approval of Miss Cheatham, and to the 
amusement of the audience, she came to 
the stage and proceeded to direct them. 
At the Victoria Theater, at her regular recital, Miss Cheatham paid a glowing tribute to the late Paul Laurence 
Dunbar, and read his "When Malindy 
Sings." 
Os-Ke-Non-Ton, the Mohawk Indian 
Chief, who is said to have a fine voice 
which is now being trained for. the concert stage, made his debut in New York 
City at the "Tree of Light." The music 
journals spoke appreciatingly of his appearance. 
At the Musicale given at Hempstead, 
L. I. on Jan. 12th, by pupils of Miss Fay 
Foster, a teacher of New York City, 
songs by Coleridge Taylor were presented on the program. 
At the Ford Hall Meeting of Jan. 17, 
at Boston, Mass., for which Rev. John 
Haynes Holmes of New York was the 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 216 TH E CRISIS 
speaker, Mr. William H. Richardson, 
baritone, gave a program of classic and 
modern songs. He was assisted by Mrs. 
Maud Cuney Hare at the piano. 
(Mr . Roland W . Hayes, the tenor, was 
heard with much pleasure at the "Russell Club" Musicale, given at the Universalist Church of Melrose, Mass., on 
Jan. 20th. An enthusiastic audience demanded many encores. 
The Howard University Glee Club has 
been touring Delaware and Pennsylvania 
and singing among other things Negro 
folk songs and the compositions of Burleigh, Cook and Johnson. 
([Miss Anne Whitney, the famous sculptor, a member of the Anti-Slavery group 
in New England, died at the age of 93, 
in January in her apartment in Boston, 
Mass. 
Among Miss Whitney's works was a 
piece called "Ethiopia,'' a reclining figure of a young colored woman, raising 
herself, and in the act of awakening. The 
statue was destroyed, although the artist 
long afterward said, "It was one of the 
best things I ever did." Her next piece 
of work was a statue of Toussaint L'-
Overture, whose heroic life strongly appealed to her. 
Miss Whitney's best known works are 
the statues of Sam Adams in Adams 
Square, Boston, and Charles Sumner, 
near Howard Square in Cambridge, 
Mass. 
The Choir Guild of St. Bartholomew's 
Church, Cambridge, Mass., gave a concert and assembly on Jan. 11 at Brattle 
Hall. 
Miss Lvdia C. McClane of Philadelphia, was the soprano soloist; Mr. Roland W. Hayes, tenor; Mr. Wesley 
Howard, violinist and Mr. J. Shelton 
Pollen, pianist. 
The Hampton Choral Union gave a 
concert at the Institute Gymnasium. 
Miss Helen Ware, the violinist, was 
helped by choruses and soloists. 
A folk-lore festival with music is being planned by the Y. M. C. A. of Indianapolis. 
MEETINGS 
A MEETIN G of Negro authors has 
been called for August, 1915, during the fiftieth anniversary celebration of 
Negro freedom at Chicago. 
The National Negro Business League 
will hold its fifteenth annual meeting in 
Boston, August 18, 19 and 20, 1915. 
([ A large meeting for the benefit of 
Hampton Institute was held in Carnegie 
Hall, New York City. Mr. Booker T. 
Washington, Major R. R. Moton and 
Mr. Harry T. Burleigh took part. 
([Th e annual Negro Farmers' Conference was held at Lane College, Jackson, 
Tenn. 
The Board of Bishops of the A. M. E. 
Zion Church met at Petersburg, Va. 
CTh e twentieth annual meeting of the 
Tuskegee Negro Conference has been 
held at Tuskegee Institute. There was 
the usual meeting of farmers followed 
by a meeting of workers. The attendance was large. 
The largest meeting on Dr. J. E. Spingarn's remarkable trip was that at Pittsburgh, where 3,000 people crowded the 
church and many could not get in. 
m 
EDUCATIO N 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y may receive $104,800 from the United 
States Government if present proposals 
pass Congress. This sum is larger than 
last year and provides for a professor of 
sociology and a survey of housing conditions among Negroes. 
The new Douglas High School at San 
Antonio, Tex., has ten rooms and cost 
$32,000. 
The Association of Teachers in Negro 
Schools will hold their annual meeting 
in Cincinnati next July. 
The County Judge of Jersey Co., Ill., 
has just appointed two additional members to the Board of Trustees of the 
"George Washington Fund." This fund 
was founded by a Negro and now 
amounts to $23,000. Its income is used 
for educating colored students and there 
has long been a feeling that the white 
trustees are not making desperate efforts 
to find beneficiaries. One hundred students have been assisted in the past but 
only one is at present receiving aid. 
The Mayor of Knoxville, Tenn., has 
recommended a new colored high school. 
In reply to white newspaper opposition, 
a colored man writes to a local paper: ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 217 
"We have seen building after building 
for school purposes go up for whites, 
and our school left in a miserable location without improvements and falling 
into decay, and have never uttered a protest. We have paid the ten cent tax levy 
on the $100 to build and maintain high 
schools in Knox county, and yet we have 
said nothing. We are even preparing to 
help assume the $125,000 that the county 
has undertaken to raise to buy a farm 
for the University of Tennessee where 
none of the colored race can have access, and at the same time we propose 
to do this cheerfully, or at least as cheerfully as we can. And now, when the 
mayor of the city comes along with a 
proposition to give us a new high school 
and to take us out of a location that no 
other race would have stood for five minutes, and where we have been forty 
years, in a building paid for by northern 
philanthropists, we are charged with being 'ill advised' and as acting 'hasty.' " 
Governor Emmett O'Neal of Alabama, 
visited Tuskegee Institute and addressed 
the students. 
Howard University had 75 college students in 1907 and 313 in 1914. The 
Freshman Class of 1914 numbered 144 
and came from 50 high schools, academies and colleges. The last graduating 
class numbered 49; of these 14 went to 
teaching, 20 entered professional schools, 
2 entered schools of engineering, 2 entered business, 6 are taking graduate 
studies and 6 are at work earning money 
for professional courses in the future. 
There are in all 40 graduates of the college in the professional schools of Howard University and others are at Harvard, Columbia, Cornell, Chicago, Northwestern, Boston and other universities. 
Mr. Kelly Miller regards this record as 
marking the end of the controversy between the Negro colleges and industrial 
schools. 
Dr. J. W . and Mrs. L. S. Anderson of 
Dallas," Tex., have just given to Meharry 
Medical College of Nashville, Tenn., a 
deed of real estate in Dallas valued at 
least at $10,000. The proceeds of this 
gift are for the erection of the "Anderson Anatomical Hall." 
The trustees of the Jeanes and Slater 
Funds and members of the educational 
boards of most of the colored churches 
had a conference recently with the 
United States Commissioner of Education. The maintenance of the standards 
of institutions like Fisk and Atlanta on 
the one hand and Hampton and Tuskegee on the other was discussed. 
m 
POLITICS 
THE white people of Louisiana are 
exercised because the payment of 
poll taxes among the Negroes of the 
state has recently doubled. Some think 
that this means increased political activity among Negroes, while others are 
sure that the Negroes are trying to increase the meager amounts given to public schools. Many Negro organizations 
are making the payment of poll taxes by 
their members compulsory. 
The New England colored Baptist convention is mailing its report on the 
"State of the Country" to every member 
of Congress. The report will arrive 
February 22nd and the convention asks 
that every member and friend of the 
church write to his representative and 
senators and call their attention to the 
pamphlet. 
The Indian Register of the Treasury 
appointed by President Wilson to succeed the Hon. J. P. Napier, has resigned 
to become Indian Commissioner. Next? 
m 
ECONOMICS 
MR. E. G. HARLESTO N has built a 
new three-story building for his 
undertaking business in Charleston, S. 
C. 
Mr. Booker T. Washington has purchased 10,000 acres of land in the vicinity of Cheehaw, Ala. for colonization 
purposes. A lumber plant has already 
been started. A new railway line will 
connect this colony with Tuskegee. 
It is charged that the Brotherhood of 
Locomotive Firemen and Engineers are 
trying to oust Negro firemen. The question arose in the proceedings of the 
Board of Arbitration between railroads 
and firemen which has been' sitting in 
Chicago. The council for the firemen 
admitted that the Negro firemen had not 
been represented when the arbitration 
agreement was made. 218 TH E CRISIS 
([Virginia Union University has been 
helping the Associated Charities of Richmond. The Associated Charities had 
formerly refused aid to needy Negroes 
but when 1,500 unemployed Negroes besieged their officers they asked the University to make investigation for them. 
Classes were dismissed and already more 
than 900 families have been visited. The 
work was personally superintended by 
Dr. Simpson, of the Department of Sociology. 
The Howard Medical School is now 
the only Negro school rated in class A of 
the American Medical Association. Meharry is in class B. In 1913, of the 38 
graduates of Howard examined by medical boards, only 3 failed. This is practically the same percentage as that made 
by Harvard graduates. 
Frederick L. Siddons, a grandson of 
the great actress, has been recently confirmed as Justice of the District of Columbia Supreme Court. His colored 
employes in his former office of District 
Commissioner, presented him with an 
inscribed testimonial on parchment. 
The colored schools of Baltimore are 
searching for 17 names of distinguished 
colored persons, not living, after whom 
the colored school houses may be named. 
The beautiful building of the Red 
Cross Sanitarium, a colored hospital at 
Louisville, Ky., was opened for inspection on Lincoln's birthday. 
Brig.-Gen. Philip Reade, U. S. A., retired, recently addressed the Kentucky 
State Society of the Sons of the American Revolution on "Negro Soldiers in 
the Revolutionary War." 
Edward Wood , a 17 year old colored 
boy of Pulaski County, Ark., has recently made a record in cotton growing by 
raising 2 bales amounting to 1,192 
pounds on 2 acres of land. 
m 
THE CHURCH 
J. E. EARNEST, a southern white 
man, has recently published a book 
at Charlottesville, Va., on the history of 
the Negro Church. 
The Commission of the M. E. Church, 
on the federation of colored Methodist 
churches, met in Chattanooga. 
There is still trouble in the Baptist 
church between the publishing house and 
the national convention. The facts are 
difficult to ascertain, but the splendid 
work accomplished by the publishing 
house cannot be gainsaid. 
PERSONA L 
MISS FRANCE S F. KEALING , the 
daughter of President H. T Kealing of Western University, is making an 
exceptional record in mathematics at the 
Kansas State University. She has become the first colored member of the 
mathematics club. 
Dr. Peter M. Murray, in competition 
with twenty-seven applicants for licenses 
to practice medicine in the District of 
Columbia, won first honors before the 
Board of Medical Examiners at the 
quarterly examination held June 16-19, 
1914. In his Junior year at Howard 
University, he took the prize in Obstetrics and in his Senior year, in Surgery. 
In competition with twenty-four applicants representing Columbia University, 
University of Pittsburgh, University of 
West Tennessee and Howard University, for interne at Freedmen's Hospital, 
he led all with an average of 91.1%. 
President W. S. Scarborough of Wilberforce University had the misfortune 
to fall on the ice and break two ribs. 
Mrs. Julia B. Nelson, a white woman 
and an ardent worker in the cause of 
woman's suffrage and temperance, has 
recently died leaving about $20,000 to 
Professor W. H. Richards of the Howard Law School, who, as she says in her 
will: "Has cheered my lonely life with 
sympathy and affection as a son should 
render his mother." 
Mrs. Ellen Bransford, a colored exslave, died recently leaving $6,000, the 
savings of a life time, to the Lutheran 
church of which she was a member. Her 
home was in Little Rock, Ark. 
Mr. Wade H. Hammond, Chief Musician of the colored Ninth Cavalry 
Band, was recently presented by the 
Mayor of Douglass, Ariz., with a gold 
medal set with diamonds. This medal 
was purchased by popular subscription 
and was to express the gratitude of the 
citizens for the services of the band during the last two years. ALON G TH E COLOR LIN E 219 
Springfield, Ill., has published a pamphlet concerning its colored people. They 
have a bank, 12 churches, 2 furniture 
stores, 5 grocery stores, 2 milliners, 4 
printers, 2 undertakers, 3 tailors. There 
are also 3 lawyers, 3 physicians, 34 
artisans and 3 newspapers. There is a 
colored fire company, a masonic hall and 
a manual training school. 
Howard University Commercial Col 
lege has been making a study of Negro 
banks. Twenty-one selected banks 
throughout the United States show a 
paid in capital of $276,800, a surplus of 
$179,140 and deposits of $1,103,838. 
Seventeen have less than $15,000 capital 
and two over $25,000; 16 have deposits 
of less than $50,000 and 3 of over $100,-
000. 
The report of the Farm Demonstrator 
for Dallas County, Tex., shows that one 
of the most successful farms and the one 
that made the largest clear profit was 
run by a colored man, W. Johnson of 
Marion Junction. He raised $866 worth 
of cotton, oats, corn, peas and hay at a 
cost of $305.58, making a clear profit of 
$560.42. 
Wilberforce University is establishing 
in connection with its commercial department, a museum for which it asks 
photographs of Negro business houses, 
products of manufacturing establishments, pamphlets, etc. 
At a meeting of Negro farmers at 
Ocala, Fla., Neptune Brown, a colored 
farmer said that he had bought and paid 
for a 200 acre farm, that he raised hogs, 
horses, cows and chickens; he made 20 
barrels of syrup, 4 barrels of sugar and 
kept home-cured meat; he had a grove 
of 5 acres filled with grapefruit and orange trees; his cattle brought him $200 
a year. 
The Colored One Cent Savings Bank 
of Nashville, Tenn., has just finished 11 
years' work. The gross clearings for the 
year amounted to $855,470. 
Charlotte, N. C , sends us "Colored 
Charlotte." This shows in the city 3 real 
estate companies, 31 restaurants, 5 blacksmith shops, 5 drug stores, 3 hotels, 3 
insurance companies, 20 tailors, 24 grocery stores, 20 shoe repairing shops and 
20 wood yards. There are also 3 editors, 
113 teachers, 87 ministers, 12 doctors, 2 
librarians, 2 lawyers and 222 industrial 
insurance agents. Artisans show 72 barbers, 55 carpenters, 40 bricklayers, 40 
plasterers, 40 painters, 30 nurses and 14 
printers. To these may be added 125 
hackmen and draymen. In the city and 
county there are 87 churches worth 
$514,800; there is $40,000 invested in 
business and homes owned to the value 
of $974,440. The total number of acres 
of farm land amounts to 9,489 acres; 8 
automobiles are owned by colored people. 
m 
SOCIAL UPLIFT 
A "WHO' S Wh o of the Colored 
*• Race" is announced. It is to be issued under the auspices of the Illinois 
Fiftieth Anniversary Commission and 
will sell for the unusually high price of 
$6.00 a copy to those who order in advance and $7.50 to other people. 
CTh e Governor of Iowa has recommended that the state join the colored people 
of Illinois in celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of freedom, and make appropriation therefor. 
Messrs. Henry Holt & Co. announce 
for publication in the early spring a volume of the Home University Library on 
"The Negro," by W. E. B. Du Bois. 
Edna Mae Bulkley, the nine year old 
daughter of J. R. Bulkley, Professor of 
Mathematics at Claflin University, Orangeburg, S. C , has recently originated 
a game of cards for teaching children 
the addition and multiplication tables. 
The game has been tested by teachers of 
reputation and is highly recommended 
by them. 
The Frances Harper Women's Club of 
Muskogee, Okla., is trying to establish a 
library for colored people. The local 
business league and other colored organizations are co-operating. 
The American Book Co. has brought 
out an interesting little volume of "Animal Fables from the Dark Continent," 
by A. O. Stafford. It can be recommended for supplementary reading for children. 
The Interstate Literary Association of 
Kansas and the West has held its twentyfourth annual session at Lawrence. First 
prizes in music, declamation and poetry 
went to A. L. Counter, Miss Leona Jordan and Miss Myrtle Brown. 220 TH E CRISIS 
The Hon. W . C. Matthews, assistant 
United States District Attorney of Boston, Mass., has retired from office at the 
close of his term. 
Dr. J. H. Boothe, a prominent colored 
physician of Philadelphia, died recently. 
Before 30,000 persons at the Tournament of Roses in Pasadena, Cal., Howard Drew, the colored sprinter, recently 
won five races and received two silver 
cups. 
FOREIGN 
EAST INDIAN soldiers are now, for 
the first time, eligible for the British 
military decoration known as the Vic ­
toria Cross. 
It is said that Liberia has removed 
from the supreme court Justice T. Mc -
Cants Stewart without trial. The cause 
or the charges are not clear. 
COURTS 
TH E supreme court of the State of 
New York has upheld the case of 
L. L. Wilson, a colored woman, against 
a restaurant keeper who refused to serve 
her food. 
The National Benefit Insurance Co., 
by a decision of the Court of Appeals of 
Kentucky, has gained the right to do 
business in that state. 
n 
TH E GHETTO 
IN Atlanta, the white Alkahest Lyceum 
Course sold balcony tickets to colored 
teachers and then gave them seats in the 
gallery despite their protests. 
A committee of Washington colored 
ministers are protesting to the AnheuserBusch Brewing Co. on account of posters caricaturing the race. Friends are 
asked to write the company and support 
this protest. 
The city of Richmond has finally allowed a colored church to buy a former 
white church, but has ordered it to 
change its entrance so that its worshippers shall not enter from a "white" 
street! 
It is claimed that in Baltimore segregation is a boom to real estate sharks 
who are raising the rentals at least 20% 
in the restricted Negro districts. 
The juvenile court in Philadelphia sentenced a colored boy to Seydert Institute. 
The school refused to receive him but 
the judge stood firm and declared that as 
a public institution, the school must admit the boy. 
Mrs. Laura Loving has been fined 
$100 and costs in a Richmond police 
court for moving into a "white" block. 
The General Educational Board has 
capitalized the word Negro in its recent 
report. 
The Wendell Phillips High School of 
Chicago is trying to separate white and 
colored students in social functions. 
Percy Brown, a Negro of Texarkana, 
Tex., shot and killed a white man who, 
with others, had been terrorizing the 
Negroes and shooting into their homes 
at night. Many of the Negroes left the 
county but this Negro killed his assailant 
and to the great astonishment of the 
colored people, was freed by the court. 
The question of the Negro regiment in 
the New York National Guard is now 
before Governor Whitman. His attitude 
is said to be favorable. 
The Supreme Court of Minnesota has 
decided that churches do not come under 
the civil rights law and may, therefore, 
"Jim-Crow" their colored members, if 
they wish. This relieves much anxiety. 
The Supreme Court of the District of 
Columbia has twice adjourned in honor 
of distinguished colored men: once in 
1878 in honor of John F. Cook, and recently in honor of the late J. F. Bundy. 
CRIME 
SINCE our last record, 8 Negroes 
^ have been lynched as follows: Pete 
Morris, at Blakely, Ga., suspected of 
killing a white man ; Dan Barber, his son 
and 2 daughters, at Monticello, Ga., for 
resisting arrest; Ed Johnson, Vicksburg, 
Miss., for stealing cattle; Herman Neally, at Huntsville, Ala., for accidentally 
wounding a white man in the knee and 
Doc Hartley, at Greenville, Ala., for 
burglary. 
A mob killed Dr. A. B. Culberson, a 
white physician of Evans, Ga., "for assaulting the married daughter of a prominent citizen. LEADERS OF POSTAL CLERKS 
ARISIN G out of the attempt to segrcgate Negro employes of the Post 
Office, there has been formed at Chattanooga, Tenn., a National Alliance of 
Postal Employes. Twenty-six clerks 
representing fourteen states made the 
permanent organization and elected 
Henry L. Mims of Houston, Tex., as 
president, C. B. Shepperson of Arkansas, 
vice-president; R. L. Bailey of Indiana, 
secretary; A. H. Hendricks of Georgia, 
treasurer and Irvin Butler of Tennessee 
is auditor. Frank A. Carter of St. Louis 
was elected editor of the official organ, 
which will be known as the Postal Alliance Magazine. 
The Alliance issues insurance at cost 
to its members, indemnifying against 
loss of time, accident and accidental 
death. The organization has the approval of the Post Office Department 
and is now placing before the Department a plan by which the colored clerks 
may have the privilege of taking up directly with the higher officials, the grievances of the members. 
With reference to the segregation 
movement being forwarded by the white 
clerks of the South, President Mims, and 
officers of the Alliance refuse to "try 
their case in the papers," but it is known 
that the Alliance is going to make a 
strong fight before the post office officials to see that none of the rights of the 
Negro clerks, guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States, shall be 
denied them. The organization will contend that all promotions fairly earned in 
competition with white clerks, be given 
to the men whose records are the best, 
regardless of color. 
Nothing less than a square deal will 
be satisfactory to the officers of the Alliance, and this they believe they will 
obtain when the colored clerks' side of 
the segregation question is fairly presented to the higher department officials. 
The motto of the organization is going 
Editor, F. A . CARTE R President. H . L. MIM S Vice-President, C . P. SHEPPERSO N 
MEN OF THE MONTH 222 TH E CRISIS 
to be, so it is learned, "legislate no 
worthless man forward, nor arbitrarily 
relegate any worthy man backward." 
The president of the Alliance writes: 
"I was long a disciple of Booker 
Washington in that we should proceed 
along the line of least resistance; I have 
become firmly convinced that this course 
is wrong, fundamentally wrong, if you 
please. From actual experience in the 
government service, having been appointed to the Railway Mail Service 
more than 20 years ago, I have found 
that race prejudice is insidious and it 
must be fought and fought hard. It has 
received a serious set-back through the 
efforts of your organization, and God 
speed you to continue to hammer it to 
its certain death." 
Local branches of the Alliance are being formed. Lately one was formed at 
Richmond, Va., with twelve members. 
E. H. Woo d was elected president and 
R. H. Jackson, secretary-treasurer. 
® 
A DEALE R I N REA L ESTAT E 
CHARLE S H. TONES was born in 
^ Wake County, N. C, in 1875. He 
MR . CHARLE S H . JONE S 
lost his father when he was six and his 
mother when he was thirteen. Until 
twenty years of age he was a farm 
laborer attending a country school during 
intervals of work. Then he tried a small 
mercantile business but failed in the 
panic of 1895. In 1912 he succeeded in 
selling a small lot, 25 x 100 feet, to R. J. 
Reynolds Tobacco Company in WinstonSalem, and made $10,000 profit. This 
was the beginning of his financial prosperity. Mr. Jones owns one block in 
Winston-Salem which is worth $30,000 
and brings in $5,000 a year in rent. His 
total income from rent is said to be $12,-
000 a year and he is supposed to be 
worth at least $100,000. 
Mr. Jones declared that the right sort 
of man does not have to leave home to 
succeed. One of his hobbies is horse 
flesh and he owns "Silver Dick" who 
has never lost a race and has a record of 
a mile in 2.13 1/4. 
m 
A DENTIST 
THE West Indies has given to Pittsburgh a successful dentist in the 
person of Dr. Frank F. Bishop. 
FRAN K F. BISHOP , D . D . S. ME N OF TH E MONT H 223 
DR . BISHOP S OFFIC E 
Dr. Bishop arrived in the United 
States as a youth and received his training at the New York College of Dental 
and Oral Surgery and was graduated 
from the Pennsylvania College of Dental Surgery in 1906. He opened his 
office in Pittsburgh the same year and 
has built up a large and successful practice. Among other things he compounds 
his own dentifrices. He is especially 
notable for the cleanliness of his office, 
its modern equipment, his punctuality in 
keeping appointments and the reliability 
of his work. Small wonder that last_ 
summer the Doctor moved into his own 
new building valued at $10,000. 
A N INSURANCE MA N 
ONE of the best known industrial 
insurance companies among the 
colored people is the North Carolina 
Mutual and Provident Association. The 
man who made this association is Charles 
C. Spaulding. 
He was born in Whiteville, N. C , 
August 1, 1874. Mr. Spaulding's family 
had considerable property chiefly in real 
estate and sent him to school in Durham. 
At the age of twenty-six he married Miss 
Fannie Jones of Washington, D. C , and 
has three children. 
The North Carolina Mutual and Provident Association was organized in 
1S99. Mr. Spaulding became its first 
local agent and was elected general 
manager in 1901. At this time the 
weekly collections of the company amounted to $29.40. Today its weekly collection is $9,000. The Durham Sun, a 
local white paper, reports that during 
1914 this company did a business of 
$400,000 or nearly $50,000 more than the 
previous year. The home office employs 
thirty-five people and the business of the 
company is in the two Carolinas and 
Georgia and next year it expects to 
enter Virginia. The company has deposited $100,000 with the State Insurance Commission of North Carolina and 
$20,000 with the Insurance Commission 
of South Carolina. The president is 
Tohn C. Merrick, the secretary A. M. 
Moore and the general manager C. C. 
Spaulding. 
Mr. Spaulding is also vice president of 
a local colored bank, assistant superintendent of a Baptist Sunday School and 
a director of the colored Lincoln Hospital. 
MR . C . C . SPAULDIN G 224 TH E CRISIS 
MR . SOLOMO N HARPE R 
AN INVENTOR 
SOLOMO N HARPE R was born Aug0
 ust 8, 1893, at Poplar Grove, Ark. 
He left home- at the age of twelve, 
worked in a lumber camp and then as 
a section hand. Afterward he became 
an iron moulder and then again worked 
for various railways as section hand, in 
construction work, in grading, locomotive work, etc. His first application for 
a patent was filed in January, 1914, and 
he has three more applications now being prepared. He claims to have invented a new block system for controlling 
railway trains and preventing collision. 
This new system is designed to prevent 
rear and head-on collisions, to prevent 
trains from running into open switches, 
automatically to reduce speed at dangerous places, to stop trains at railway 
junctions, automatically to apply the 
brakes and to record the time when this 
is done and a number of other astonishing things. 
Professor John E. Sweet, of Syracuse, 
N. Y., writes: "Your mechanism is ingenious and I cannot see why it will not 
act as you plan." Professor Sweet is 
one of the foremost mechanical engineers of the world. The new company 
has offices at 112 East 125th Street, New 
York City. 
A TENO R 
THER E is no doubt that Roland W. 
Hayes has one of the finest tenor 
voices that Americans of today can listen 
to. His development in technique and 
stage presence has been marvelous to 
those who have watched him in the last 
five years. 
He was born in Curryville, Ga., June 
3, 1887, and brought to Chattanooga as 
a child. When he was about seventeen 
Mr. W. A. Calhoun, a graduate of the 
Oberlin Conservatory discovered Hayes' 
voice and gave him some lessons. Encouraged by his teacher he went to Fisk 
University in the fall of 1906 and studied 
under Miss Jennie Robinson, the wellknown Fisk teacher. A Boston man, Mr. 
Henry H. Putnam, urged Hayes to come 
to Boston. This he did and there 
through Mr. Putnam's help he became 
eventually a pupil of Mr. Arthur J. 
Hubbard, one of the best voice instructors in Boston. 
Mr. Hayes is becoming more and more 
in demand, and the best critics like 
Philip Hale, of Boston, have given him 
most flattering encouragement. 
MR . ROLAN D W . HAYE S LYNCHIN G 
SOUTHERN The recent horrible lynching 
CHIVALRY in Georgia brings even the 
New York Times to its feet. 
After some shuffling to excuse the South 
the editorial goes on to say: 
"Use has bred a habit. No longer are 
lynchings committed solely for 'the usual 
crime.' A case of disorderly conduct, a 
case of resisting an officer, now supply 
warrant enough for the organized murder of men and even women. The evil 
has grown. The time is near, if indeed 
it is not already at hand, when the fact 
that a man is 'a bad nigger' will ' e 
enough to warrant his assassination by a 
mob. 
"Lynchings are committed mostly by 
cowards, and quite largely by the riff-raff 
of the neighborhood, inspired by rum. 
But in most cases there are a few mob 
leaders who are men of reputation in the 
community, and whose activity is the excuse of the whisky-soaked riff-raff who 
follow them. If an attempt is made to 
punish them, their standing in the vicinage, their swagger and pose, and the 
sympathy of their neighbors make their 
escape a foregone conclusion. Not until 
these men, the real criminals, are sternly 
dealt with in some outstanding trial will 
the reproach that hangs over the South 
be removed. If some Southern Governor, if some Southern Judge, would 
show just once real intrepidity and fearlessness of consequences in dealing with 
what has become a dastardly and common crime, lynching would become as 
unfashionable as any other felony in that 
particular State. Let us hope that we 
may see that day come." 
The Boston Traveler in commenting 
on talk about "the industrious Negro," 
in a Florida paper, says: 
"Surely the one hundred members of 
that Georgia community which last week 
lynched a Negro father, his two daughters and a son and filled their bodies 
with bullets because they beat a policeman who attempted to make an arrest 
did not treat the helpless victims as 
though they were 'our own people.' 
And what would have happened to the 
Negroes of the community if they had 
lynched four whites for beating a colored 
policeman? But the South is constantly 
reminding us that we 'do not understand,' and we have frankly to confess 
that we do not, quite." 
In another editorial it continues: 
"At Monticello, Georgia, a mob of 100 
masked men, took from the jail four 
Negroes, a father, his two married 
daughters and a son, accused of clubbing 
a policeman in making an arrest, hanged 
them to a tree and riddled their bodies 
with bullets. Could anything more clearly set forth the inherent right of the 
white man to govern or the moral superiority of the Caucasian over the 
African? So long as such shocking evidences of brutal depravity are more or 
less common in the southern section of 
this country, the rest of the world may 
well look upon the United States as a 
semi-civilized land." 
The Courier Herald of Sagamore, 
Mich., speaks in the same line. 
"This was a grim orgy indeed! What 
a wild and savage thing it would seem, 
if a traveler brought back an account of 
such a carnival of death from the heart 
of Africa or the depths of the great 
South American jungle! And yet it 
happened in our own country, in one of 
our sovereign states, in free, liberty-loving, civilized America, whose constitution guarantees equality for all!" 
The Press of Binghamton, N. Y., 
says: 
"There is a very simple way to pre-226 TH E CRISIS 
vent lynching, always assuming that the 
fearful and wonderful instrument known 
as a State Constitution permits it. Pu t 
the sheriff under bonds for the protection of his prisoners, and give him, of 
course, money enough to hire a few capable deputies. 
"Southern peace officers want to stand 
well with their neighbors, but there are 
some of them who would certainly fight 
harder to save a $50,000 bond than they 
would, otherwise, to save the life of a 
Negro prisoner. An d three or four 
armed men, with plenty of determination 
and plenty of ammunition, can scatter 
any mob the South ever produced." 
The Congregationalist is a little despondent. 
"The lynching of four Negroes in a 
Southern town because they were reluctant to be arrested shows that the progress of education and good feeling in 
that part of the country is hardly as 
rapid as we have dared to hope." 
The Ne w Yor k Globe writes: 
"W e profess to be a civilized nation, 
and in horror raise our hands at tales of 
cruelties practised by war-crazed soldiers 
abroad. Ye t in cold blood and like veritable fiends incarnate we torture to 
death our fellow creatures. The time 
has come to put an end to lynch law in 
the South. " 
The Alban y (N . Y. ) Knickerbocker 
Press says: 
"It must amaze all right-thinking citizens that in this twentieth century a 
mob of supposedly intelligent white men 
could, in cold blood, take two women and 
two men from their homes, hang them 
one by one and riddle their bodies with 
bullets. 
"The country owes many debts to the 
sunny southland which has been the 
mother of some of the greatest of America's citizens, but the South must soon 
realize that the stigma of lynch law 
which has made her a hissing ana a 
shame in the eyes of civilization for 
generations, must be lifted if she would 
hold her head high in the confraternity 
of peoples." 
The Evening Telegram of Philadelphia continues: 
"There are places under the America n 
flag to-day where 'nigger killing' is regarded no more seriously than rat chasing, where the eyes of civilized little 
white children glisten as they recount 
the scenes of the lynching, and where 
white men and women are now being 
offered as sacrifices to this new and insatiable Moloch . 
"Th e lynching impulse is one that a 
people may indulge only at their own 
peril. " 
The Ne w Yor k World adds this bit: 
"The quadruple lynching of Negro 
men and women i n Georgia is not for 
'the usual crime.' It is merely what has 
come to be the usual manifestation of a 
cowardly and murderous mob spirit, fostered by a lawlessness which sought a 
justification in 'the usual crime.' " 
Southern papers have, to some extent, 
spoken out also. The Louisvill e Courier 
Journal, for instance: 
"It seems almost incredible that four 
persons should have been lynched as the 
outcome of a mere street row i n which 
no one appears to have been seriously 
injured. Monticello has made a record 
for causeless bloodshed that wil l be hard 
to live down. " 
The Atlant a Journal writes: 
"The resolutions adopted by a mass 
meeting of the citizens of Monticello 
and Jasper county on the recent lynching 
in that community find earnest response 
in the mind of every Georgian who 
values his state's good name or who has 
any sense of justice and humanity. Savage lawlessness seldom grows so monstrous as it did in the mob which hanged 
four Negro prisoners, two of them women, charged wit h running a 'blind tiger' 
and with assaulting the officers who 
came to arrest them. Tha t was murder, 
cold-blooded and cowardly and so 
should it be dealt with, to the limit of 
the state's legal resources." 
An d the Columbus (Ga.) Ledger is 
forced to the conclusion that in a typical 
modern lynching "the original crime is 
the factor of least importance. The chief 
cause appears to be a crimina l desire for 
blood on the part of an inflamed mob. 
Most any offense wil l serve for a pretext." 
The colored papers are naturally bitter. "Great God, " says the Amsterdam 
(N . Y. ) News, "is there i n Georgia no 
woman bold enough to take up the cudgels for her sex? Wil l not Georgia's OPINION 227 
womanhood fight the new pastime of the 
mob? Will not Georgia women organize and draw the line somewhere in this 
disgraceful business? Women have captured the ear of the public before and 
can do so now. Can Southern white 
women sit still and see women, of whatever race, manhandled and insulted, 
lynched and riddled with bullets?" 
The Atlanta Independent replies incisively to the Governor of Georgia. 
"It does not suffice or justify a carnage of crime for our Governor to argue 
in extenuation of the Monticello outrage 
what happened in Illinois, New York 
and Massachusetts years ago. The fact 
that some years ago Negroes were murdered in Illinois, Pennsylvania, Delaware and elsewhere does not in any 
sense justify or extenuate or mitigate 
for the outrage at Monticello. That this 
great state with 2,000,000 people, immense wealth and unequalled intelligence, should stand idly by and see a 
whole family shot to death by a lawless 
mob is almost incomprehensible, and that 
the Governor should answer those who 
criticize his state for crimes perpetrated 
against the majesty of the law and for 
the barbarous killing of citizens in the 
hands of the law, with the recital of 
crimes in other states is both humiliating 
and excruciating to an intelligent citizenship. 
"The Governor reasons that one sin 
justifies another; that murder in New 
York justifies or mitigates murder in 
Georgia. There is no need of any longer 
putting up the stock argument that the 
members of the mob can not be apprehended. 
"It is openly charged by the whites of 
the South that the Negro conceals his 
criminal element; that he receives stolen 
goods and hides that element of his race 
that violates the law. That is largely 
true. There is an element of our people that commits crimes and another element that conceals crime. But happily, 
both these elements are largely in the 
minority, and it is equally true that there 
is a large element of the whites of this 
section that conceals crime, that hides 
criminals, that covers the mobs and 
shields them from the strong arm of the 
law. If this were not true, why is it 
that the Governor's reward will not apprehend and convict the Monticello 
lynchers and the thousands of lynchers 
who, year after year, put many black 
people to death in the South upon mere 
suspicion." 
There is the usual evidence of discomfort in the South at criticism. The 
Times Union of Jacksonville, Fla., does 
not see as many "holier than thou" 
Northern newspapers "as we saw in days 
gone by. A number of lynchings occurring in Northern states, more brutal than 
any ever known in the South, convinced 
most of our critics of the impropriety of 
throwing stones. We speak of a number of Northern lynchings as more brutal than any that ever occurred in the 
South because the Southern mob hunts 
for the guilty man and does not molest 
others while in several instances in 
Northern cities mobs have chased and 
lynched Negroes without any reason to 
believe them guilty of any offense." 
The Macon Daily Telegraph says: 
"If those Northern and Eastern publications which deal in 'ifs' and 'ands' 
and 'wonders' regarding the attitude of 
the people of Georgia and the South toward the Monticello lynching, will observe the aftermath of that regrettable 
affair, and refresh their memories as to 
similar notorious occurrences in their 
own sections, they will find less reason 
to inferentially accuse a people of the 
act of a few lawbreakers." 
And later the Telegraph even attempts 
some half-hearted defense of the lynchers. 
"It was not 'the usual crime' it is true. 
But it was an attempt at an exceedingly 
vicious one, and while its nature does not 
justify wholesale lynchings, in fairness it 
must be admitted that there were features connected with it calculated to 
rouse public passion hotly. This is not 
an attempt at condonement, but rather 
at palliation. The affair was terrible, on 
the face of it, notwithstanding, however, 
the strongest palliation, and should be 
thoroughly probed." 
There is a disposition to search for 
causes in this prevalence of mob murder. The New York Evening Post says: 
"Southern newspapers and people 
have in the main spoken out well against 
the revival of lynching. Thus 200 citizens of Monticello, Georgia, one of the 228 TH E CRISIS 
disgraced towns, in a mass meeting presided over by the mayor, expressed their 
disapproval of the mob-murder of four 
accused Negroes, and promised the Governor their assistance in bringing the 
guilty to book. The feeling of the local 
press is typified by the statement of the 
Thomasville Times-Enterprise, that this 
lynching is 'a blot on the name of the 
county of Jasper that will never be 
erased,' and its hope that the state 'will 
make a sincere effort to mete punishment to those who have so transgressed 
the bounds of reason and right.' Though 
neither utterance is quite vigorous 
enough in view of the dastardly character of the lynching, and the fact that 
two of the victims were innocent colored 
women, so far so good. But the time is 
close at hand when the enlightened sentiment of the South ought to do a great 
deal more than resolving and depreciating. One of the differences between the 
North and the South is the comparative 
ease with which reform organizations 
are started in the two sections. It is 
much harder to get men or women in the 
old slave states to assume an unpopular 
position; but the time has surely come 
when there ought to be a strong Southern organization to deal with this matter of lynching and the abuse of the 
law." 
If the Evening Post, however, will 
look to its own columns it will find certain latent causes of the lynching spirit. 
In a review, for instance, of "The Diary 
of Adam Tas" the Post speaks of the 
celebrated governor of the Dutch East 
India Company; Willem Adriaan van 
der Stel. Van der Stel was a mulatto 
and the Post sagely says that from his 
Negro grandmother "he appears to have 
inherited doubtful morals and an inclination towards Oriental splendor which 
led him into extravagance and consequent oppression." 
Of course, "doubtful morals" always 
come from colored people; never from 
white people; and an "inclination to 
Oriental splendor" is peculiarly African. 
It is this kind of wholesale but subtle 
condemnation of the Negro race that is 
the beginning of the lynching spirit. 
As the Utica (N. Y.) Press says, 
speaking of the proposed discrimination 
against Negro immigrants: 
"The lieracy test would keep out the 
illiterate of any degree of black blood as 
well as an illiterate of white blood. But 
that alone would not discriminate sufficiently to satisfy the Negro-hating sentiment of the constituencies of these 
southern statesmen. One of the bitter 
grievances of these constituencies against 
the Negro is not on account of any degree 
of illiteracy, but because of his unwillingness to be content with a continued condition of ignorance and political and 
economic dependence. The anti-Negro 
clause of the immigration bill is not 
aimed at the illiterate Negro of pure or 
mixed blood, but at the intelligent Negro 
of whatever blood proportion. Men of 
Negro or mixed Negro blood prominent 
in South American countries—and they 
are numerous—are not likely to contribute zealously to the better or cordial 
relations the Washington Government is 
seeking to promote with those countries, 
when they know there is a law forbidding their entry into the United States." 
But back of all this the real trouble 
arises from the facts like these taken 
from a white Florida daily paper and 
referring to Seneca, S. C.: 
"Two Negroes are dead a third is believed to be dying and half a dozen white 
men were wounded by bullets as a result 
of a race riot at Fairplay, a small village 
12 miles from here. 
"An hour after the rioting started, 
whites and Negroes came across the line 
from Georgia to take part in the fight. 
"Trouble between the races has been 
brewing for days; and came to a head 
when a white man said to be Woodrow 
Campbell and George Gibson a young 
Negro quarreled over Gibson's attentions 
to a mulatto woman. Negroes sided with 
Gibson and last night the friends of 
Campbell formed a mob and took Tom 
Spright a Negro across the Savannah 
river into Georgia and gave him a terrible 
beating. 
"Gibson and his father, Green Gibson, 
arrived on the bridge in a buggy and demanded that the bridge be cleared of the 
mob so that they might pass. 
"Walking to the buggy, one of the men 
said to young Gibson: 'Yo u are the one 
we want.' 
"Gibson was pulled from the buggy. 
He resisted and escaped. The escape OPINION 229 
only infuriated the mob more. He was 
chased and after a time caught. Then he 
was beaten to death. Spright, unconscious and near death, was hurried to a 
near-by town. 
"It is reported that another Negro was 
killed, but this has not been verified. 
"Following the killings and beatings, 
the Negroes formed in large numbers 
and attacked the whites. The white men 
injured are Magistrate W . C. McClure, 
shot in the face; Paul Marrott, shot in 
the back, condition serious; Woodrow 
Campbell, shot in the chest and stabbed; 
Logan Ramoy, shot in the eye, and 
several others who were not badly hurt. 
"Several of the whites were shot by the 
elder Gibson, who protected himself behind the bridge. Then he ran and was 
brought down with a bullet in his back. 
His gun was broken to pieces and used 
to beat him to death." 
To this we have only to add the recent 
report on the conduct of white men in 
Alaska. Dr. E. L. Jones reports to 
President Wilson: 
"The white man's lack of care and regard for the sanctity of the native's 
homes is the crime of Alaska," he says. 
"In many sections the wife and daughters are dishonored, and any resistance 
from the husband, father or brother is 
overcome by threats and bribes and 
liquor, until even the men have all their 
best impulses deadened and seem to be 
unmanned." 
" A VITA L MAGAZINE," 
A FEW The Rev. Francis J. Grimke, 
BOUQUETS of Washington, in a sermon 
said recently: 
"W e ought also to be thankful for the 
existence of the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People. I 
don't know whether, as a race, we realize 
what the existence of such an association 
with its organ, TH E CRISIS, means, or 
fully appreciate the invaluable service 
which it is rendering to the race in its 
battle against race prejudice and proscription, which confronts us on all sides 
in every shape and form. Here is an 
Association composed of some of the 
very best type of white men and women 
in this country, and also of some of the 
very best type of colored men and 
women of the race. These men and 
women have banded themselves together 
for the purpose of resisting injustice and 
oppression—for the purpose of standing 
up fearlessly and uncompromisingly for 
the manhood rights of the colored man, 
and also for his civil and political equality under the Constitution. The fact 
that such a society as this exists is itself 
a ground for thanksgiving, but when we 
remember what it has done and is still 
doing towards bettering conditions, the 
greater is the ground for thanksgiving." 
Recently TH E CRISIS has figured in the 
Congressional Record to the extent of 
nearly a page. Congressman Webb, of 
North Carolina, gets his matter from a 
newspaper writer named Calloway, in the 
Macon Daily Telegraph, and speaks at 
length of the National Association. 
"Reading of this association in TH E 
CRISIS, it is a matter of regret that its 
method of procedure is not along the 
lines advocated by Booker Washington. 
Washington is eager for his race to preserve race identity, finding a great work 
to build up pride of race, and for the 
education to be along industrial lines. 
"But this National Association has for 
its purpose advancement along political 
and social lines. Very prominent in the 
platform is: 'The abolition of all caste 
distinctions based on race or color.' The 
Association has its colored lawyers 'to 
secure rights of the colored people,' to 
'win Jim Crow' cases, segregation cases 
and disfranchisement cases. 
"In the call for a national conference 
in 1914 for the political and social uplift 
of the Negro are many prominent white 
women and white men. This call was 
signed, first on the list, by Jane Addams, 
Samuel Bowles (Springfield Republican), Dr. John L. Elliott of New York, 
William Lloyd Garrison of Boston, William Dean Howells, Florence Kelly, John 
E. Milholland of New York, Dr. Charles 
H. Parkhurst of New York, Louis F. 
Post of Chicago, Oswald Garrison Villard of the New York Evening Post, 
with many others. 
"The conference, in pursuance of this 
call, was held in New York. It was 
celebrated by a feast, if I understand 
TH E CRISIS, and seated at the table are 
the Negro men in large numbers, each 
with a white, woman by his side as guest 230 TH E CRISIS 
(I suppose). It is social equality done 
to the taste of DuBois, William Lloyd 
Garrison and Oswald Villard. A large 
array of whites, men and women, mostly 
women, are looking on approvingly. 
Under the large photograph of this social 
scene is the device: 'Social Life in 
Colored America'— 'A Dinner at the 
Loendi Club, Pittsburg.' 
"Any one wishing to verify this story 
is referred to THE CRISIS, August number, 1914. THE CRISIS also comes out 
editorially for equal suffrage." 
The joke of this extraordinary arraignment is that every person in the 
picture referred to (which by the way 
had absolutely nothing to do with the 
National Association or its Baltimore 
meeting) is a person of Negro descent. 
Imagine the social history of a country 
that is wild to discriminate about "white" 
and "black" people and yet cannot tell 
them apart! 
On the other side of the shield we 
cannot forbear from reprinting, at the 
request of numerous correspondents, an 
appreciation of THE CRISIS written by 
Mr. John Barry, of San Francisco, and 
published in half a dozen papers including the San Francisco Examiner and the 
Washington, D. C , Herald. The article 
which occupies a column or more is entitled "A Vital Magazine," and says in 
part: 
" A magazine that I have just been 
reading seems to me to be of unusual interest and of peculiar significance. It 
happens to be a recent number of T H E 
CRISIS, published by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People, at 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
City, and edited by Prof. W. E. Burghardt Du Bois. In its subtitle it calls 
itself a 'Record of the Darker Races.' 
"It is well printed, on white glazed 
paper, and, besides an illustrated cover, 
it contains many illustrations, mainly 
from photographs. One cannot look it 
over without realizing that it represents 
a big, vital movement in this country. In 
its printed words one can feel the heartbeat of a long-suffering and a rapidly 
developing people. 
"T H E CRISIS opens with a department 
called 'Along the Color Line,' giving 
items of interest ranging from music and 
art, through social economics, to crime. 
In this country it is plain that the musical 
genius of the Negro race is finding more 
encouragement. Wa s it not the Hungarian composer, Dvorak, who, some 
years ago, said that the typical American 
music lay in our Negro melodies ? Surely 
no music ever expressed more clearly or 
more poignantly the anguish of a race. 
In the vast store of talents lost to the 
world through lack of opportunity for 
expression there must be included a possible negro composer. As the Negroes 
secure wider educational advantages they 
are certain to give to the world music 
with a flavor of its own, echoing, not 
merely the sadness of the people, but the 
gayety as well, the spirit that enables 
them to rise above tribulation and to illustrate the blessings of a childlike and 
happy temperament 
"The special articles are mainly devoted 
to discussing colored people who are 
reaching positions of public usefulness. 
There is also a great deal of writing 
about the relation of the colored people 
to 'the world war.' The department 
called 'Editorial' deals with the war 
from what must, to most of us, be a new 
point of view. According to the writer, 
the cause of the war is "the wild quest 
for imperial expansion among colored 
races between Germany, England and 
France primarily, and Belgium, Italy, 
Russia and Austria-Hungary in lesser 
degree." So far the war reduces itself 
to a fight for the power of exploiting the 
darker peoples. While expressing great 
personal regard for the Germans as a 
people, the writer deplores the German 
spirit of militarism and points out its 
dangers to his race. The article on 'The 
Colored Y. M. C. A.,' by C. H. Tobias, 
shows how wonderfully this organization 
has grown since its start in 1853. It is 
estimated that it now owns property 
worth more than $1,000,000. The growth 
has been greatly helped by the co-operation of the more prosperous colored people throughout the country. 
"There are many other features in this 
ably edited number of T H E CRISIS. They 
include a dramatic poem, 'The Burden 
of Black Women.' Indeed, I know of 
few magazines that can compare with 
this magazine for human interest. It 
shows that the black folk are sharing in 
the social unrest and aspiration of the 
world today." OPINION 231 
NEGRO SOLDIERS 
SOME FOR- In the Washington, D. C , 
GETFULNESS Evening Star, James Croggen has written about Negroes in the Battle of New Orleans, and 
intimated that this was the first employment of Negroes as soldiers in the American army. Albert N. Seip immediately 
corrected Mr. Croggen, who is a noted 
archeologist and antiquarian, with the 
following facts: 
"Referring to James Croggc-n's statement that 'judging from some of the 
muster rolls, where the word "Negro" 
appears with their names, there were not 
many such in the service, though the law 
was silent as to color.' Bancroft, volume 6, page 142, speaking of the battle 
of Monmouth, says: 'So many histories 
omit to record that, of the "revolutionary 
patriots" who on that day periled life for 
their country, more than 700 black 
Americans fought side by side with the 
white.' On page 300, same volume, the 
well informed historian remarks: 'The 
question of recruiting the army by the 
enlistment of black men forced itself on 
attention. The several states employed 
them as they pleased, and the slave was 
enfranchised by the service. Once Congress touched on the delicate subject; 
and in March, 1779, it recommended 
Georgia and South Carolina to raise 
3,000 active, able-bodied Negro men, 
under thirty-five years of age; and the 
recommendation was coupled with a promise of a "full compensation to the proprietors of such Negroes for the property." The resolution appears to have 
been adopted without opposition. North 
and South Carolina having both been 
represented in the committee that reported it. But South Carolina refused by 
great majorities to give effect to the 
scheme. Bancroft's history is full of 
reference to the part taken by Negroes 
as soldiers in the revolutionary war, both 
in the northern and southern campaigns, 
and judging from the difficulties Washington had in keeping and recruiting his 
army, and his well known sentiments in 
favor of employing Negroes as soldiers, 
I have no doubt that many such served 
and fought for our and their freedom." 
Thomas H. R. Clarke adds the following : 
"The diary of Baron von Clauser, a 
German army officer sent to this country 
by his government to report upon military activities, was published in part by 
the New York Herald a few years ago 
and contained, among other things, the 
following memorandum: 
"I have visited Gen. Washington's 
camp at White Plains today. He has 
20,000 troops under him, one-fourth of 
which are Negroes, and the best drilled 
and disciplined regiment in camp is a 
Rhode Island regiment, three-fourths of 
which are composed of Negroes. 
"In Livermore's historical papers it can 
be easily discovered that provision was 
made by the legislature of several of the 
colonies, subsequent to the establishment 
of the camp at White Plains, for the recruiting of several more thousand black 
soldiers. 
"These facts, it would seem disposes 
of the statement that 'there were not 
many such in the service.' 
"Whether this relatively large number 
of Negro soldiers under Gen. Washington all served in mixed regiments I do 
not know, but in the battle of Rhode 
Island the Hessian mercenaries were defeated with great loss of life by Negro 
soldiers operating in distinct units under 
Col. Greene (see George W. William's 
History of the Negro Soldier). 
"We cannot forget, also, that it was a 
regiment of Haitian Negroes, serving 
under the leadership of such men as 
Christophe and Dessalines, who afterward figured prominently in Haitian affairs, which saved the colonial brigade 
from a severe defeat by a brilliant rear 
guard action in the retreat from Savannah. (See essay by T. G. Steward, 
former officer in United States Army, in 
his book entitled 'The Negro Regular')." 
INTER-MARRIAGE 
THE The Hon. Martin B. Madden, 
FUTILITY representative from Illinois, 
OF LAW. spoke recently in Congress 
for the protection of Negro 
womanhood. He said: 
"To make such marriages criminal and 
void would leave the children of such 
marriages without the protection which 
they need and should have. Instead of 
bettering the moral conditions such a law 
would make them worse. It would leave 
many young girls at the mercy of brutes 232 TH E CRISIS 
willing to take advantage of their virtue 
and then desert them to a life of shame. 
1 cannot conceive of a condition under 
which a white man should be allowed to 
cohabit with a black woman not his wife 
without being compelled by law to marry 
her or provide for the care of their children. Why should innocent women of the 
Negro race not have the same protection 
of the law which is accorded to women 
of any other race? It will not do to say 
there is no such condition as that to 
which I have alluded. Everyone knows 
better, else how does it happen that we 
have so many people of mixed blood in 
the United States. 
"The Negroes are willing to confine 
their marriages to their own race, indeed 
they would prefer that, but they have a 
right to demand that the women of their 
race shall not be considered the legitimate 
prey of the men of other races. (Ap ­
plause.)" 
Annesley Burrowes, writing in a Detroit paper, says: 
"The marriage of a white woman to a 
black man is a thing that white men don't 
like to think about, and some black 
women share that feeling. 
"But when the governor of a great 
state like Michigan digs this question up 
from the depths, and when state laws are 
proposed to deal with it—• 
"Then you've got to think about it, 
and talk about it, too. For when a people reaches the point when it allows 
laws to be made for it without interest, 
and without comment, then it is nearing 
its jumping off place, as a nation. 
"There are different things to think 
about in this connection. 
"One is the opinion of a great ethnologist, a student of the history of many 
races. 
" 'In a thousand years from now,' he 
said, 'the only trace remaining of the 
9,000,000 Negroes now here will be a 
slight tinge of darkness in the faces of 
the American people.' 
"That may, or may not, be true, but 
observe this, read it twice, and pin it in 
your memory. 
"The Negro race, roughly speaking, 
has been with us only two centuries, and 
in that time it has paled a whole lot. . . 
"Suppose a law had been passed fifty 
years ago, making marriage a crime, 
would these regiments of illegitimates 
have been fewer? 
"Of course they wouldn't. 
"Then how is it going to help to pass 
such a law now? 
"And, considering that you cannot 
prevent these unions, isn't it wise to 
make the best of them? 
"Wouldn't it have been better if these 
millions of illicit unions had been legal 
unions, blessed by the church, and sanctioned by society? 
"I'm not saying. I leave it to you. 
"What would have been the result, 
anyway ? 
"Wouldn't these millions of illegitimates have had the support, the education, the pride, the position, which their 
white fathers could, and should, and 
would have given them? 
"And wouldn't the whole immense, 
struggling mass have been a million times 
the better for it? 
"Stick to the facts. Think them over. 
Be honest, and fair. Answer the question. 
"Wouldn't those millions of particolored illegitimates have been the better 
for it if the fathers who begot them had 
accepted the responsibility, and had done 
their duty by them, as God has said 
fathers should do ? 
"And wouldn't the nation, and the 
whole world have been the better for it 
had this injustice not been done? 
"If not then fatherhood is a lie and a 
mockery. Don't tell us that these unions 
were formed only by men of the lowest 
types, because it isn't true, and you 
know it isn't true. 
"Such unions have been participated 
in by men of the highest rank not only 
in the South, but for that matter, right 
here in this Detroit of ours, where life 
is so well worth living. 
"There have been men whose memory 
is revered today by all the millions of 
American people, but who did not disdain these unions, and also who did not 
disdain to let their children sink, and 
suffer, for lack of the physical support 
and the moral support which they owed 
them, and have paid them, but which 
they never paid. 
"People are fond of calling the union 
of whites and blacks unnatural, but is it 
so? OPINION 233 
"Look the question straight in the 
face, even if you don't like it. I don't 
like it any better than you do, but I'm 
looking right at it now. 
"If illicit unions between blacks and 
whites were unnatural, there wouldn't be 
the thousands, and hundreds of thousands, and millions of them that there 
are. 
"If they were unnatural, the black race 
would be coal black to this day. 
"If they were unnatural there wouldn't 
be enough of these unions to make the 
race even a seal brown, let alone the 
yellow it now is. 
"As a cold fact, the dislike which most 
white people have to these unions, is not 
the revolt of nature against them. 
"It is simply the revolt of taste—the 
feeling that a Beau Brummell would experience if confronted at breakfast with 
a perfectly wholesome dish of salt pork 
and molasses 
"The relation between the races will 
continue in the future as it has lasted 
through the centuries, in spite of all the 
terrors of the law. 
"Nothing can stop it, but one thing 
can raise the relation to a higher and 
purer plane—that is, the sanctification of 
marriage. 
"It is that one good possibility in all 
this welter of wrong that the sages from 
Flint, Lansing and Saranac are aiming to 
wipe out. 
"And so all they can do by their meddling is to do harm. 
"As to the great movement of the 
races they are helpless. They are like 
mere ants clinging to the periphery of the 
great wheel of evolution. Its top is in 
the clouds, and its bottom sweeps the low 
places of the earth. But with their antlike perceptions they have decided that it 
is whirling in the wrong direction, and 
have passed a resolution that it must be 
reversed." 
The Chicago Tribune has an editorial 
entitled " A Useless Law. " 
"There is a bigger thing than law which 
prohibits the intermarriage of blacks and 
whites. It is unconquerable sentiment. 
Then why give it the disagreeable expression of legal enactment? Wh y make 
it a matter of record that the law recognizes a distinction between citizens of the 
United States? Why make the hollowness of our democracy a matter of record 
when it is not needed?" 
m 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Driving along one of Charlotte's principal thoroughfares last Sunday afternoon we came face to face with a sign 
which stunned us. It was in big, bold 
letters and read "Colored People Not 
Allowed in This Park." The chief of 
police, a Mr. Moore, had signed it so 
the board itself declared. Just a little 
plank like that looks innocent enough. It 
has so many counterparts along our 
streets where there is much land to be 
occupied— for Charlotte is a real estate 
bonanza, if lots marked for sale are a 
true sign: Well, there was the board 
and in the rear of it "Independence 
Park," given to the city by some generous citizens a few years aback, presumably for white people. This part is now 
set apart as a playground for white children. The city having prepared it and 
kept it "park like" out of the funds accruing from the taxes of all polls and 
property—black as well as white.— Star 
of Zion, Charlotte, N. C. 
This week the city of Miami has on 
her gala clothes; she is advertising her 
wares to the world showing the "depths 
from which she has come" and the 
heights she has reached. Every factor 
that contributed to its development is to 
be in full blast. Floats of an historical 
character showing the ancient beginning 
of "The Magic City" and floats revealing 
the present day possessions will roll 
along the streets. The city has gone to 
expense to advertise the "goods" of 
Miami. Yet, notwithstanding the fact, 
that the Negro was in the very first line 
of pioneers that laid the foundations of 
Miami, felling its forests, fighting its 
pestiferous mosquitoes and everything 
that it takes to bring the "Magic City" 
up to its present splendor, there has been 
no effort made to have the part the 
Negro played in Miami's history recognized.— The New Monrovia (Fla.) 
Journal. 234 TH E CRISIS 
There are two routes from North 
America to the mouth of the canal. One 
lies between Cuba and Haiti and the 
other between Haiti and Porto Rico. 
Whichever way is chosen by any craft, 
Haiti is found lying right across its path. 
"By one of the curious shifts of the current of commerce, such as brings an obscure station on the main line of a railroad, the opening of the Panama canal 
places the island of Haiti in the midst of 
the stream of the world's traffic." There 
are other islands that also occupy more 
or less strategic position in relation to the 
canal, such as Jamaica, Porto Rico, Martinique and Saint Thomas, but, unfortunately! for the United States, the strong 
hands of Great Britain and France and 
Denmark are in control in these places, 
except Porto Rico. It is true that there 
is a coaling station at Guantanamo, in 
Cuba, for the use of the American navy, 
but it is an insignificant concern and inadequate entirely for the needs of the 
trade. Haiti is in the midst of the stream. 
Haiti is isolated from the rest of 
America. No one will particularly feel 
offended if Haiti is hurt. No other sister 
nation to come to her help. None need 
say "Our turn next." Haiti, therefore, is 
easy to be controlled. 
To the end that a nefarious scheme 
might find ground on which to stand, 
public opinion in the United States is 
being misguided, not only in using extreme virulence in emphasizing Haiti's 
political misfortunes, but also in distorting the facts relating to the financial 
standing of this little republic. They 
would make it appear that it will not pay 
its debts and that its creditors fail even 
in their attempts to collect interest when 
due 
Is there real cause for alarm on the 
part of any one, acting in good faith, 
even to intimate that such a debt is a 
menace to the existence of a government 
that has for over a century maintained 
its credit in the world? Here stands a 
country with a per capita debt of $13.74, 
with the United States with a per capita 
debt of $23.72 and England $80 and 
France $150 and Germany $15.00, and 
they tell you that they are alarmed by its 
debt threatening its national existence. 
Is it difficult to uncover the hand at 
work and that which it is reaching after? 
Is it possible to disguise any longer the 
aim in view of the outcry concerning 
Haiti? Is it necessary in order to assure commensurate returns to the 
United States for the $400,000,000 invested in the Panama Canal that Haiti be 
under American control? Will Haiti 
yield? It is worth while to watch the 
game.—• Bishop John Hurst, in the A. 
M. E. Quarterly Review. 
Unknown to most persons the oldest 
iron implement in the world is in the 
University Museum, having been found 
by the Eckley B. Coxe expedition to 
Nubia a few years ago 
It is an iron spearhead about 10 
inches long, and the astonishing thing 
is that in every respect it resembles 
spearheads used by the African Negroes 
to this day, even to the manner in which 
the shaft is inserted. The spearhead was 
found in a tomb at Behen, near Wadi 
Haifa, in Nubia, by the Coxe University 
Museum Expedition in a long row of 
tombs belonging to the Twelfth Egyptian 
dynasty. . . . The find made a sensation, as in all the other tombs there was 
no metal but bronze. If it were possible 
to tell exactly the date of the Twelfth 
dynasty it would be easy to tell how old 
is this piece of iron. Archaeologists are 
almost 1,500 years apart in their estimates, but very recently the Petrie estimates have been confirmed which place 
this dynasty at about 3400 B. C , or about 
5300 years ago. The importance of the 
discovery lies in the fact that iron in 
Europe was not known until at least 
1200 B. C , and was not in common use 
for implements until centuries later. 
This is one more evidence, and a very 
important one, that the smelting of iron 
was first practiced among the Negroes. 
This is the first time an implement anything like so old has been found—one 
whose antiquity is unquestioned. It appears that iron beads are very ancient 
and were esteemed as better than gold. 
Homer mentions a piece of iron as a 
great prize contested for in games. That 
Negroes invented the iron art seems confirmed by the fact that they never had 
bronze; that they have no traditions of 
the art being given them and by the fact 
that they smelt it to this day differently 
from all other peoples.— Philadelphia 
Press. ORGANIZATION 
IF the Negroes of the United States want to know 
what organization is and 
what it can accomplish 
along racial lines they 
should buy the American 
Jewish Year Book. This publication 
has courteously been sent to this office 
and a glance at its pages is most informing. 
The organization of the 3,000,000 
Jews in America is little less than marvelous. To name a few of these organizations; there is the Alliance Israelite 
Universelle, over fifty years old with 
eight branches; there is the American 
Jewish Committee, a great federation of 
individuals and organizations "to prevent the infraction of the civil and religious rights of Jews in any part of the 
world." Its fourteen districts cover the 
United States and beside the large sums 
which it handles annually it has an 
Emergency Trust Fund of nearly $200,-
000; the American Jewish Historical 
Society is twenty7two years old and has 
373 members; twenty-four periodicals 
belong to the American Jewish Press Association ; the Workmen's Circle has 
509 branches with 45,000 members; the 
Baron De Hirsch Fund has millions for 
agricultural and industrial education; 
the Council of Jewish Women is seven 
years old with 78 sections covering the 
whole country; the Federation of American Zionists is seventeen years old with 
14,000 members; the Roumanian Jews 
are organized with 40,000 members, and 
the Hebrew Sheltering and Immigrant 
Aid Society has 29,000 members. There 
are endless secret and semi-secret 
orders: the B'nai B'rith with 34,000 
members; the two branches of Brith 
Abraham with over 250,000 members; 
the Brith Sholom with 46,000 members ; 
the Free Sons of Judah with 23,000 
members, and so on. There are agricultural and colonial associations, agricultural aid societies, a Jewish chatauqua, a consumptives' relief society, beside colleges, theological seminaries and 
last but not least a great national conference of Jewish charities with its 115 
constituent societies. 
The Jewish Publication Society sends 
out the American Jewish Year Book annually and a number of other carefully 
selected publications. It is supported by 
12,000 members and has total assets of 
over $100,000. There have been 26 
Jews in Congress and there are five in 
the present Congress. 
This is the great net work of organization which makes the Jewish people 
the tremendous force for good and for 
uplift which they are in this country. Let 
black men look at them with admiration 
and emulate them. Only in our secret 
orders can we approach them from afar, 
while in voluntary organizations and 
philanthropic activity we can see from 
the record of these 3,000,000 what our 
10,000,000 have to learn. 
EDITORIAL 236 TH E CRISIS 
DO W E WAN T ARTICLES ? 
I WRIT E you to ask if 
such an article would 
receive favorable con ­
sideration if sent." 
We cannot answer . 
This is like askin g : 
"How would you like to live in the 
moon ?" or "Do you want to know John 
What-is-it?" or "Would you like my last 
novel?" 
We do not know. It depends. We 
do know this: we consider nothing too 
good for THE CRISIS : essays, descriptions, stories, poems, facts, jokes—anything good. But whether the matter you 
offer is good or not, we can only tell by 
reading it. Therefore, send it by all 
means, not forgetting to enclose return 
postage. 
T O OUR YOUN G POETS 
OF all forms of writing, 
poetry is the most difficult. It is not mere 
rhyme, it is not merely 
rythym. It is not prose 
cut into lengths. It must 
have ideas. It must above all be beautiful, alluring, delicate, fine. Few can 
write poetry. Poetry calls for thought, 
feeling, and long and careful practice. 
To know what poetry is, read poetry. 
Have you ever read any great masterpieces of poetry? Buy Palgrave's 
"Golden Treasury of English Poetry." It 
is a little book and costs one dollar. Buy it 
and read it through a few times. Add to 
this Max Eastman's "Enjoyment of 
Poetry" and Braithwaites "Anthology of 
Magazine Verse, 1914." After reading 
and studying these try your hand again 
at writing poetry. 
"ADVERTISIN G MR. HYDE " 
THE New York Tribune 
1
 has recently assumed a 
very striking pose as a 
high moral and philanthropic organ. Th e 
phrase "Editorial M r . 
Jeckyl and advertising Mr. Hyde " has 
been rolled unctiously on its lips. Among 
other things this paper is promoting a 
land scheme for the sale of lots at 
Beachwood, N. J. A director of this 
Association made a contract in the usual 
form to buy one of these lots. Later he 
received the following letter: 
Dear Sir: 
Enclosed herewith please find check 
for $5.60 which we received for the 
second payment on your lots at Beachwood, N. J. 
Since we have just learned that you 
are a member of the colored race, we 
regret to inform you that you cannot 
hold title to any property at Beachwood and beg to quote you the clause 
in our deed covering this point, which 
specifically states:— 
"Said party of the second part, 
by the acceptance of this deed, covenant and agrees, as a covenant running with the land thereby conveyed 
. . . that the said property or any 
part thereof will not be sold, rented 
or conveyed to any person of any 
race other than the Caucasian race." 
If you will call at this office in the 
near future, bringing with you your 
contract and all receipts to you from 
this office, we will gladly refund all 
moneys paid by you according to your 
contract with us. 
Yours very truly, 
(Signed) C. C. GLEESON, 
Promotion Department, 
The New York Tribune. EDITORIA L 237 
EXAGGERATIO N 
MR. JOHN M. PARKER, 
of New Orleans, an 
owner of plantations has 
bee n talking recently. 
He says after the usual 
twaddle about his "Negro Mammy" that "the southern Negro 
has every opportunity that the white 
man has and it is unfair to say that we 
have taken advantage of him. Most of 
the blame lies at the door of the Negro 
himself." 
To this we may add an extraordinary 
speech made by a colored "doctor" Wilkins at Little Rock, Ark., in which he 
says: "Does anyone believe that Lincoln 
would ever have signed a paper in which 
he could have foreseen such a saturnalia 
of wickedness as reigned over the South 
during the days of reconstruction ?" And 
finally W . M. McDonald, of Texas, a 
man for whom TH E CRISIS has hitherto 
had the greatest respect, rushed into 
print after the Trotter affair to defend 
the President and up-braid Mr. Trotter. 
What are we going to do with persons 
of this sort? They all know better. Mr. 
Parker knows that the exploitation of 
Negro laborers by white southerners, 
the denial of their political rights and the 
caste system which has been built up is 
nothing more than organized theft and 
degradation for just as many of the 8,-
000,000 southern Negroes as the system 
is able to hold down. Wilkins knows or 
ought to know that the current tales of 
the horrors of Reconstruction are threefourths false, and that Reconstruction 
was one of the most successful experiments in democracy that a free country 
ever made. Mr. McDonald has more 
respect for Mr. Trotter's brave action 
than he has for himself and he said what 
he did because he thought his banking 
and real estate interests demanded it 
from a Negro living in Texas. 
What, then, are we to do? Nothing. 
Such exaggerated statements answer 
themselves. 
MONTICELL O 
I A M a student in 
University and my home 
is at Monticello, Ga., 
where the recent notorious lynching took place. 
I know the family well 
and I thought the following facts which 
I know to be true might help you to get 
a more correct idea of the affair than 
you could otherwise get. 
(1 ) The boy murdered was generally known to be plainly "feeble-minded." 
(2 ) According to the statement of 
my mother, it is generally believed in the 
town of Monticello that the other members of the family never attempted to 
harm the officer until he had needlessly 
struck their mother! 
(3) One of the girls, Eula, went 
through grammar school, always leading 
her classes in spelling and grammar. (I 
was in grammar school with her.) 
(4 ) The members of the family, except the father, were not notoriously 
bad. 
(5 ) The "lynchers" chose the most 
law-abiding and respectable colored section of the town for the scene of the 
murder and paraded the victims through 
another colored section in route to the 
place of carnage. 
(6 ) The "mob" warned the only 
colored doctor in the town (Dr. Turner, 
of McGill) not to have anything to do 
with the dead or wounded and frightened him to such an extent that he is 
thinking of leaving the town. 
Very truly yours, 238 TH E CRISIS 
TH E BATTLE. OF NE W ORLEANS 
THE Louisiana Historical 
Society has been celebrating the centennial of 
the Battle of New Orleans . Neighboring 
states were invited, the 
English Consul sent a gracious message, 
the Government sent a warship and the 
President sent a representative. There 
were white soldiers, white orators and 
white school children but the colored 
people had no part. Evidently the erudite association quite forgot that little 
speech which General Jackson made to 
his colored troops December 18, 1814: 
"To the Men of Color: Soldiers! 
From the shores of Mobile I collected 
you to arms; I invited you to share in 
the perils and to divide the glory of your 
white countrymen. I expected much 
from you, for I was not uninformed of 
those qualities which must render you 
so formidable to an invading foe. I 
knew that you could endure hunger and 
thirst and all the hardships of war. I 
knew that you loved the land of your 
nativity, and that, like ourselves, you 
had to defend all that is most dear to 
man. But you surpass my hopes. I 
have found in you, united to these qualities, that noble enthusiasm which impels to great deeds. 
"Soldiers! The President of the 
United States shall be informed of your 
conduct on the present occasion; and the 
voice of the representatives of the American nation shall applaud your valor, as 
your general now praises your ardor. 
The enemy is near. His sails cover the 
lakes. But the brave are united; and if 
he finds us contending among ourselves, 
it will be for the prize of valor and fame, 
its noblest reward." 
TH E WHIT E CHRIST 
IT seems fair to judge the 
Christianity of whit e 
folk by two present day 
developments: the World 
Wa r and "Billy" Sun ­
day. As to the widespread and costly murder that is being 
waged today by the children of the 
Prince of Peace comment is quite unnecessary. It simply spells the failure of 
Christianity. As to "Billy" Sunday there 
is room for opinions. Personally we do 
not object to him; he is quite natural 
under the circumstances and a fit expression of his day. He is nearly the 
same thing as the whirling dervish, the 
snake dancer and devotee of "Mumbo 
Jumbo." Such methods of appealing to 
primitive passions and emotions have 
been usual in the history of the world. 
Today they are joined, in the case of 
Mr. Sunday, to picturesque abuse of 
the English language, unusual contortions and a curious moral obtuseness 
which allows Mr. Sunday to appropriate 
a whole speech belonging to Robert Ingersol and use it as his own. The result 
has been a large number of converts and 
widespread demand for Mr. Sunday's 
services. All this seems necessary. Evidently Mr. Sunday's methods are the 
only ones that appeal to white Christians. 
Reason does not appeal. Suffering and 
poverty does not appeal. The lynching 
and burning of human beings and torturing of women has no affect. But the 
contortions of Mr. Sunday bring people 
down the "saw-dust" trail. 
Selah! 
But hereafter let no white man sneer 
at the medicine men of West Africa or 
the howling of the Negro revival. The 
Negro church is at least democratic. It 
welcomes everybody. It draws no color 
line. TH E WHIT E WITCH 239 
THE WHITE WITCH 
By JAMES WELDON JOHNSON 
O, brothers mine, take care ! Take care! 
The great white witch rides out to-night, 
Trust not your prowess nor your strength ; 
Your only safety lies in flight; 
For in her glance there is a snare, 
And in her smile there is a blight. 
The great white witch you have not seen ? 
Then, younger brothers mine, forsooth, 
Like nursery children you have looked 
For ancient hag and snaggled tooth ; 
But no, not so; the witch appears 
In all the glowing charms of youth. 
Her lips are like carnations red, 
Her face like new-born lilies fair, 
Her eyes like ocean waters blue, 
She moves with subtile grace and air, 
And all about her head there floats 
The golden glory of her hair. 
But though she always thus appears 
In form of youth and mood of mirth, 
Unnumbered centuries are hers, 
The infant planets saw her birth; 
The child of throbbing Life is she, 
Twin sister to the greedy earth. 
For I have seen the great white witch, 
And she has led me to her lair, 
And I have kissed her red, red lips 
And cruel face so white and fair; 
Around me she has twined her arms, 
And bound me with her yellow hair. 
I felt those red lips burn and sear 
My body like a living coal; 
Obeyed the power of those eyes 
As the needle trembles to the pole; 
And did not care although I felt 
The strength go ebbing from my soul. 
Oh! she has seen your strong young 
limbs, 
And heard your laughter loud and gay, 
And in your voices she has caught 
The echo of a far off day, 
When man was closer to the earth; 
And she has marked you for her prey. 
She feels the old Antaean strength 
In you, the great dynamic beat 
Of primal passions, and she sees 
In you the last besieged retreat 
Of love relentless, lusty, fierce, 
Love pain-ecstatic, cruel-sweet. 
And back behind those smiling lips, 
And down within those laughing eyes, 
And underneath the soft caress 
Of hand and voice and purring sighs 
The shadow of the panther lurks, 
The spirit of the vampire lies. 
O, brothers mine, take care ! Take care ! 
The great white witch rides out to-night! 
O, younger brothers mine, beware! 
Look not upon her beauty bright; 
For in her glance there is a snare, 
And in her smile there is a blight. TH E CRISIS 
LINCOL N 
By T. J. CALLOWA Y 
LINCOLN, Maryland, 
has a plan to establish without restriction 
as to race, but primarily 
by, for and of colored 
persons, a community 
with its own municipal 
government, schools , 
churches, c o m m e r -
cial an d industrial life. 
T o th e superficial observe r this plan may 
appear to be a surrender 
t o t h e vicious segregation sentiment tha t 
would forcibly separate colored people 
from others. To the student, however, 
the voluntary association of families at 
Lincoln and under similar movements is 
rather to be regarded as an application 
of the homeopathic principle— similia 
similibus curantur, which may be freely 
translated as saying that disease germs 
contain the means for their own destruction. If we accept the American probTH E PAR K 
TH E STATIO N 
lem before us as a condition rather than 
a theory, we are agreed that Negroes 
must unite for effective progress, however much we may differ as to abstract 
principles involved. 
In the winter of 1908-9, The Lincoln 
Land and Improvement Company, of 
Washington, D. C , Incorporated, was 
chartered with a capital stock of $200,-
000, to build a town. After considering 
many sites the company 
purchased a beautiful 
trac t o f land on t h e 
Washington, Baltimore 
an d Annapolis Electric 
Railroad. With due surveys and gradin g the 
future city was give n 
birt h an d christened 
Lincoln, Maryland. 
The engineers wer e 
instructe d to make 
things roomy , henc e 
streets are 50, 60 and 70 
feet wide. The building 
lots are 50 feet wide by 
150 feet deep. These lots 
ar e sold for $270 each 
under a title , building 
and improvement bond, 
on eas y monthly payments of $10.00 dow n 
and $4.00 per month . 
The bond provide s LINCOLN 241 
MR . CALLOWAY' S HOM E 
that should the purchaser die while making his payments a deed shall issue to the 
decedent's family or heirs without further payment. There is a complete water 
system that furnishes spring water under 
pressure to all the homes; there are 
about a score of homes built and building, a church, a brick yard, a store and 
hotel. But the story of Lincoln cannot 
be told so well by sattistic s as by personal 
sketches. Here are four : 
I. T. Hatton attended 
the publi c schools of 
Washington , D. C , 
graduated fro m th e 
Armstrong High School, 
and prepared himself as 
an architect. He elected 
to reside in Lincoln and 
was among the first to 
pla n and cause t o b e 
erected his own hom e 
here. Throug h his 
guidance we have bee n 
able to maintain a high 
standard o f excellence 
i n Lincoln home planning. He maintains an 
offic e i n Washington 
City and thus is in touch 
with the larger business 
world. Hi s leadership 
at Lincoln has helped us 
and we have helped him 
b y putting practically 
all our business o f d e -
signing into his hands. 
F. W. Holland, a native of Virginia, learned 
carpentry in Howar d 
University's Industrial 
Department. He was induced to come to Lincoln to take charge of 
the construction of on e 
home. His work was so 
satisfactory that he has 
bee n engaged t o construct or supervise other 
homes. Having familiarized himself wit h local 
conditions and prepared 
himself to eliminate unnecessary expense h e 
can buil d homes a t a 
pric e far below others 
and thus save us much money. By this 
arrangement he has steady work and we 
are assured of honest and faithful construction by a neighbor and friend rather 
than the doubtful quality of work by intinerant mechanics. 
W. A. Davis conducted a grocery store 
in Philadelphia for some dozen of years 
in close competition with others, so that 
DR . SEATON' S HOM E 242 TH E CRISIS 
he could never mak e 
much financial head ­
way. H e sol d hi s 
business , came to 
Lincol n and has co n -
structed an d equipped 
a building tha t serves 
fo r a store, dinin g 
room, hotel a n d residenc e . Wit h cows 
givin g milk and the 
other sources of income h e is makin g 
good, and at the same 
tim e is affording the 
community a merchant 
i n ful l sympathy 
with our best ambi ­
tions, a ma n read y 
fully to co-operate in all 
movements for the progress of Lincoln . 
Dr. Daniel P. Seaton was a grown 
man when President Lincol n issued the 
Emancipation Proclamation. H e grasped 
the first opportunity for education, finally succeeded in being awarded a medical 
diploma from a Philadelphia medical 
college and later took special studies in 
the theological department of Howar d 
University. A s was customary in earlier 
years, he combined the practice of medicine with the ministry. H e found it too 
much labor to do both, so gave up medicine. H e has made some three trips to 
Palestine and has published a book, 
"The Lan d of Promise. " Dr. Seaton has 
been thrifty and owns unencumbered 
real estate in Washington, D . C , Baltimore, Md. , and Chester, Pa . H e had 
the means to purchase a home wherever 
he desired, but he chose Lincoln , where 
his home has been planned by an architect, built by carpenters, plasterers, tinners, furnace men, etc., all of his own 
race. His residence there is a source of 
inspiration to his neighbors. H e is the 
"Gran d Ol d Man " at Lincoln , as might 
have been seen whe n 
th e whole community 
joine d in a surprise 
testimonial on hi s recent birthday. 
Th e foregoin g 
sketches are types and 
illustrations. It is not 
the men alone who are 
worthy of note. Except 
fo r th e difficulty o f 
statin g the case, the 
facts as to Lincol n 
women woul d b e of 
eve n greater interest. 
The Alph a Progressive 
Club is the special organ of the women, bein g a n outgrowth o f 
th e Lincol n Citizens 
Association, composed 
of both sexes, which is performing some 
of the functions of a city council and 
chamber of commerce. 
A s Lincol n is but 14 miles from the 
heart of Washington City, 26 miles from 
Baltimore and directly between these 
cities its citizens have the advantage of 
being accessible to employment in either 
city and within easy reach of their markets over a choice of transportation by 
trolley, steam railway or driveway. 
If the future of Lincol n can be prophesied from its brief past it is destined to 
meet a situation forced upon the colored 
people. If we have learned voluntarily 
to unite i n churches, fraternal societies, 
schools and apartments we shall find 
some additional conveniences if we 
voluntarily unite in communities of our 
own choosing. Then, and not until then, 
wil l we, as a race, learn to feed, clothe 
and house ourselves, an operation effectively performed by the slowly creeping 
snail but a lesson yet to be learned by 
some of those higher creatures that claim 
to be made "i n God's own image." 
MR. T . J. CALLOWA Y 
A N OL D FOLKS ' HOM E 
IT is noticeable that the number of 
colored people asking charity in hard 
times like the present is much less than 
the great poverty of the race would lead 
one to expect. The reason for this is 
the large amount of unrecorded and personal charity that takes place inside the 
race lines: the cheerful helping of neigh-A N OLD FOLKS' HOM E 243 
bors, the adoption of children and the 
care of the old. In the latter work 
Negro charity has become institutional 
and the old folks' home is perhaps the 
most characteristic Negro charity. 
There are today in the United States 
not less than one hundred homes supported and conducted very largely by 
colored people. One of them, the Home 
for Aged and Infirm Colored Persons at 
Philadelphia, was endowed by a colored 
man in 1864 with a capital of about 
$100,000. Philanthropic whites have 
added to this until the Home's property 
now is worth $400,000. In other cases, 
as in Springfield, Mass.. a colored man, 
Primus Mason, founded a home for all 
races; and in New Bedford, a colored 
woman, Miss Elizabeth" C. Carter, has a 
home for which she has collected over 
$35,000. 
This article refers primarily to the 
Home for Aged Colored People in Cleveland, Ohio. It was founded by Mrs. 
Eliza Bryant in 1893 and incorporated in 
1896. The present property containing 
eleven rooms and all improvements was 
purchased in 1901, burned down soon 
after, but reoccupied in 1902. The home 
is valued at $11,725, with a mortgage indebtedness of $4,000. The home collects 
through donations, entertainments and 
the like about $2,200 a year. There is a 
house furnishing committee which collected $373 worth of furniture last year; 
there is a $15,000 campaign committee 
which is hard at work. The institution 
is conducted by a board of trustees consisting of twenty persons of whom four 
are men and the rest women. The home 
is a member of the Cleveland Federation 
for Charity and Philanthrophy and thus 
receives advice and co-operation in the 
latest philanthropic methods. This institution together with dozens of similar 
institutions throughout the United States 
call for the sympathy and co-operation 
of all right-minded people. 
TH E COLORE D OL D FOLKS ' HOM E A T CLEVELAN D 244 TH E CRISIS 
A N OPEN WINDO W CLASS 
By AGNES P. BERRY, M. D. 
OUR open window class began its 
existence September, 1914, at the 
Thomas Durban School, Philadelphia. 
This school under Mr. J. R. P. Brock, 
has already aroused considerable interest 
by the original lines along which it is 
working out the problem of vocational 
training, for children in the southern 
section of the city. 
The room chosen for our open window experiment was a pleasant sunny 
room, southern exposure, equipped as 
any other modern school room with the 
exception of the desk chairs, of various 
sizes. These chairs could be moved back 
against the walls in one minute, and the 
floor space cleared for gymnastics. W e 
devoted five minutes in every hour to 
these exercises, for deep breathing and 
chest development, and on very cold 
days, simple warming exercises. 
The children for the class were carefully selected from the pupils of the 
second, third and fourth grades. The 
Medical Inspectors went carefully over 
the children examining and selecting only 
those most in need of the treatment. 
The homes of these children were then 
each in turn visited by "The Home and 
School Visitor." The parents were interviewed, the plans and objects of the 
class explained and the consent obtained 
to have the child enrolled. The parents 
were glad to cooperate and we find ourselves at this time with more than 
enough children scattered throughout 
the regular classes, to form an additional 
open window class. 
When we assembled for the first time, 
we found a most discouraging looking 
aggregation. W e had collected the 
anaemic, the rachitic, the flat and narrow 
chested—in fact almost every variety of 
the devitalized and poorly nourished. 
With few exceptions they were listless, 
inert, and retarded in their studies. 
Added to this, many were morose and 
irritable and a large percentage were exceptional disciplinary cases. W e tried to 
persuade ourselves that we felt very 
hopeful about them and so we began. 
Each child was provided with a 
woolen blanket, sweater, cap, gloves, and 
a little rug for the feet on very cold 
days. Throughout the term the windows were kept open, except on two or 
three exceptionally cold days when it became necessary to bring the temperature 
up to our SO degrees Fahrenheit. 
After the fifteen minute morning assembly, the children were taken to the 
basement, given a warm shower bath and 
vigorous rubbing, under Miss Richardson's supervision. 
Returning to the class room each child 
was served with a hot breakfast, and at 
10 o'clock, the children had cleared away 
the dishes and were ready for the routine 
class work. These breakfasts were provided by Miss Alice Boughton of The 
Home and School League, who has had 
great success in serving these school 
lunches throughout the city. For three 
cents apiece, each child was served with 
breakfast, the children bringing whatever 
they could and the deficit being made up 
from an emergency school fund which 
we try to keep on hand. 
After breakfast the children were 
taught in groups, according to their 
standing. They were given the usual 
morning and afternoon recess periods 
and the physical exercises for 5 minutes, 
every hour. 
Regularly during the term the School 
Nurse and the Medical Inspector have 
weighed and measured each child and 
kept careful record of every gain. 
These children whose age averaged 11 
years were found in the beginning to be 
below the average 70 pounds of the 
normal 11 year old child. They gave an 
average weight of 68 2-3 pounds. After 
6 months in the open window class they 
showed a gain of 6 1-3 pounds each, 
making an average of 75 pounds. 
These results have been watched with 
much interest by our many visitors and 
even by the newspapers who have taken 
such kindly interest in our experiment. 
W e who have been with these children 
day after day have been more than gratified by the improvement which the gain 
in pounds and inches alone does not en-PAEAN 245 
tirely show. There is such a difference 
in the increased vitality, the alertness of 
these one time dull and listless little ones. 
The discipline which was at first "A 
Problem" now requires but passing attention at rare intervals. These children 
now are alert and interested in their 
work; they are no longer quarrelsome 
and irritable as at first, and life to them 
seems worth living. Then 'too, they 
carry into their homes, their little lessons 
on the importance of ventilation and sunshine. They are no longer satisfied as 
formerly to be shut up in a room with 
every breath of fresh air shut out. 
Throughout the entire country people 
are beginning to take notice of the effects 
of the widely spreading fresh air crusade. In New York City open window 
classes were opened during the past 
term without the equipment as we have 
been using it here. The windows were 
kept open and the regular class workfollowed—the children being permitted 
to keep on their out door clothing. 
Only a few months ago, the National 
Open Air Association was organized to 
advocate and spread the doctrine of fresh 
air teaching. The officers and members 
came from many states in the Union— 
North, South, East and West, each sending its quota. Thus our class is only one 
of the small beginnings, which we hope 
may have more far reaching effects in 
the future. 
PAEAN 
By OTT O L. BOHANAN 
Keep me in chains ! I defy you ! 
That is a pow'r I deny you! 
I will sing! I will rise! 
Up ! T o the lurid skiesWith the smoke of my soul, 
With my last breath, 
Tar-feathered, I shall cry: 
Ethiopia shall not die! 
And hand in hand with Death, 
Pass on! 
I shall not curse you. But singingMy singing! fatefully ringing 
Till startled and dumb 
Yo u falter, the sum 
Of your crime shall reveal—• 
This do I prophesy . . . 
O Heart wrung dry! 
Awake 1 
Startle the world with thy cry : 
Ethiopia shall not die! 246 TH E CRISIS 
TH E FIGHT IN CONGRESS 
"1^7TLL the Sixty-third Congress ad-
* ^ journ without passing some 
measure of discrimination against the 
Negro? This is the question that is 
agitating the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People. 
The present Congress will long be remembered for its Negro baiting and may 
before adjournment, or even in extra 
session write its name in history. During 
these last crowded days, while attention 
is engrossed by the Merchant Marine, 
the Army and Navy bills and other important measures, a few tireless Bourbons are quietly redoubling their efforts 
to push through anti-Negro legislation. 
Undoubtedly it would be embarrassing 
for them to return to their southern constituents without being able to report the 
enactment of a single hostile law against 
the Negro. 
The real menace lies in the possibility 
of trading votes. Northern members 
with no prejudices or convictions on the 
race question may be willing to vote for 
anti-Negro legislation in return for votes 
on other measures in which they are interested. The anti-intermarriage bill, 
with its appeal to general ignorance and 
prejudice, may go through on this account. Already it has been jammed 
through the House with the speed and 
secrecy which is a characteristic procedure of the South in all such proposed 
legislation in Congress. These bills arc 
usually brought up suddenly without 
warning when there are few members 
present and rushed through committees 
with no time for hearings by legislators. 
These same men, however, paid at the 
rate of twenty dollars a day can on occasion remain in session all night to filibuster in speeches eleven hours or more 
long. It is such stuff that fills the Congressional Record, the most expensive 
free-speech organ in the world. 
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People has, however, been standing on guard. It employs in each branch at Congress a man 
whose duty it is to keep it informed by 
mail and telegram of all proceedings 
affecting colored people. These men are 
also in close touch with the District of 
Columbia branch which acts as a Congressional committee in Washington, cooperating with the headquarters in New 
York and leading the fight locally. 
Branches, members, officers and friends 
all over the country co-operate by pouring telegrams, letters and petitions into 
Congress and even appearing before 
committees at hearings. 
This is the machinery that defeated 
the amendment to the Immigration Bill 
as told in the February CRISIS. Last year 
a series of discriminating measures, antiintermarriage bills, "Jim-Crow"' car bills, 
etc., were quietly asphyxiated. The 
dangerous segregation bill for colored 
civil servants was killed in the committee 
through the work of Mr. Archibald 
Grirnke, President of the District of 
Columbia Branch. The work on the 
Smith-Lever Bill has already been described in TH E CRISIS for March and • 
April, 1914. 
Never has Congress, however, so engrossed the attention of our Association 
as during the last two months. Hardly a 
day passes without bringing a telegram 
announcing some new legislation affecting colored people. In addition to the antiintermarriage bill which has passed the 
House and is before the Senate District 
of Columbia Committee, there are six 
"Jim-Crpw" car bills in the House and 
one of these, the Clark Bill, has been 
favorably reported by the House District 
Committee and may come up for action 
any day. The Association, and especially the District of Columbia Branch, is 
working hard against these measures, 
knowing well that "Jim-Crow" car legislation in Washington means the spread 
of such laws in border cities and perhaps 
even further North. Already St. Louis 
is trying to pass a segregation ordinance 
which the local branch of our Association is helping to fight. A Committee of 
Thirty composed of fifteen white and fifteen colored Men has been organized 
there for this work. N. A. A. C. P. 247 
Last year in Michigan the Detroit 
Branch defeated an anti-intermarriage 
bill. This year a general eugenics law is 
proposed in that state, prohibiting the 
marriage of idiots, imbeciles, insane, etc., 
and in the very first clause the intermarriage of whites and persons of Negro 
descent is forbidden. This vicious mixing of measures makes it difficult to fight 
the proposition and disentangle the race 
discrimination from the other features. 
The eugenic features have already won 
for the bill the support of most of the 
women's clubs in Michigan and of many 
of the churches and welfare societies. 
It is the task of our local branch to enlighten these well-meaning but mistaken 
people. 
TH E NEGRO-BAITERS 
A STUD Y of the vote on these discriminating measures is suggested 
to CRISIS readers. They were as follows : Is your representative here ? 
AFRICAN EXCLUSION AMENDMENT 
Senate Vote. 
Yeas, 29; Nays, 25 ; Not voting. 42. 
ASHURSI 
Borah 
Bryan 
Chamberlain 
Clarke, Ark. 
Fletcher 
Hardwick 
James 
JOHNSON 
TTERN 
Yeas, 75 
Ahercrombie 
Adamson 
Aiken 
Aswell 
Barkley • 
Bartlett 
Beall, Tex. 
Blackmon 
BORLAND 
Brockson 
Burgess 
Bvrnes, S. C. 
Candler, Miss. 
Caraway 
Church 
Collier 
Crisp 
Dent 
Dupre 
Eagle 
Edwards 
Estopinal 
Ferris 
Finley 
Flood, Va . 
YEAS—2 9 
Lee. Md. 
Marline, N. J. 
Mvei a 
Overman 
Poindextcr 
Reed 
Sheppard 
Simmons 
Srni'h, Anx . 
Smith, Ga. 
House Vote: 
Smith, S. C. 
Sterling 
Sutherland 
Swanson 
Thornton 
Vardaman 
White 
Williams 
Works 
Nays, 252 ; Not voting, 99. 
YEAS—7 5 
Floyd, Ark. 
Garner 
Garrett, Tex. 
Goodwin, Ark. 
Gregg 
Hardy 
Harrison 
Hangcn 
Hen in 
Helm 
Huehes, On. 
Humphreys, M 
Tacoway 
.Tohnson, S. ('. 
K itch in 
Lazaro 
Lee, Ga. 
LEVER 
Lewis. Md. 
Linthicuni 
Moon 
Morgan, La. 
Oldfield 
Park 
Quin 
Ragsdale 
Ravburn 
Rouse 
Sherley 
Sissnn 
Smalt 
Smith, Tex. 
Stephens. Miss. 
Sumners 
Talbott, Md. 
Talcott, N. Y. 
ISS.Taylor, AH . 
Taylor, Ark. 
Thomas 
Thompson, Okl 
TRIBBLE 
Underwoo 1 
Vaughan 
Vinson 
Watkins 
Watson 
Weave,-
Whaley 
Wi n go 
Young, Tex. 
ANTI-INTERMARRIAGE P>ILL 
House Vote 
Yeas, 2.>S; Nays, 60; Not voting, 126. 
YEAS—23 S 
A he TO O m Lie 
Adair 
Ad am son 
Aiken 
Alexander 
Ashhrook 
Aswell 
Avis 
Bnilev 
Baker 
Rarkley 
Barn hart 
Rartlett 
Barton 
Rcakes 
Beall, Tex. 
Bell, Cal. 
Rlackmnn 
Rorchei'3 
Rorland 
Rowdle 
Britten 
Rrocksen 
Rrown, N. V. 
Rrumbaugb, 
Rry-in 
Ruchanan, 111. 
Buchanan. Tex. 
Rurgess 
Burke, Wis. 
Rurnett 
Byrnes, S. C. 
Byrns, Tenn. 
Candler, Miss. 
Cantrill 
Caraway 
Carlin 
Carr 
Carter 
Church 
CHrk, Fla. 
(Mine ('-indv 
Collie? 
Connelly, Vans. 
('onnollv, Irjwa 
Cox 
Cramton 
< Vis;> 
Curry 
I
 1 ivcnpoi t 
] - ckcr 
1 >eitrick 
1 )ent 
Dcrsheri 
I Dickinson 
Dies 
Dillon 
Dixo-i 
Donob e 
Donovai 
Dooling 
Doolitll ; 
Dorenius 
1 >oughton 
Driscoll 
Dupre 
Eaale 
Edward i 
Estopin.il 
Ferguson 
Ferris 
Fields 
Finley 
FitzHenry 
Flood, Va. 
Flovd, Ark. 
Fordncy 
Foster 
Fowler 
Francis Old FIE 1.1 
Frenr O'Shaun essy 
French Padgett 
Gallagher Pace, N. C. 
Gallivan Paige, Mass. 
Card Palmer 
Gai ncr Park 
1
 larrett, Tenn. Patton, Pa, 
Garrett, Tex Peterson 
Godwin, N . c. 
Phclan 
Goodwin, A R K, Pliimley 
Gordon Porter 
Gorman Pou 
Goulden Prouty 
Graham, 111. Quin 
Gray Ragsdale 
Greene, Vt. Rainey 
Gregg Raker 
Gudger Ravburn 
Hamlin Reed 
Hardy Reilly, Wis. 
Harris Riordan 
Harrison Rogers 
Hay Rouse 
Havden Rubey 
Haves Russell 
HeHin Seldomridge 
Helm Sells 
Helvering Sherley 
Henry Sims 
Hensley Sinnott 
Hill Sisson 
Hobson Slavden 
Holland Slemp 
Houston Sloan 
Howard Small 
Howell Smith, Idaho 
Hughes, Ga. Smith, N . Y . 
Hughes, W . Va. Smith, Sami; W . 
Hull Smith, Tex. 
Humphreys, Miss.Sparkman 
Jacoway S ted man 
Tohnson, Ky Stephens, C-l. 
.Tohnson, S. c. Stephens, Miss. 
Keating Stephens, Nelir. 
Kennedv, O mn. Stephens, TEX . 
Key, Ohio Stevens, K. II. 
Kiess, Pa.^ Stone 
Kinkaid, Nel IR. Stout 
Kirkualrick Stringer 
Kitchin Sumners 
Stringer 
Sumners 
Konop 5 utherland 
Korbly Taggart 
Langlcy Tavenner 
Lee, Ga. Taylor, Ala. 
Lee, Pa. Taylor, Ark. 
Lever Taylor, Colo. 
Lewis, Md. Thomas 
Lieh Thompson, ()!,' 
Lloyd Treadway 
Lobeck Tribble 
Loncrgan Underbill 
McAndit ws Underwood 
McGilliciiddy Vaughan 
MeKellar Vinson 
McKenzie Vollmer 
McLaughlin Walker 
Maguire, Ne In. Watkins 
Mali an Watson 
Mapi s Weaver 
Martin Webb 
Mitchell Whaley 
Montague White 
Moon William3 
Morgan. ' )k! a. Wingo 
Moss, lnd. Winslow 
Mulkey Woods 
Mu rray Young, TEX . 
Neeley, Kan: 
Nolan, J. I. 248 TH E CRISIS 
ERNES T EVERET T JUS T 
Born in Charleston. S. C , 1883 ; A . B., Magna cum laude, Dartmouth, 1907 ; Phi Beta Kappa ; Professor 
of Physiology , Howar d University Medical School, Washington , D . C , 
SPINGAR N MEDALIST , 1914 
For distinguished research in Physiolog y and1 Biology . N. A. A. C. P. 249 
TH E CHAIRMAN'S SECOND ANNUA L 
TOU R 
THE chairman of the Board of Directors, Dr. J. E. Spingarn, has 
just returned from his second annual 
tour, and brings reports of a profound 
awakening interest in our cause throughout the Middle West. He spoke in fourteen Western cities, to audiences of various kinds, and received the most enthusiastic response wherever he spoke. 
The tour began at Pittsburgh on January 10th. Dr. Spingarn spent two days 
in that city, speaking at the First Unitarian Church, the Bethel A. M. E. 
Church, the St. James A. M. E. Church, 
at a luncheon of the Hungry Club, and 
to the students in sociology at the University of Pittsburgh. At Columbus, O., 
he addressed an enormous audience in 
the Auditorium of the Chamber of Commerce, from which hundreds were turned 
away for lack of room, and he spoke to 
the students of Ohio State University 
the following morning. At Springfield, 
Ohio, he spoke at the North Street A. 
M. E. Church, and to the students of 
Wittenberg College. In Dayton, Ohio, 
he spoke to a very large gathering at the 
Y. M. C. A. Hall, being introduced by 
D. F. Farland, Director of Public Welfare of the City; and the next day he was 
a guest at a luncheon given by the 
Greater Dayton Association, at which 
the Mayor and various other representative men and women were present. In 
Cincinnati, he spoke at the Douglass 
School Auditorium; and at Springfield, 
Ill., at the First M. E. Church, the Union 
Baptist Church, and St. Paul's A. M. E. 
Church. 
He was not scheduled to speak at 
Kansas City, but on arriving to spend 
the night there, he found a large crowd 
waiting for him at the colored Y. M. C. 
A., at 11 P. M. His address in St. 
Joseph, Mo., at the Francis Street Baptist Church, was heard by the Mayor of 
the city and a number of other local men 
of eminence. At Des Moines, Iowa, 
where he spoke in the Corinthian Baptist Church, he was introduced by 
Governor Clarke of Iowa, and among 
those on the platform were Attorney 
General Cossum, Harvey Ingham, editor 
of the Register and Leader, and other 
notables. He was introduced by exCongressman John L. Kennedy in 
Omaha, Neb., where he spoke in the 
Council Chamber of the City Hall. 
At St. Paul, Minn., he met the local 
branch at an informal conference, delivered an address to a large audience at 
the First Methodist Church, where he 
was introduced by Lieutenant Governor 
Burnquist, and met some thirty representative white women at a parlor conference in the home of Mrs. C. P. Noyes. 
At Minneapolis, he was a guest at a 
luncheon given by the Saturday Lunch 
Club, and he also spoke at a meeting in 
the Unitarian Church; at the luncheon 
there was an informal discussion following his address, in which a brother of 
Secretary Daniels, from North Carolina, 
took part. Here, as well as elsewhere, 
his audience voted to send protests to 
Washington against segregation and all 
other forms of persecution of colored 
people. At Toledo, Ohio, he spoke at 
the Warren A. M. E. Church where he 
was introduced by Judge Chittenden of 
the Court of Appeals, as well as at a 
luncheon of the Toledo Commerce Club; 
and the tour closed at Buffalo, N. Y., 
where he spoke in Perkins Memorial 
Hall of the Y. M. C. A. 
This tour, like the one a year ago, resulted in the widest publicity in the white 
as well as the colored press. The Cincinnati Times-Star, Toledo Times, Des 
Moines Tribune, and other dailies, featured his visit on the first page, and the 
newspapers of every city devoted columns of news to his speeches. All sorts 
and conditions of people, white and 
black, heard his pleas for justice, including business and professional men, college students and professors, and even 
society women. It is too early to estimate the number of members who have 
joined our Association as a result of his 
tour, but the number will probably be 
between five hundred and a thousand. 
The New York News, after pointing out 
that Mayor Spiegel had ordered the 
word "white" stricken from the rules of 
qualification for membership in the Cincinnati Fire Department, says: "This 
elimination of an odious color line coming so closely on the heels of Prof. Spingarn's address here, has greatly encouraged the race and encourages greater interest in the N. A. A. C. P. 'Agitate, 250 TH E CRISIS 
agitate for rights and stop compromising 
with segregation i n return for contributions,' is the slogan here." 
Dr. Spingarn was preceded on this 
tour by Mrs. Butler R. Wilson , and Miss 
Katherine M . Johnson, and credit should 
be given to them for their wor k i n arranging the meetings. Ou r chariman 
hopes to take a similar trip next January, if his other engagements permit, and 
ultimately he expects to cover and organize the whole country i n the interest of 
our cause. 
TH E BURDE N 
FOX FIRE 
ON January 5th, the first recitation 
day of the Ne w Year, there appeared at the Howar d University Chapel 
exercises a Mr . Osborne, of Iowa, president of the American Colortype Co., who 
was attending the conference of the 
Popular Government League then in session in the city. Mr . Osborne was called 
upon by the president for words of 
greeting, and during his speech advised 
the students of Howar d University as 
follows: 
"D o not worry over your circumscribed opportunities. There are 10,000,-
000 of your people i n this country and 
there is as much to be done among yourselves—colored doctors attending colored 
people, colored lawyers getting colored 
people out of trouble and keeping them 
out, colored ministers preaching to them, 
etc.—as any colored brain can master. 
. . . Do not mind the ugly, mean, unchristian prejudice that does you wrong 
in this country. Yo u cannot destroy it in a 
day, nor can you dispel it by resolutions. 
An d my advice to you is not to join any 
of the organizations that attempt to demand your rights. You'l l never get them 
that way ! Do you know how prejudice 
wil l disappear? Onl y by education; by 
the education of black people and the 
education of white people." 
A t the utterance of these words a silence so deep that it was painful, fell 
over the chapel, and all else that the 
speaker said was lost. The tenseness of 
the situation can well be imagined when 
the work of the College Chapter of the 
N . A . A . C. P. here is remembered; and 
only the courtesies of the occasion and 
the belief that the speaker was wholly 
misinformed in what he was saying permitted him to continue uninterrupted 
and unenlightened. H e was taken to 
task, however, after the chapel exercises 
by the faculty member wit h whom he 
was visiting; and he sent word to the 
student body on Friday , through that 
officer, that his remarks had been entirely misunderstood. H e is reported as 
being in complete sympathy with the obtaining by the Negro of his full manhood rights, and as favoring organization for the securing of them. 
"Wha t he meant," said the interlocutor, "is that prejudice is so mean and unreasoning that it cannot be reached or 
overcome by merely fighting it, but that 
education must eradicate it. " 
This attempt did not, however, sufficiently explain what Mr . Osborne really 
meant to say. Immediately following the 
statement made in his defense, secretary 
George Willia m Cook arose and made a 
speech showing the necessity of organization for the advancement of any 
cause, and pointing in signal fashion to 
the work of the Nationa l Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People. 
Secretary Cook spoke more feelingly 
than he ever has upon this subject, and 
continued applause from the entire student body drew him from his seat in 
acknowledgment twice after he had concluded. 
The incident has done much to impress upon the students of Howar d University the importance of enlisting in the 
service of the N . A . A . C. P . TH E BURDEN 2S1 
FROM JACKSONVILLE, FLA. 
THE case of Sam Tuckett was particularly brutal and cowardly. It seems 
that the white collector. Smith, who, by 
the way, catered to the colored trade, 
went to Tuckett's house to collect and 
was cursing his wife when Tuckett came 
out and told him not to curse his wife, 
but to curse him, whereupon, Smith 
pulled a pistol from under his seat and 
shot him fatally. It is said that the 
wounded man begged his wife for a cup 
of water but Smith stood over him with 
the pistol and dared her to come near 
him. A white man across the street kept 
yelling to him, "Shoot the Nigger again." 
At the coroner's inquest, where Smith 
was exonerated, he claimed that Tuckett 
was advancing towards him with a 
knife; later on he changed it to a hatchet. As Tuckett, as well as the other 
murdered Negroes were all shot in the 
back, he could not have been advancing 
towards him. Through the efforts of 
the Negroes who called the mass meeting, Smith has been indicted by the 
Grand Jury for murder in the first degree and both he and another white man 
are being held without bond. 
To the credit of the state attorney, it 
must be said that he is willing to do his 
best to bring to justice all such cowardly 
murderers when the proper steps are 
taken to bring the matter before him. It 
seems also that the members of the 
Grand Jury were surprised to learn that 
so many Negroes had been killed. 
The officers of the law here will shoot 
down a Negro sooner than they will a 
stray dog on the street and will fire at 
random in the colored districts, not caring whom they hit. Chas. Anderson, 
treasurer of the B. M. C , leading wholesale fish-dealer in Florida, president of 
the colored bank here narrowly escaped 
a bullet through his head early one evening, on one of the most populous streets 
here, by stepping behind a post, when 
one of the officers was firing at a colored 
woman on the street. 
Jacksonville contains some of the 
most progressive and wealthy Negroes 
in the country, and yet, despite the large 
amount of taxes which they pay, the 
City School for Colored here is a disgrace to any community. It is very unsanitary and unsafe, being a dilapidated 
structure. The teachers are humiliated 
in every conceivable way and usually get 
their appointments just the day before 
school opens when a notice is put in the 
daily paper here. Of course, the white 
teachers are appointed just after their 
schools close. 
m 
Portsmouth, N. H., December 19, 1914. 
My dear Dr. Du Bois:— 
Miss Patillo has been known to me 
for many years: I knew her mother before her. I have never heard anything 
but praise of her life in the community. 
Nor was there any charge of unfitness. 
I am sorry to tell you that there was no 
possible grounds for her rejection except that she happens to be a few shades 
darker than the rest and there was a 
fear that there might be others who 
might consider themselves "girls over 
fourteen" and desire to enter the club.. 
It may be of interest to you to know 
that I spent an entire evening with the 
Board of Directors and the Advisory 
Committee of the Club upon this question. I have been connected with the 
club ever since its inception and I have 
felt some responsibility for its success. 
It is of interest, also, to know that every 
member of the Advisory Committee (all 
of them women of mature years) 
favored the continuance of Miss Patillo 
in the club. 
The matter of final action remains 
with the girls of the club and I am very 
sure that the officers decided the matter. 
The result is that I am convinced that I 
am of no use as an Advisory member 
and I have felt that, in order to be consistent, I must resign, which I have done. 
I should be false to the memory of my 
sainted mother, whose eyes always saw 
beneath the pigment in the skin and respected, and taught her children to respect a man or woman according to 
character, if I did not stand strongly 
upon the matter. 
With the hope that our children's 
children may at least live to see a time 
when race discrimination will be a thing 
of the past and regretting that the time 
is not yet, I am 
Very truly yours, 
Mary I. Wood . 252 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The Value of Life Insurance 
To Colored People 
Is a text from which a little sermon could well be preached in every colored 
church in America. 
There is scarcely a family whose members do not have some sort of Policy in 
some sort of Company or Society or Order. These are usually for just enough 
to give a decent burial. The funeral expenses take practically all the proceeds and 
there is nothing left to meet the obligations which face the widow after she returns from the funeral. The problem of rent, food, clothes, books and school 
expenses for the children are not theories. When the grocer's boy brings the 
package he wants the money; and when the landlord calls he wants the rent. 
The man who carried $50 to $200 in a weekly benefit society or 
a secret society on the assessment plan earned enough and could 
easily have paid the premium on $1,000 to $5,000 in an old line 
legal reserve life insurance company whose rates are fixed and 
subject to no assessment, if he only had known. 
He could have made impossible the long hours of bending over a needle or the 
cook stove or the wash tub that came to his widow, if he had carried the necessary 
amount of life insurance. He could have assured his beautiful daughter the education she desired, the amusements she wanted, the clothes she craved—and which 
she got, somehow. He could have kept his boy in school and he would have 
grown up a credit to the memory of his father, a respected citizen of his community, and a successor to his father's business, instead of the wanderer or menial 
or ne'er-do-well. He could have changed the destiny of every member of his 
family! He had it in his power to make them bless his memory or bewail his 
shortsightedness ! What a tremendous responsibility ! 
Are you , reading this, preparing for the future of your family or are you leaving them to shift for themselves after you are gone? What will become of your 
son.-' Will he leave school and go to work prematurely? Will your daughter 
give up her training upon which she has just entered? Must your wife go out and 
hunt work to support herself and the younger children? Will you leave money 
enough to pay the balance due on the home you have been purchasing? Or will 
your wife lose the place? 
You can secure to those you love future independence, you can 
protect your obligations, you can save your business if, while you 
are alive, sound and well—and that is NOW—yo u secure the necessary amount of life insurance. 
You can secure this life insurance in a strong, well managed life insurance company which has met every requirement demanded of it, owned, organized 
and operated by our people, the only one of its kind in the world, at rates 
within your reach if you act to-day. No matter where you live we can 
Protect you. Tear off this coupon and mail it to-day to 
STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
200 Auburn Avenue, ATLANTA, GEORGIA 
Capital Fully Paid - - $100,000.00 
Over One Million and a Quarter Insurance in Force 
Issues Policies from $250.00 to $5,000.00 
HEMA N E. PERRY, President 
HARR Y H. PACE, Secretary 
Mention THE Crisis 
Please 
•end me 
particulars 
about 
insurance. 
Amount $ 
Sex 
Ag e ... . 
Weight. . . 
Occupatio 
Name .. . 
Address 
(C. Mar. 1915) TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 253 
$30 0 i n 3 0 Days ! 
Made by one Robinson salesman. You—yourself 
—can positively make $6 0 and expenses every 
week. I want men like you, hustling, energetic, 
ambitious fellows, anxious to make money, who are 
willing to work with me. Not for me, but with 
me. I want you to advertise, sell, and appoint 
local agents for the biggest, most sensational seller 
in 5 0 years—the ROBINSO N FOLDIN G BAT H 
TUB . Here's an absolutely new invention that has 
taken the entire country by storm. Nothing else 
like it. Gives every home a modern up-to-date 
bathroom in any part of the house. No plumbing, 
no waterworks needed. Folds in small roll, handy 
as an umbrella. Self-emptying and positively unleakable. Absolutely guaranteed for 5 years. 
Hustlers, east, north, west, south,—coining money. 
Orders, orders, everywhere. Badly wanted, eagerly 
bought, for remember, fully 70% of homes have 
no bath-rooms. Immense profits for you. Two 
sales a day means $300 A month. Here*s proof— 
real proof. Breeze, of Idaho, made $400 profit in 
3 0 days. Rev. Otto Schulze, Mo. , got $1,600 to 
date. Burkholder, Mont., orders $1,072 in 17 
days. Hamlinton, of Wyo. , made $60 first two 
days. Hundreds like that. Pleasant, permanent, 
fascinating work. This is not idle talk. Make me 
prove it. Writ e a postcard. Let me write you A 
long letter. Then decide. No experience needed, 
no capital. Your credit is good if you mean business. But you must be ambitious, you must want 
to make money. That's all. Writ e A postcard 
now. I want to pay you sixty dollars every week. 
H. S. Robinson, Pres., The Robinson Cabinet Mfg. Co. 
78 9 FACTORIES BUILDING TOLEDO, OHIO 
CANADIAN ADDRESS : WALKERVILLE, ONTARIO 
Good Words for The CRISIS 
I have no criticism to MAKE OF T H E CRISIS . I AM 
often saddened by reading IT. SUCH CRUEL INJUSTICE 
which your people HAVE TO FACE! THERE is A BRIGHT 
side, however, AND FOR THAT WE WILL REJOICE. I BELIEVE 
THOROUGHLY in the NEGRO RACE. YOU HAVE MY PRAYERS 
and sympathy IN YOUR EFFORTS TO ESTABLISH A FIRST CLASS 
magazine. MRS. MAR Y C. REYNOLDS , 
SWAMPSCOTT, MASS. 
Whil e I am writing I WANT TO ADD A FEW WORDS OF 
praise for TH E CRISIS . IT IS A REVELATION TO US AND 
to others who see it ON OUR TABLE—THE FACTS YOU 
gather. TH E CRISI S is DOING A GREAT WORK FOR OUR 
people, and doing it well—AND I WONDER IF YOU ARE 
getting subscriptions A plenty. YOU SURELY DESERVE A 
large list. * * * 
Everyone in this house IS A CRISI S SUPPORTER AND 
we wish you large financial RETURNS. 
W ALTE R H. P RICE, 
Hartford, CONN. 
Please renew my subscription TO T H E CRISI S FOR 
another year. I cannot express in WORDS how MUCH 
I appreciate your esteemed magazine. It GIVES DOUBLE 
service because when I have read it I SEND it TO my 
brother who is a private in the 24th infantry U. S. A. , 
stationed in the Philippines. In one of my most recent 
letters from my brother, he TOLD me that they had 
voted not long since to see which was THE MOST popular paper or magazine that comes TO the camp. He 
said TH E CRISI S won out. with a GREAT majority. 
ERNEST E. WILLIAMS , 
Jacksonville, Fla. 
Forty Thousand 
The Easter 
Crisis 
will have a regular edition of 
35,000 copies and 5,000 supplements—40,000 in all. 
The Easter Crisis will be a 
DOUBLE NUMBER 
with 
Sixty-eight instead of fifty-two 
pages 
The Easter Crisis will have 
1. A Cover in colors 
By RICHARD L. BROWN 
2. A Story 
By CHARLES W. CHESNUTT 
3. A Poem 
By WILLIAM STANLEY BRAITHWAITE 
4. A Song 
By J. ROSAMOND JOHNSON 
5. An Easter Allegory 
By W. E. B. DUBOIS 
And in addition 
The Fifth Annual Report 
of the 
N. A. A. C. P. 
TH E GREATES T NUMBE R 
OF A GREA T MAGAZIN E 
Mention THE CRISI S 254 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
= THE = 
Underwood 
is the machine upon which all World's 
Speed and Accuracy typewriter records 
have been established. 
TH E = 
Underwoo d 
is the holder of the Elliott Cresson Medal 
for superiority of mechanical construction. 
UNDERWOO D 
"Th e Machin e Yo u Wil l Eventuall y Buy " 
UNDERWOO D BUILDING NE W YOR K 
Mention THE Crisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 255 
MILES M. WEBB 
School of Practical Photography 
All branches of photography taught 
Terms reasonable. Service efficient. 
Three courses: Amateur, intermediate, 
professional. REGISTER NOW. 
3519 So. STATE STREET CHICAGO, ILL. 
Telephone Douglass 6688 
Made-to-Measure 
Express $2.7 5 
Prepaid 
Pants cut in the latest 
style. Made-to-your individual measure. Fit, 
workmanship and wear 
guaranteed. 
No Extr a Charg e 
for peg tops, DO matter how 
extreme you order them. 
Agents Wante d 
A good live hustler in every 
town to take orders for our 
celebrated made to meas 
ure clothes. Samples of all 
the latest materials FREE. 
W e Pa y Big Mone y 
to our agents everywhere. 
Turn your spare time into 
cash by taking orders for our 
stylish clothes. Write today 
for beautiful FREE outfit. 
THE PROGRESS TAILORING CO. 
Department 803 CHICAGO 
A LEGAL EDUCATION FOR LESS THAN TEN CENTS A DAY 
What Has the New Year to Offer You ? 
High Grade Legal Training and Instruction by Correspondence 
Th e Lincoln Extension University 
offers to each and all alike these valuable courses : College, Post Graduate, Business 
Law and Bar Examination Review. 
Improved methods, the celebrated Putney Law Library furnished free with 
each course. Hundreds of Lectures, Moot Court, Brief Writing, Practice, Degrees. 
Enroll at any time. Actual daily lessons. Not a book selling concern but a 
recognized Law School. Approved by Bench and Bar. 
Write today for free catalog giving all necessary information. 
This valuable course so pertinent to every American Citizen. 
THIS COUPON IS WORTH ELEVEN DOLLARS TO ALL WHO ENROLL 
To LINCOLN EXTENSION UNIVERSITY 
312 South Clark Street, Chicago 
Please send me without obligation your valuable catalogue. 
Name 
Street and Number 
P. O . State 
Mention THE Crisis 256 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TEACHERS The new efficiency era calls 
fo r the modern way of 
selecting teachers, through a live agency that furnishes 
the connecting medium in a business way, saves time 
of school officials, relieves teachers of the embarrassment of job hunting and covers the whole country. 
W e have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Rhode 
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia 
and West Virginia. 
Ou r list of teachers covers even a wider territory. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 
1335 T Street, N. W . Washington, D. C. 
Only 
$65.00 
Wo. 24 Southern Buggy 
Highest Grade 
A Value Unequaled. Sold on$1.oo 
profit Margin 
Factory to User 
Write for prices 
and other styles. 
Send for catalogs 
C. R. PATTERSON 
& SONS. 
Greenfield Ohio 
Largest Negro Carriage concern in the United States. 
Start a Mail Order Business and Make Money 
You can operate in your own home during spare 
time. The parcel post has opened up the doors of 
opportunity to YOU . Others are making $20 to $500 
a week. Wh y can't you? By our method you can 
start with $5 and up. W e offer you thirty live, 
money-miking mail order plans. You can make 95 
cents profit of every dollar order. W e furnish circulars, printed matter and place your advertising at 
lowest rates. Send 10 cents for complete outfit. Do 
it today—Now ! 
MAI L DEALER S WHOLESAL E HOUS E 
517 Dearborn Street Chicago, Ill. 
PROFITABL E SPAR E TIM E WOR K 
Colored agents wanted to take orders for our high 
grade calling cards. Big demand everywhere. Exclusive territory. Writ e now for samples and terms. 
TH E HOUS E O F CHOWNING , Indianapolis, Ind . 
COLORE D ME N 
WANTED TO PREPARE AS 
SLEEPING-CAR AND TRAIN 
PORTERS. 
No experience necessary. Positions 
pay $65 to $100 a month. Steady 
work. Standard roads. Passes and 
uniforms furnished when necessary. 
Writ e now. 
I. RY . C. I., Dept. 28, Indianapolis, Ind. 
THE SMALLES T BIBLE 
on Earth! Size of postage stamp. New 
Testament illustrated; 200 pages; sample 10c; per dozen 75c. AGENTS 
WANTED. The biggest wonder of the 
Twentieth Century. Coin $5.00 a day 
selling them 
J. JACKSON . 242 Hilliard St., Atlanta, Ga . 
10c 
BEAUT Y 
CULTUR E 
An art every woman should cultivate to retain the transparent, 
velvety complexion of youth. 
There's no secret or mystery 
about it, just use 
REJUVENATING CREAM' 
tor cleansing and massage 
DE LUXE POWDER 
for a beautiful complexion. Rejuvenating Cream, 20 cent jars. DeLuxe Powder, white, pink, or high 
brown, 50 cent boxes. 
As a profession Beauty Culture offers a dignified and lucrative employment for young women. Most completely appointed Beauty Culture Parlors and School In the east All 
branches taught. Special terms for a limited 
time. 
MADAM BARREAU 
Bristol Building 
NEW BEDFORD, MASS. 
A NE W WA Y 
To Get Your Clothes Free 
A NEW PLAN TO MAKE 
BIG MONEY DURING 
YOUR SPARE TIME 
Something different — better, 
bigger, more liberal than any 
offer ever made. Lower 
prices—better clothes— 
bigger cash profits—Express paid on everything. 
Doubl e Pay 
FREE clothes and cash profits 
besides. We don't ask you 
to use your cash profits for 
your own clothes. Ours is a 
new and better plan. 
An Extra Present with every order. Not a prize 
scheme. Choose what you want, work for it and get 
it besides your Cash Profits. Agent's Complete Outfit FREE, fifty-six stylish, real cloth 
samples — fifty Fashion Plates. Inside wholesale 
prices. Everything FREE. Get into the big 
money-making class. Just put your name on a 
post card and mail it to us today. 
SPENCER MEAD CO., Dept. 303, Chicago 
Mention The Crisis TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 257 
Th e Haitian Revolution 1791-1804 
Or Side Lights on the French Revolution 
by 
T . G. STEWAR D 
Professor of History in Wilberforce University and Chaplain U. S. A., Retired. 
This is a magnificent work, written in admirable style, giving in detail the HEROI C and 
MASTERFU L achievements of the slaves and free colored men of Haiti who rose up against 
their inhuman oppressors and made themselves free. Afterwards, when their defeated masters 
undertook to sell the country to the English, these Free men in black met and defeated the ably 
commanded English army of invasion. 
Whe n Napoleon sent his fine army under command of his brother-in-law to subdue and 
reduce these blacks, the invincible Generals, Toussaint L'Overture, Maurepas, Dessalines and 
others met these veterans before whom Europe had trembled and drove them from their shores 
and to the amazement of the civilized world, established a tree government of Negroes which 
ha* endured for more than a hundred years. 
The book is a most entertaining and captivating historical narrative, handsomely printed 
and richly illustrated from paintings of the great men who made themselves immortal in their 
work of founding the Haitian Republic. 
Price, $1.25 net. Postage extra. 
For sale at 
Young's Book Exchange, 135 West 135th Street, New York 
T. G. Steward, Wilberforce, Ohio 
The CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
17 Monographs Sold Separately 
ADDRESS 
ATLANTA UNIVERSITY CONFERENCE 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y ATLANTA , GA . 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M. 
AN aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing 
arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity for 
clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. Belongs in the library of every friend of social justice. 
Price 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAMES F. MORTON, JR. 
211 West 138th Street -:- New York, N. Y. 
WANTED 
Agents for THE CRISIS. Dignified work. 
7 0 Fifth Avenue, New York. 
The Story of Wendell Phillips 
by 
CHARLES EDWAR D RUSSELL 
"The story of the great abolitionist by a modern 
abolitionist." 
Mr. Russell says: 
Th e real emancipators o f the slaves wer e Garrison, 
Phillips. John Brow n and the few that, standing with 
them upon the exalted groun d o f right, despised expedienc y and refused to compromise . 
This excellent boo k should be an inspiration to 
every lover of freedom. 
PRICE, 50 CENTS 
The CRISIS, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
JUS T OF F TH E PRES S 
TH E SILVER CHORD 
A Boo k of Poems b y 
ADOLPHUS JOHNSON 
PRICE, $1.0 0 NET 
For sale by 
ADOLPHU S JOHNSON , 718 S. 19th St.. Philadelphia 
or TH E CRISIS , 70 Fifth Avenue , Ne w Yor k City 
HAV E YO U SEE N THA T HANDSOM E NE W BOO K 
"GOULDTOWN " 
A historical narrative o f a unique settlement o f 
colore d peopl e in Ne w Jersey—ove r two hundre d 
years old. 
It's a tine boo k o f high literary class. Get the 
slogan "Buy a boo k by a colore d author, " then buy 
this book . Pric e $2.50 net. 
Fo r sale at YOUNG' S BOOK EXCHANGE , 
135 West 135th Street, Ne w York , or at 
TH E CRISIS , 70 Fifth Avenue , Ne w York . 
Mention TH E CRISI S 258 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LEGAL DIRECTORY 
Telephone* : 
/Centra l 104-W 
\Mai n 61 
HARRY E. DAVIS 
ATTORNE Y AT-LA W NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
1607 Williamso n Buildin g Cleveland , Ohi o 
Office L. D . Telephon e 3297 Marke t 
Residenc e L. D . Telephon e 5277-M Marke t 
GEORGE A. DOUGLAS 
COUNSELOR-AT-L AW 
Room s 613-614, Metropolita n Buildin g 
111 Marke t St., Cor. Washington , Newark , N . J. 
Genera l Practic e Notar y Publi c 
WILLIAM R. MORRIS 
A TTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT -L AW 
1020 Metropolita n Lif e Buildin g 
Minneapolis Minn . 
BROWN S. SMITH 
A TTORNEY-AT-LA W 
Offices: Suit e 802 Syke s Bloc k 
Near Thir d an d Hennepi n 
REGALIA 
Minneapolis Minn. 
GEORGE W. MITCHELL 
A TTORNEY-AT -L A W 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia Pa. 
Tel. 5437 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
A TTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT -L A W 
14 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W . Ashbie Hawkins George W . F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHEN 
A TTORNEYS-AT -L A W 
31 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md . 
PERSONAL CARDS 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUDE E. CURTIS 
S URGEO N D ENTIS T 
188 W . 135th Street New York City 
WILLIAM L. BELL ERNEST W. KING 
Associate Architects 
300 Odd Fellow Bldg. ATLANTA, GA. 
J. E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTANT 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August 
Box 25, Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, O. 
A Race Enterprise 
Manufacturing Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraternal and 
Church Societies. Catalog upon request. 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E. Corne r 8t h an d Plu m Streets, Cincinnati, Old * 
"What Better Easter Greetings to Your 
Friends Than 
A Year's Subscription to 
Th e CRISI S 
ONE DOLLAR PER YEAR 
Special offer. Five paid up yearly subscriptions sent in and paid for at one time will 
entitle the sender to a year's subscription free. 
This offer holds good until midnight, April 3d. 
TH E CRISIS 70 FIFTH AVE., NEW YORK. 
Without a Cent of Cost to You 
I give you a very fine pure 
wool sweater; double collar 
and cuffs, your choice of color. 
Just handle forme your club's 
spring order for basebal l 
goods — at special discount, 
and this jersey is yours. Send 
for complete catalog of my best 
grade sporting goods at wholesale prices—basketball, baseball, 
tennis, golf, etc. Write me now. 
JAC K SHANNO N CO . 
Dcpt.25,54 E.Monroe St..Cbicago 
WANTED—Ambitious man to open 
a Cleaning , Dyein g & Pressing Shop in every neighborhood. W e teach you how. No capital or experienc e necessary. 
Atlas Supply House , 2003 Turne r St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
Make$3 5 t o $65 a wee k show 
ing this grea t Tailor-Book . 
Goods so much finer and prices 
so much lower, everyon e sees 
the difference at a glance . 
Special Offer 
T o prove our unequalled quality, 
we will let you orde r at the 
wholesale price, a Sampl e Suit OP 
even a pair of pants as low as $2.25 
—and n o extra charges even for the 
biggest peg top styles. You can 
now make more quick money and buy your 
own fine tailored clothes cheaper than you ever thought possible. 
We prepay the charges on every order and don't keep acent of 
any customer's money unless he is well pleased. Let us send you 
this fine sample outfit and show you how to take the most perfect 
measures for the finest tailoring on the market. Write us today. 
The Chicago Tailors' Association 
Dept . 737 Van Buren and Marke t Sts. , CHICAGO 
Mention T H E CRISI S 
A Base Ball 
Jersey Attention , Masons ! 
A New Book of Interest to You 
Prince Hall and His Followers 
A carefully argued defense of the legitimacy of Negro Masonry in the 
United States, with notes and documents, by 
GEORGE W. CRAWFORD, 32° 
A graduate of Tuskegee, Talladega and Yale, formerly clerk of the 
Probate Court of New Haven and now a practicing lawyer there. Mr. 
Crawford is one of the best informed Masons in the country. 
COMMENTS 
From James F. Rikards, 33°, Most Puissant Sovereign Grand Commander, 
A. & A. Scottish Rite : 
" 'Prince Hall and His Followers,' written by a scholarly Afro-American, presents to the Masonic world a treatise on the legitimacy of Negro Masonry that 
should be in the hands of every Mason seeking for Truth. The information 
contained in the chapter devoted to Prince Hall is alone worth to the young 
Mason the price of the book. Brother Crawford's easy and pleasing style 
creates in the reader a desire to complete the volume before putting the book 
out of his hands." 
From Henry A. Spencer, 33°, Grand Master and Grand Commander of 
Knights Templar of New York : 
"The book fills a long-felt want among intelligent Masons of our Race. 
To know that we are right, and to substantiate that fact by intelligent research 
and logical statements, is worth more to us than what the other fellow may 
say. This is what Brother Crawford's book does; and it should be in the hands 
of every Mason of our Race." 
From Jose H. Sherwood, 33°, Past Grand Master of Minnesota and 
Deputy Imperial Potentate of "Shriners : 
"A very strong brief, setting forth plainly the legitimacy of Prince Hall 
Masonry, and, as well, a stern call to all Negroes to assume full pride in the 
happy possession of a Rite which can show such clear proofs of its contentions." 
From William H. Grimshaw, 33°, Past Grand Master of the District of 
Columbia and author of "A History of Colored Freemasonry": 
"I have read with great pleasure 'Prince Hall and His Followers.' The book 
is well written, containing clear and convincing diction. The impartial accuracy 
with which the facts are marshalled makes the book a very valuable asset 
to Masons." 
Price One Dollar. Postage Extra. 
ORDE R NO W AGENTS WANTE D 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: :: New York 
Mention TH E CRISI S A SELECTED LIST OF BOOKS 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HOUSE BEHIND THE CEDARS. (Charles W . Chesmitt) $1.5 0 
HAZEL. (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF AN EX-COLORED MAN. (Anonymous) 1.20 
LYRICS OF LOWLY LIFE. (Paul Laurence Dunbar) 1.25 
THE MARROW OF TRADITION. (Charles W. Chesnutt) 1.50 
THE SPORT OF THE GODS. (Paul Laurence Dunbar) 1.50 
NORRIS WRIGHT CUNEY. (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton; 1.50 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W . E. B. D U Bois) 1.25 
RACE ADJUSTMENT. (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
HALF A MAN. (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
MIND OF PRIMITIVE MAN. (Franz Boas) 1.50 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.50 
JOHN BROWN. (W . E. B. Du Bois) 1.25 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINCE HALL AND HIS FOLLOWERS. (George W. Crawford) 1.00 
LIBERIA. (Frederick Starr) 1.00 
FACTS OF RECONSTRUCTION. (John R. Lynch) 1.50 
STORY OF THE NEGRO. 2 Volumes. (Booker T. Washington) 3.0 0 
MASTERPIECES OF NEGRO ELOQUENCE. (Alice Moore Dunbar, Editor) 2.5 0 
POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.0 0 
THE AFRICAN ABROAD. 2 Volumes. (William H. Ferris) 5.0 0 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H . E. Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OUT OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
THE COLORED INVENTOR. (Henry E. Baker) .15 
A CHILD'S STORY OF DUNBAR. (Julia L. Henderson) .25 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Fifth Avenue :: : : New York City 
Mentio n TH E CRISI S 