The CRISIS 
Vol . 20-No . 6 OCTOBER , 1920 Whol e No . 120 
HOMES NUMBE R 
ONE DOLLAR AND A HAL F A YEA R FIFTEE N CENTS A COPY A PREVENTIVE AS WELL 
AS A CURATIVE — 
A Branch of the N. A . A . C. P. 
A prominen t ministe r i n a wester n tow n wrot e a few day s ag o t o the Nationa l 
Offic e o f the N . A . A . C. P. askin g fo r hel p fo r a n age d colore d ma n wh o ha d 
been left b y the owne r as caretake r i n a whit e home , whos e presenc e wa s resente d 
b y the whit e neighbors, wh o wa s attacke d b y a crow d o f thirt y men , wh o defende d 
himsel f whe n tire d upo n b y firin g i n retur n bu t struc k n o one—an d wh o wa s 
sentence d to fou r years i n jai l fo r resistin g arrest . Th e ministe r writes: 
"Ha d ther e bee n a branc h o f th e N . A . A . C . P . i n ou r tow n whe n th e 
troubl e first started , it coul d hav e prevente d al l tha t ha s happened . 
Pleas e sen d m e instruction s fo r organizin g a branc h so tha t we may be 
prepared whe n futur e incidents o f this kin d tak e place. " 
THRE E HUNDRE D AN D FORTY-FIV E BRANCHE S O F TH E N . A . 
A. C. P. IN FORTY-FOU R STATE S A S WEL L A S FOU R OUTSID E OF 
THE STATE S AR E ACTIN G A S CORRECTIVE FORCE S T O PREVEN T 
INJUSTICE . T O COLORE D PEOPLE . 
The y are usin g al l lega l an d legitimat e mean s o f protectin g colore d citizen s 
no t onl y o f their ow n communities, bu t o f ever y communit y i n the Unite d States. 
Wha t is you r communit y doing ? Wha t ar e yo u doing ? Whe n on e Negr o is 
lynched , disfranchised , discriminate d against—ever y Negr o i n the Unite d State -
is lynched , disfranchised , discriminate d against i n spirit . N o Negr o is fre e fro m 
prejudic e unti l al l Negroe s are free. 
If yo u hav e n o branc h in you r city , writ e immediatel y fo r informatio n regardin g the formatio n o f on e to 
The National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y . 
Nationa l Officers 
President 
MOORFIELD STOREY 
Vice-Presidents 
ARCHIBALD H. GRIMKE 
REV . JOHN HAYNES HOLME S 
BISHO P JOH N HURS T 
ARTHU R R. SPINGAR N 
OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD 
Treasurer 
J. E. SPINGAR N 
Executiv e Officer s 
Chairman of the Board 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Acting Secretary 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSO N 
Assistant Secretary 
WALTE R F. WHIT E 
Associate Field Secretary 
WILLIA M PICKEN S TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO B TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CON ­
DUCTE D B Y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS ; JESSI E REDMO N FAUSET , LITERAR Y EDITOR ; 
AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINES S MANAGER . 
Vol . 20—No. 6 OCTOBER , 1920 Whole No. 120 
PICTURES Page 
COVER . Home of A . H . Herndon, Atlanta. 
PHOTOGRAPH S O F SIXTEEN NEGRO HOMES. 
"THIS WA S NO DELIVER Y BOY, THIS MAN,— " 269 
"SHE LA Y BAC K AGAI N ON TH E FLOOR, PRONE" 271 
ME N OF TH E MONT H 287 
ARTICLES 
TH E SLEEPER WAKES . A Novelette. Jessie Fauset. Illustrated by Laura 
Wheeler 267 
TH E ELECTION COMES. Ernest R. McKinney 274 
RAIN-MIST. A Poem. Charles Bertram Johnson 282 
DEPARTMENTS , 
OPINION .• 261 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D 
PEOPLE 278 
TH E LOOKIN G GLASS 283 
ME N O F TH E MONT H •, 286 
TH E HORIZON 288 
THE NOVEMBER CRISIS 
•
 : Th e November CRISI S will celebrate our Tenth Anniversary. The Christmas CRISI S in 
colors will outdo its beautiful predecessors. 
D o not forget The CRISI S Calendar for 1921. 
FIFTEE N CENT S A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY-FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Th e date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. Whe n 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Tw o weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPT S and drawings relating to colored people are desired. The y must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entere d as second class matte r Novembe r 2, 1910, at the post office at New York , Ne w 
York , unde r the Ac t of Marc h 8, 1879. 
'84 258 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teachtr Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Sciences The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
TERM OPENED SEPTEMBER 21, 1920 
For farther information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y 
Washington, D. C. 
J . STANLE Y DURKEE , A.M. , Ph.D. , President 
EMMET T J . SCOTT , A.M. , LL.D. , Secretary-Treasurer. 
Collegiate and Professional Schools 
Junior College, covering the Freshman and Sophomore years, and leading to the Senior Colleges. 
Senior College, consisting of the Schools of Liberal Arts, Education, Journalism and Commerce 
and Finance, granting respectively the degrees, A.B . or B.S.; A.B . or B.S. in Education; B.S. in Journalism; B.S. in Commerce. 
School of Applied Science, four year course, giving degree, B.S . in C.E. ; B.S. in E.E. ; B.S. 
in M.E. ; B.S. in Architecture; B.S. in Agriculture, and B.S. in Household Economics. 
School of Music, four year course, giving degree of Mus.B. 
School of Religion, three year course, giving degree of B.D . (Also Diploma and Correspondence 
Courses.) 
School of Law, three year evening course, giving degree of LL.B . 
School of Medicine, including Medical, Dental, Pharmaceutical Colleges. Fou r year course for 
Medical and Dental students; three years for Pharmaceutical students. Following dedegrees given: M.D. , D.D.S. , Phar.C. 
Students ma y enter for Collegiate Wor k at the beginning of any quarter . 
REGISTRATION : 
Autum n Quarter September 27 to 29, 1920 
"Winter Quarte r Januar y 3, 1921 
Spring Quarte r Marc h 19 and 21, 1921 
Fo r Catalo g an d Information , writ e 
DWIGH T O . W . HOLMES , Registra r 
HOWAR D UNIVERSITY , Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISI S TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 259 
Atlanta University Is beautifull y located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
The courses of study Include Hig h School, forma l 
School and College , wit h Manua l training and domesti c science. Amon g the teachers ar e graduate s 
of Yale , Harvard , Dartmout h an d Wellesley. Fift y 
year s of successful work have been completed. 
Students come fro m al l parts of the south. Graduates ar e almost universally successful. 
Fo r furthe r Information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E ATLANTA , GA. _ _ 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE Beautifu l Situation. Healthfu l Location, 
Best Mora l and Spiritua l Environment. 
Splendid Intellectua l Atmosphere . 
Note d for Honest and Thoroug h Work . 
Institution offers ful l courses i n the following departments: College, Normal , Hig h 
School, Gramma r School, Domesti c Science, 
Nurs e Trainin g and Industrial. 
Good water , steam heat, electric lights, 
natura l drainage , splendid dormitories. Ex ­
penses very reasonable. 
Bcga n Septembe r 15, 1920. 
For catalo g and other information address 
PRESIDENT , J . KELL Y GIFFE N | Knoxville. Tenn . 
1870 CLAR K UNIVERSIT Y 1920 ATLANTA . GEORGI A 
Over 100 acres of beautiful campus. Twelve buildings with new $100,000 administration building with modern chapel and gymnasium under construction. Strong facul­ ty—Religious atmosphere—Athletics—Co-educational. Ad ­ mission only by application. 
RE-ARRANGE D COURSE S OF STUD Y 
Junior High School—7th and 8th Grades and 1st and 
2nd Years' High School Courses, with Certificate. 
Junior College—3rd and 4th Year Hig h School with 
Freshman an d Sophomore years of College work, with 
Diploma . 
College—Four years above Hig h School, or two years 
above Junior College Course, with degree of A.B . 
Domestic Science—Commerce—Normal— 
Pre-medica l Course 
51st year of nine months opened September 22, 1920. 
$16.00 per month pays tuition, board, room and laundry. 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING . President 
The Florida Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahassee, Florida 
LINCOL N UNIVERSIT Y is ranked In Class 1 
among colleges for colored students by the 
America n Medica l Association. 
Th e College and Theologica l Seminar y 
Address opened Sept. 21, 1920 
PRESIDEN T JOH N B . KENDALL , D.D. , 
Lincol n University , Cheste r County , Pa . 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , G A 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M . C. A , 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY CHARLOTTE . N . C . 
Biddle University, operated under the auspices of the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Depart­ ments—High School, Arts and Sciences Theological and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School course is the requirement for entrance to the first year of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses of study, the Classical and the Scientific, in the scientific, German is substituted for Greek or Latin. The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class is 15 units of High School work. The Theological Department offers two courses, each consisting of three years. The first is purely English. Greek and Hebrew are taught In the others. Al l students in the High School Dept. are required to take trades in the Industrial Dept. 
For further information, address 
President H. L. McCrorey. 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational Th e largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specialists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Wel l equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, Hig h School, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Sewing, 
Printing and Tailoring . 
First Semester began September, 1920. 
Fo r further information address 
JOH N H . LEWIS, President 
BISHOP J . S. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Board. 
Mention TH E C RISIS . 260 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
WALDE N UNIVERSITY 
Nashville, Tenn. 
A Christian Institution for the Education and Training of Negro 
Youth, Both Sexes. 
Strong Faculty. Thorough Work and Drill in all Departments. Wholesome Moral and Christian Atmosphere. 
SCHOO L OPENE D SEPTEMBE R 21 , 1920 
For particulars write the President, 
J. H . LOVELL . 
Wile y Universit y 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas. Louisiana. Arkansas and Okla ­
homa State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University, University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented on its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W. DOGAN , President 
Both of Us Lose, Young Man 
If you fail to study the superior advantages North Carolina 
offers you through The Agricultural and Technical College 
for securing good, practical and 
technical training. 
Four Strong Departments: 
Agricultural Academic 
Mechanical Teacher-Training 
Night School for. those who 
desire to work in the day. 
Fall Term began, September 1, 1920 
Address: 
JAS . B. DUDLEY , President 
A. &T . College 
Greensboro, N . C . 
The Cheyney Training School 
for Teachers 
Cheyney , Pa . 
Made in 1920 an accredited State Norma l School, 
offering in addition to the regular Normal course 
of two years professional three year courses in Home 
Economics and Manual Training. A diploma from 
any of these courses makes a graduate eligible to teach 
in the public schools of Pennsylvania. A three-year 
High School Course is offered to all who have completed the eighth grammar grade. 
Boar d and Tuitio n $153.00 
1st Semester, Septembe r 13, 1920 
2nd Semester, Januar y 26, 1921 
For further particulars and catalog, write— 
LESLI E PINCKNE Y HILL , Principal , 
CHEYNEY , PA . 
COLEMAN COLLEGE 
GIBSLAND , LA . 
Supported b y Baptist Stat e Woman's Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicag o and Boston and 
A, B . H . Society of Ne w York , Students 
fro m six different states. Graduate s exempted on first grade by Louisiana , Arkansa s 
and Oklahoma . 
O. L. COLEMAN , President 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
A n Episcopa l boarding school for girls, unde r the 
direction of the sisters of St. Mary . Address: TH E 
SISTER-IN-CHAEGE , 6138 Germantow n Avenue , 
Philadelphia , Pa. 
STATE UNIVERSITY, Louisville, Ky. 
Founded 1879. 
The only Institution i n the State having for its object 
Collegiate, Ministerial, Medical, and Lega l training for Col ­
ored citizens in Kentucky. 
Special training in Insurance, Socia l Service, Nursin g and 
Hospita l Work. 
Normal. Commercial, Music , Domestic Science. Missionary 
training class. 
Evening classes, correspondence course. Degrees offered. 
Presiden t C . H . Parris h 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the Negro Problems 
20 Monographs Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY ATLANTA , CA . 
Mention THE CRISIS , THE CRISIS 
Vol. 20. No. 6 OCTOBER, 1920 Whole No. 120 
Opinion of W. E. B. Du Bois 
TRIUMP H 
AT last the work of Susan B. 
Anthony and Frederick Douglass is crowned. From this 
day on in the United States a 
grown human being has the right to 
a voice i n his own government, even 
if he is a woman. 
Who oppose Woman Suffrage? 
Wit h but few exceptions those states 
which oppose the abolition of child 
labor, the raising of the age of consent and universal education; those 
which advocate and practice lynching, 
mob violence and government by minority. These states are: 
Alabam a Virgini a 
Georgi a Marylan d 
Mississipp i Delawar e 
South Carolin a Nort h Carolin a 
Louisian a 
How slowly the world moves in the 
commonest matters of elementary 
righteousness. To think that we had 
to wait until 1920 for Woman Suffrage and then got it by two votes! 
Ye t i n this very fact lies hope for 
us: A civilization that required nineteen centuries to recognize the Rights 
of Women can confidently be expected 
some day to abolish the Color Line . 
HAIT I 
THE N . A . A . C. P. has begun 
its campaign for the freedom 
of Haiti. Our Secretary, 
James Weldon Johnson, and 
our Publicity Agent, Herbert J. Seligman, have spent six weeks in the 
Island. Much material has been 
gathered and now the New Yor k Nation has begun its expose of the seizure of a nation by the National City 
Bank of Wall Street. If any one has 
lingering doubts of the way in which 
this great government has been made 
the catspaw of thieves, let him read 
the impudent assertion of Frankli n 
D. Roosevelt: 
"Th e Republicans are playin g a shell 
game on the America n people; they ar e 
stil l busy circulatin g the story that Eng ­
lan d has six votes [in the League of Na ­
tions] to America's one. It is just the 
other way. A s a matte r of fact, the Unite d 
States has about twelve votes i n the As ­
sembly. 
"Unti l last week I had two of them my ­
self, and now Secretary Daniels has them. 
Yo u know I have had something to do wit h 
the runnin g of a couple of littl e republics. 
Th e facts are that I wrote Haiti's Constitution myself. " 
Ma y the League of Nations be delivered from its fool friends, and may 
Haiti find New Freedom when the impossible Wilson and his lackeys disappear. 
STEA L 
WE trust the Negro world has 
watched with intelligent 
comprehension the extraordinar y conjunction of 
Church and Steel in recent events. 
When the Interchurch movement 
came TH E CRISI S was dumb with astonishment. Was it possible that the 
white followers of Jesus Christ were 
actually going to forget Infant Damnation and Justification by Fait h long 
enough to work together for education, the abolition of child labor, opposition to race prejudice, co-operation in national missionary effort, social uplift and fair wages? A s the 
survey progressed and the Negro and 
Afric a were included and, too, not i n 
the appendix, it looked as though the 
261 262 TH E
Christian Church was about to be reborn. 
Of course, we expected the white 
southern Baptists to refuse co-operation. They are too much interested in 
lynching and immersion to heed the 
call of the black and the poor. But 
the movement grew and swelled and 
swept until it struck hard Steel. Un ­
til it struck Steal. 
Ric h holders of steel securities i n 
northern churches were exactly like 
hirers of black and disfranchised Negro peons in southern churches. 
"Hands off" is their common cry when 
you touch "wages and unions" or "the 
Negro problem". These two things 
have "nothing to do with religion". 
So when the Interchurch movement 
investigated the Steel strike, where 
Negroes, underpaid and disfranchised 
in the South, were induced to "scab" 
in Pennsylvania and Ohio and break 
the ranks of Union labor, and when 
it was proven that Mr. Gary or somebody lied and lied roundly and extensively—this was too much. The 
Interchurch movement was suddenly 
found extravagant. First, the perfect 
Presbyterians withdrew their spotless skirts and then i n a weird procession followed criticism, rumor and 
withdrawal until at last the white 
Church shrank in horror from this 
smoking Hell of Steel. Christianity 
again was crucified. How long, 0 
Lord, how long! 
PERSECUTION 
THE CRISI S has said nothing 
concerning the extraordinary 
persecution of Roscoe Conkling Bruce i n Washington. 
No one can accuse TH E CRISI S of being partisan to Mr . Bruce, because it 
has at times frankly disagreed with 
him and his policies. Bu t the situation in Washington has gone far beyond all personal consideration and 
has become a national disgrace—a 
feud which is doing much to discredit 
us as a civilized group. 
 CRISIS 
Washington is, because of its political relation to the nation and its own 
disfranchisement, a city of gossip, full 
of rumor and incipient hysteria on all 
subjects, from the president's health 
to the visitor next door. When, some 
years ago, the Moens matter arose it 
was amplified into an attack on all colored teachers. When absolute proof 
was adduced that the teachers were 
not involved at all, save i n one very 
doubtful case, suddenly the whole attack veered and like a bolt from the 
blue hit the colored Superintendent of 
Public Schools, Mr. Bruce. Fo r two 
long years Mr . Bruce has been openly 
accused of nearly every crime i n the 
calendar. He has been flatly insulted, his office picketed and his life 
made utterly miserable. Mass-meeting has followed mass-meeting and 
protest has crowded on protest wit h 
the one cry : Remove Bruce ! 
We who stood without, looking on 
in puzzled amazement, held our comment waiting for the facts. We expected, we feared, a most damning series of revelations, for how else could 
the hysteria be explained ? Bu t public 
hearings have been held, public 
speeches made, public accusations 
printed and in each case Mr . Bruce 
has conducted himself like a gentleman, with rare poise and perfect 
courtesy. He has answered his accusers thoughtfully and clearly, and has 
twice or three times been openly vin ­
dicated by judicial bodies which would 
seem to have had no bias i n his favor. 
Ever y chance has been given his accusers, and the net sum of the accusations, as far as we can see, amounts 
to some question here and there as to 
judgment i n planning, courage in policy, determination i n action; but there 
was revealed nothing low, nor criminal nor disgraceful. 
One may easily agree that a differently trained man of quick decision, 
bold generalship and wide vision could 
have done far more for Washington  
OPINION 263 
colored schools than Mr . Bruce. Bu t 
the same is true of the white schools, 
and how long would such a man have 
held his job? When Senator Blank 
asks this appointment, or Senator 
Slick opposes this action, what is a 
Washington official to do ? He may be 
stubborn and follow Chancellor, or be 
diplomatic and remain. Bruce was 
diplomatic. So i n other matters was 
Booker Washington and so today is 
Lloy d George. 
We may disagree wit h them. We 
may oppose their policy. We may desire them replaced. But all this is a 
matter of judgment or ordered, reasonable attack. It does not justify an 
orgy of abuse and absolutely unbridled and viciously cruel persecution. It is one thing to say that Mr. 
Bruce has not done as well as another 
might have done; it is quite another 
thing to call him an unprincipled 
scoundrel. 
Mr . Bruce's opponents have not 
proven their case. On the contrary, 
they have raised him high in the respect of disinterested outsiders. An y 
man who has survived the persecution 
to which he has been subjected is no 
ordinary human being. It is high 
time, and far past that hour, for colored Washington to turn its energies 
toward its outer foes and cease this internal and objectless row which has 
every earmark of personal hate and 
spiteful malice and which is already 
being used by our enemies against us. 
IN BLAC K 
IT was i n Chicago. John Haynes 
Holmes was talking. 
He said: " I met two children 
—one as fair as the dawn—the 
other as beautiful as the night." Then 
he paused. He had to pause for the 
audience guffawed in wil d merriment. 
Why ? 
It was a colored audience. Many 
of them were black. Some black 
faces there were as beautiful as the 
night. 
Wh y did they laugh? 
Because the world had taught them 
to be ashamed of their color. 
Because for 500 years men had 
hated and despised and abused black 
folk. 
An d now in strange, inexplicable 
transposition the rising blacks laugh 
at themselves i n nervous, blatant, furtive merriment. 
They laugh because they think they 
are expected to laugh—because all 
their poor hunted lives they have 
heard "black" things laughed at. 
Of all the pitiful things of this pitiful race problem, this is the pitifullest. 
So curious a mental state tends to 
further subtleties. Colored folk, like 
all folk, love to see themselves in pictures ; but they are afraid to see the 
types which the white world has caricatured. The whites obviously seldom picture brown and yellow folk, 
but for five centuries they have exhausted every ingenuity of trick, of 
ridicule and caricature on black folk: 
"grinning" Negroes, "happy" Negroes, "gold dust twins", "Aun t 
Jemimas", "solid" headed tacks— 
everything and anything to make Negroes ridiculous. A s a result if TH E 
CRISI S puts a black face on its cover our 
the actual picture—they see the caricature that white folks intend when 
they make a black face. In the last 
few years a thoughtful, clear eyed artist, Fran k Walts, has done a number 
of striking portraits for TH E CRISIS. 
Mainly he has treated black faces; 
and regularly protests have come to 
us from various colored sources. His 
lovely portrait of the bright-eyed boy, 
Harr y Elam, done in thoughtful sympathy, was approved by few Negroes. 
Our photograph of a woman of Santa 
Lucia , with its strength and humor 
and fine swing of head, was laughed 
at by many. 
Why ? 
"O—er—it was not because they 
were black," stammer some of my of­264 
TH E OL D CABI N 265 
TH E NE W MANSION : RESIDENC E O F J . W . SANFORD , MEMPHIS , TENN . 266 TH E
fice companions, "but they are too 
black. N o people wer e ever so " 
Nonsense ! Do whit e people complai n because their picture s are too 
white ? The y ought to, but they do 
not. Neithe r do we complai n i f we 
are photographed a shade "light" . 
No . It is not tha t we are ashamed 
of our color and blood. We are in ­
stinctively an d almost unconsciously 
ashamed of the caricature s done of 
our darke r shades. Blac k is carica ­
ture i n our half conscious thought and 
we shun i n prin t and paint tha t whic h 
we love i n life. Ho w good a dark face 
looks to us i n a strange whit e city ! 
Ho w the black soldiers, despite their 
whit e Frenc h sweethearts, yearned 
for their far-off "brown-skins" . A 
might y and swellin g huma n consciousness is leading us joyously to embrace 
the darke r world , but we remai n 
afrai d of black picture s because they 
are the crue l reminders of the crime s 
of Sunday "comics " and "Nigger " 
minstrels. 
Off wit h these thought-chains and 
inchoate soul-shrinkings, and let us 
trai n ourselves to see beauty i n black. 
DISFRANCHISEMEN T I N NORT H 
CAROLIN A 
THE Raleig h News and Courier 
of Jul y 29, 1920, is authority 
for the followin g clear explanation of the working s of 
democracy i n Nort h Carolina : 
"Onl y such persons are allowed to vote 
who shall register i n accordance wit h law. 
Section 4317 provides: 'Onl y such persons 
as are registered shall be entitled to vote 
in any election held under this chapter.' 
"No w we come to the crux of the matter. 
Section 4318 of the Revisa l provides: 'Ever y 
person presenting himself (or herself) after 
the passage of the amendment, shall be able 
to read and write any section of the constitution in the Englis h language, and shall 
show to the satisfaction of the registra r his 
ability to read and writ e any such section 
when he applies for registration, and before 
he is registered.' 
"It is well known that since the passage 
of this law, no Negro has been allowed to 
register, unless the registrar, under the 
wide discretion given him, permitted him 
to do so. The registra r can refuse to be 
satisfied and generally does refuse to be 
 CRISI S 
satisfied wit h a Negr o man's abilit y to read 
and writ e the constitution to the registrar's 
satisfaction when such Negr o applies for 
registration. Whe n the amendment is 
passed the Negro women wil l be placed i n 
the same statute as the Negr o men. Whe n 
she applies for registration, she wil l not 
be able to satisfy the registra r of her 
ability to read and writ e the constitution, 
certainly not to his 'satisfaction.' " 
I N TEXA S 
WE note the followin g facts 
from the Sa n Antoni o 
Express, a whit e Texa s 
daily : 
George S. Matthews has been nominated 
county judge of Travis County, defeating 
Dave Pickle , incumbent, by about 600 votes. 
Matthews is sheriff. Pickle , it wil l be recalled, was named by John R. Shillady, of 
New York , as an alleged assailant i n this 
city when the Ne w Yor k man was here i n 
the interest of an organization for the protection of the Negroes. Charles H . Hamby , 
constable, who was wit h Pickl e at the time 
of the alleged assault on Shillady, has been 
defeated for the nomination for sheriff. 
I n additio n to this, Hobby , the 
truculent Governor, has lost the 
nominatio n an d the Chie f of Police , 
Jake D . Platt, wh o stood b y and 
watched the bullies, wa s suspended 
from office some weeks ago. L . L . 
Campbell, the reveren d lia r whose 
tale-bearing caused this miserabl e 
affair, is stil l explainin g to his colored constituents. 
In none of these cases wa s Texa s 
mora l courage stron g enough to mention the Shillad y incident as a cause 
of these changes, but it nevertheless 
played its part. 
HOME S 
WE are publishin g a ver y few 
examples of moder n Amer ­
ican Negr o homes. O f al l 
the constituents of our cosmopolitan population, the Negr o demands the best homes if we consider 
relative income. Whe n he begins to 
rise he insists on a beautiful home : 
he invades Harlem , Drui d Hill , an d 
Hyd e Park , and instead of encouragement he meets laws, curses an d 
bombs. Bu t wha t does he care ! H e 
seeks a Home ! TH E SLEEPER WAKE S A NOVELETT E I N THRE E INSTALLMENT S 
JESSIE FAUSE T 
I-III 
AMY when an infant was left in care of a colored family, the Boldins, whom she 
grew to love, especially her little foster brother Cornelius. She grew up innocent 
and happy but impulsive and at the age of seventeen suddenly decided to run away to 
New York City. Here she found work and was received as white. Finally a Greenwich 
Village artist, Zora Harrisson, took her into her coterie and eventually married her to 
a wealthy, elderly southern white man, Stuart Wynne. Eventually she resented his 
treatment of his colored help. Finally, to keep him from seeking to lynch his valet 
who had struck him, she confessed to her own Negro blood. 
I V 
AMAZINGL Y her beauty availed her 
nothing. If she had been an older 
woman , i f she had had Zora's age and 
experience, she woul d have been able to 
gauge exactly her influence over Wynne . 
Thoug h even then i n simila r circumstances 
she woul d have taken the ris k and acted 
in just the same manner. Bu t she was a 
littl e bewildered at her utter miscalcula ­
tion. She had thought he migh t not want 
his friends—his worl d by whic h he set such 
store—to know tha t she was colored, but 
she ha d not dreamed it could make any 
rea l difference to him. H e had chosen her, 
poor an d ignorant, out of a host of women, and ha d told he r countless times of 
his love. To herself Am y Wynn e was i n 
comparison wit h Zor a for instance, stupid 
and uninteresting. Bu t his constant, unsolicited iterations had made her accept his 
idea. 
She was just the same woman she told 
herself, she had not changed, she was still 
beautiful, stil l charming , stil l "different". 
Perhap s tha t ver y difference had its being 
i n the fac t of her mixe d blood. She had 
been his wife—ther e were memories—she 
could not see how he could give her up. 
Th e suddenness of the divorce carried her 
off he r feet. Dazedl y she left him—though 
almost withou t a pan g for she had only 
like d him. She had been perfectly honest 
about this, and he, although consumed by 
the fierceness of his emotion towar d her, 
ha d graduall y forced himself to be content, fo r at least she had never made him 
jealous. 
She wa s to liv e i n a small house of his 
i n Ne w York , up town i n the 80's. Pete r 
was i n charge and there were a new mai d 
and a cook. The servants, of course, knew 
of the separation, but nobody guessed why . 
She was livin g on a much smalle r basis 
than the one to whic h she had become so 
accustomed i n the last three years. Bu t 
she was very comfortable. She felt, at any 
rate she manifested, no qualms at receiving 
alimony from Wynne . Tha t was the wa y 
things happened, she supposed when she 
thought of it at all. Moreover, it seemed 
to he r perfectly i n keeping wit h Wynne's 
forme r attitude towar d her; she did not see 
how he could do less. She expected people 
to be consistent. Tha t was wh y she was 
so amazed tha t he i n spite of his oft iterated love, could let he r go. If she had felt 
half the love for him whic h he had professed fo r her, she would not have sent him 
away i f he had been a leper. 
"Wh y I'd stay wit h him, " she told herself, "i f he were one, even as I feel now. " 
She was lonely i n Ne w York . Perhaps it 
was the first time i n he r lif e that she had 
felt so. Zor a had gone to Paris the first 
yea r of her marriag e and had not come 
back. 
The days dragged on emptily. One thin g 
helped her. She had gone one day to the 
modiste from whom she had bought her 
trousseau. The woman remembered her 
perfectly—"Th e lady wit h the exquisite 
taste fo r colors—ah, madame, but you have 
the rar e gift. " Am y wa s grateful to be 
taken out of he r thoughts. She bought one 
or two darin g but altogether lovely creations 
and let fall a few suggestions: 
"Tha t brown frock, Madame,—yo u say it 
has been on your hands a long time ? Yes ? 
Bu t no wonder. See, instead of tha t dead 
267 268 TH E CRISI S 
white you should have a shade of ivory , 
that White cheapens it. " Deftl y she caught 
up a bit of ivor y sati n and worke d out her 
idea. Madame was ravished. 
"Bu t yes, Madame Wee n is correct,—as 
always. Oh , wha t a pit y tha t the Madame 
is so wealthy. If she were only a poor gir l 
—Mlle . Antoin e wit h the best eye fo r color 
i n the place has just left, gone back to 
Pranc e to nurse her brother—this Worl d 
Wa r is of such a horror! If someone like 
Madame , now, could be found, to take the 
littl e Antoine's place! " 
Some obscure impuls e drove Am y to accept the half proposal: "Oh ! I don't know, 
I have nothin g to do just now. M y husband is abroad. " Wynn e ha d left he r wit h 
that impression. " I could contribute the 
money to the Re d Cross or to charity. " 
The wor k wa s the best thin g i n the worl d 
fo r her. It kept he r from becoming too in ­
trospective, though even then she did more 
serious, connected thinkin g than she had 
done i n al l the years of he r varie d life . 
She missed Wynn e definitely, chiefly as a 
guidin g influence for she ha d rarel y planned 
even he r own amusements. He r dependence on hi m ha d been absolute. She used 
to pictur e hi m to herself as he was before 
the trouble—and his changin g expressions 
as he looked at her, of amusement, interest, 
.pride, a certain littl e teasing qualit y tha t 
used to come into his eyes, whic h always 
made he r adopt he r "spoiled child air" , as 
he used to call it. It wa s the wa y he liked 
he r best. The n last, there was tha t look 
he had given he r the mornin g she had told 
him she was colored—it ha d depicted so 
man y emotions, various and yet distinct. 
Ther e were dismay, disbelief, coldness, a 
final aloofness. 
Ther e was another expression, too, that 
she thought of sometimes—the look on the 
face of Mr . Packard , Wynne's lawyer. She, 
herself, had attempted no defense. 
"Fo r God's sake wh y did yo u tell him, 
Mrs. Wynne? " Packar d asked her. His 
curiosit y got the better of him. "Yo u 
couldn't have been i n love wit h tha t yellow 
rascal, " he blurted out. "She's too cold 
really, to love anybody, " he told himself. 
"I f yo u didn't care about the boy wh y 
should you have told? " 
She defended herself feebly. "H e looked 
so lik e littl e Cornelius Boldin, " she replied 
vaguely, "an d he couldn't help being colored. " A clerk came i n then and Packar d 
said no more. Bu t into his eyes ha d crept 
a certain reluctant respect. She remembered the look, but could not define it. 
She wa s so sorr y about the trouble now, 
she wished i t ha d never happened. Stil l i f 
she ha d i t to repeat she woul d act i n the 
same wa y again . "Ther e wa s nothin g else 
fo r me to do," she used to tell herself. 
Bu t she missed Wynn e unbelievably. 
If i t ha d not been fo r Peter, he r lif e 
would have been almost tha t of a nun . Bu t 
Peter, who read the papers an d kept abreast 
of the times, constantly called he r attention, 
wit h al l due respect, to the meetings, the 
plays, the sights whic h she ought to attend 
or see. She wa s trul y gratefu l to him. 
She wa s ver y kin d to al l thre e of the 
servants. The y ha d the easiest "places " i n 
Ne w York , the maids used to tell their 
friends. A s she neve r entertained, an d 
frequently dined out, they ha d a grea t deal 
of time off. 
She had been separated from Wynn e for 
ten months before she began to make any 
definite plans fo r he r future . O f course, 
she could not go on lik e this always. It 
came to he r suddenly tha t probably she 
woul d go to Paris and liv e there—wh y or 
how she did not know. Onl y Zor a was 
there and latel y she ha d begun to thin k 
that he r lif e wa s to be lik e Zora's. The y 
had been amazingl y paralle l up to this 
time. O f course she woul d have to wai t 
until after the war. 
She sat musin g about it one day i n the 
bi g sitting-room whic h she ha d ha d fitted 
over into a luxuriou s studio. Ther e wa s 
a sewing-room off to the side from whic h 
Pete r used to whee l into the room waxe n 
figures of al l colorings and contours so tha t 
she could drape the variou s fabric s about 
them to be sure of the best results. Bu t 
today she wa s workin g out a scheme for 
one of Madame's customers, wh o wa s of 
he r own color and size and she wa s he r 
own lay-figure . She sat i n fron t of the 
huge pie r glass, a wonderfu l soft yellow 
sil k draped about he r radian t loveliness. 
" I could do some serious wor k i n Paris, " 
she said half aloud to herself. " I suppose 
i f I reall y wante d to, I could be ver y successful alon g this line. " 
Somewhere downstairs a n electric bell 
buzzed, at first softly, then afte r a slight 
pause, louder, and more insistently. TH E SLEEPE R WAKE S 269 
"I f Madame sends me that lace today, " 
she wa s thinking , idly , "I could finish this 
and start o n the pink . I wonder wh y Peter 
doesn't answe r the bell. " 
She remembered then 
tha t Pete r ha d gone to 
Ne w Rochell e on business an d she ha d sent 
Elle n to Altman's to 
find a certain rar e velvet an d ha d allowed 
Mar y to go wit h her. 
She would dine out, she 
told them, so they need 
not hurry . Evidentl y 
she wa s alone i n the 
house. 
Wel l she could answe r the bell. She had 
done i t often enough i n 
the old days at Mrs. 
Boldin's. O f course it 
was the lace. She 
smiled a bit as she 
went down stairs thinkin g how surprised the 
delivery-boy woul d be 
to see he r arraye d thus 
earl y i n the afternoon. 
She hoped he wouldn't 
go. She could see him 
throug h the long, thick 
panels of glass i n the 
vestibule an d front 
door. H e wa s just turn ­
in g about as she opened 
the door. 
This wa s no deliveryboy, this ma n whose 
gaze fel l on he r hungr y 
an d avid . This was 
Wynne . She stood for 
a second leanin g against 
th e door-jamb, a 
strange figure surely in 
the sharp Novembe r 
weather. Some leaves 
— brown , skeleto n 
shape s — rose and 
swirle d unnoticed about 
he r head. A passing 
letter-carrie r looked at 
them curiously . 
"Wha t are yo u doing answerin g the 
door? " Wynn e asked he r roughly . "Wher e 
is Peter ? Go in , you'll catch cold. " 
She was glad to see him. She took him 
into the drawin g room—a wonderful study 
in browns—and looked at him and looked at 
him. 
This was no delivery-boy, this man"— 
"Well, " he asked her, his voice eager i n 
spite of the commonplace words, "ar e yo u 
gla d to see me? Tell me wha t do you do 
wit h yourself. " 270 TH E
She could not talk fast enough, her eyes 
clinging to his face. Once it struck her 
that he had changed i n some indefinable 
way. Wa s it a slight coarsening of that refined aristocratic aspect? Eve n in her subconsciousness she denied it. 
He had come back to her. 
"So I design for Madame when I feel 
like it, and send the money to the Red 
Cross and wonder when you are coming 
back to me." Fo r the first time i n their 
acquaintanceship she was conscious deliberately of tryin g to attract, to hold him. 
She put on her spoiled child, air which had 
once been so successful. 
"It took you long enough to get here," 
she pouted. She was certain of him now. 
His mere presence assured her. 
They sat silent a moment, the late November sun bathing her head in an austere 
glow of chilly gold. A s she sat there i n the 
big brown chair she was, i n her yellow 
dress, like some mysterious emanation, some 
wraith-like aur a developed from the tone of 
her surroundings. 
He rose and came toward her, still silent. 
She grew nervous, and talked incessantly 
with sudden unusual gestures. "Oh , Stuart, 
let me give you tea. It's right there in the 
pantry off the dining-room. I can wheel 
the table in. " She rose, a lovely creature 
in her yellow robe. H e watched her intently. 
"Wait, " he bade her. 
She paused almost on tiptoe, a dainty 
golden butterfly. 
"Yo u are coming back to live with me?" 
he asked her hoarsely. 
Fo r the first time in her life she loved 
him. 
"O f course I am coming back," she told 
him softly. "Aren' t you glad? Haven't 
you missed me? I didn't see how you could 
stay away. Oh ! Stuart, what a wonderful 
ring! " 
Fo r he had slipped on her finger a heavy 
dull gold band, with an immense sapphire 
i n an oval setting—a beautiful thing of 
Italian workmanship. 
"It is so like you to remember," she told 
him gratefully. " I love colored stones." 
She admired it, turning it around and 
around on her slender finger. 
How silent he was, standing there watching her with his sombre yet eager gaze. 
It made her troubled, uneasy. She cast 
about for something to say. 
 CRISI S 
"Yo u can't think how I've improved since 
I saw you, Stuart. I've read all sorts of 
books—Oh! I'm learned, " she smiled at 
him. "An d Stuart, " she went a littl e 
closer to him, twistin g the button on his 
perfect coat, "I'm so sorry about it all, — 
about Stephen, that boy you know. I just 
couldn't help interfering. Bu t when we're 
married again, if you'll just remember how 
it hurts me to have you so cross—" 
He interrupted her. " I wasn't aware 
that I spoke of our marryin g again, " he 
told her, his voice steady, his blue eyes 
cold. 
She thought he was teasing. "Wh y you 
just asked me to. Yo u said 'aren't you 
coming back to live wit h me—' " 
"Yes, " he acquiesced, " I said just that— 
'to live wit h me'." 
Stil l she didn't comprehend. "Bu t wha t 
do you mean?" she asked bewildered. 
"Wha t do you suppose a ma n means," he 
returned deliberately, "when he asks a woman to live wit h him, but not to marr y 
him? " 
She sat down heavily i n the brown chair, 
all glowing ivory and yellow against its 
sombre depths. 
"Lik e the women in those awfu l novels?" 
she whispered. "No t like those women!— 
Oh Stuart! you don't mean it! " He r very 
heart was numb. 
"Bu t you must care a little—" she was 
amazed at her own depth of feeling. "Wh y 
I care—there are all those memories back 
of us—you must want me really—" 
" I do want you" , he told her tensely. " I 
want you damnably. But—well—I might 
as well out wit h it— A white man like me 
simply doesn't marr y a colored woman. 
Afte r all wha t difference need it make to 
you? We'l l live abroad—you'll travel, have 
all the things you love. Man y a whit e woman would envy you. " He stretched out 
an eager hand. 
She evaded it, holding herself aloof as 
though his touch were contaminating. He r 
movement angered him. 
Lik e a rending veil suddenly the veneer 
of his high polish cracked and the man 
stood revealed. 
"Oh , hell! " he snarled at her roughly. 
"Wh y don't you stop posing? Wha t do you 
think you are anyway? Do you suppose 
I'd take you for my wife—wha t do you 
think can happen to you? Wha t man of 
your own race could give you wha t you TH E SLEEPE R WAKE S 271 
want ? Yo u don't suppose I am going to 
support you this wa y forever, do you? Th e 
court imposed no alimony. You'v e got to 
come to it sooner or later—you'r e bound to 
fal l to some whit e man . What's the matter—I'm not ric h enough? " 
He r face flamed at that—"A s though it 
were that tha t mattered! " 
H e gave her a deadly look. "Well , isn't 
it ? Ah , m y girl , you 
forget you told me you 
didn't love me when 
yo u marrie d me. Yo u 
sold yourself to me 
then. Haven't I reason to suppose you are 
waitin g fo r a highe r 
bidder? " 
A t these words somethin g i n her died forever, her youth, her il ­
lusions, he r happy, happy blindness. She saw 
life leering mercilessly 
i n her face. It seemed 
to he r tha t she would 
give al l he r futur e to 
stamp out, to kil l the 
contempt i n his frosty 
insolent eyes. I n a sudden rus h of savagery 
she struck him, struck 
hi m across his hateful 
sneering mout h wit h 
the han d whic h wore 
his ring . 
A s she fell, reeling 
under the fearfu l impact of his bruta l but 
involuntar y blow, her 
min d caught at, registered two things. A 
littl e thi n stream of 
blood was tricklin g 
across his chin . She 
ha d cut him wit h the 
ring , she realized wit h 
a certain savage satisfaction. An d there 
was something else whic h she must remember, whic h she would remember i f only she 
could fight he r wa y out of this dreadful 
clingin g blackness, whic h was bearin g down 
upon her—closin g he r in . 
Whe n she came to she sat up holdin g her 
bruised, achin g head i n he r palms, tryin g 
to recall wha t it was tha t had impressed 
her so. 
Oh , yes, her very mind ached wit h the 
realization. She lay back agai n on the 
floor, prone, anythin g to relieve tha t in ­
tolerable pain. Bu t he r memory, her 
thoughts went on. 
"Nigger, " he had called her as she fell, 
"nigger, nigger, " and again, "nigger. " 
"H e despised me absolutely, " she said to 
herself wonderingly, "because I was colored. An d yet he wanted me." 
V 
Somehow she reached her room. Lon g 
after the servants had come in , she la y 
face downwar d across her bed, thinking . 
Ho w she hated Wynne , how she hated herself! An d for ten months she had been 
livin g off his money although in no wa y had 
"She Lay Back Again on the Floor, Prone" 272 TH E
she a claim on him. He r whole body burned 
wit h the shame of it. 
I n the mornin g she ran g for Peter. She 
faced him, whit e an d haggard , but i f the 
ma n noticed he r condition, he made no 
sign. H e was, if possible, more imperturb ­
able tha n ever. 
"Peter, " she told him, her eyes and voice 
very steady, " I a m leavin g this house today and shall never come back. " 
"Yes, Miss. " 
" I shall wan t you to see to the packin g 
and storin g of the goods and to send the 
keys and the receipts for the jewelr y and 
valuables to Mr . Packar d in Baltimore. " 
"Yes, Miss. " 
"And , Peter, I am very poor now and 
shall have no money besides wha t I can 
make fo r myself. " 
"Yes, Miss. " 
Woul d nothing surpris e him, she wondered dully. She went on " I don't know 
whether you knew it or not, Peter, but I am 
colored, and hereafter I mean to live among 
my own people. Do you thin k you could 
find me a little house or a littl e cottage 
not too fa r from Ne w York? " 
H e had a littl e place in Ne w Rochelle, 
he told her, his manne r alterin g not one 
whit, or better yet his sister had a fourroom house i n Orange , wit h a garden, if he 
remembered correctly. Yes, he was sure 
there was a garden. It would be just the 
thin g for Mrs. Wynne . 
She had four hundred dollars of her very 
own whic h she had earned by designing for 
Madame . She paid the maids a month i n 
advance—they were to stay as long as 
Pete r needed them. She, herself, went to a 
small hotel i n Twenty-eight h Street, and 
here Pete r came for her at the end of ten 
days, wit h the acknowledgement of the keys 
and receipts from Mr . Packard . The n he 
accompanied her to Orange and installed 
her i n her new home. 
" I wis h I could afford to keep you, Peter, " 
she said a littl e wistfully , "but I am very 
poor. I am heavily i n debt and I must get 
that off my shoulders at once." 
Mrs. Wynn e was very kind , he was sure ; 
he could thin k of no one wit h whom he 
would prefe r to work. Furthermore , he 
often ran down from Ne w Rochelle to see 
his sister; he would come i n from time to 
time, and i n the sprin g would plant the 
garden if she wished. 
She hated to see him go, but she did not 
 CRISI S 
dwell long on that. He r only thought wa s 
to wor k and wor k and wor k and save unti l 
she could pa y Wynn e back. She ha d not 
lived ver y extravagantl y durin g those ten 
months and Pete r wa s a perfec t manager— 
i n spite of he r remonstrance s he ha d give n 
her every mont h an account of his expenses. 
She had made arrangements wit h Madame 
to be he r regula r designer. Th e Frenc h 
woman guessing tha t mor e tha n whi m wa s 
behind this move drove a ver y shrewd bargain , but even then the pa y wa s excellent. 
Wit h care, she told herself, she could be 
free withi n two years, three at most. 
She live d a dul l enough existence now, 
going to wor k steadily every mornin g and 
getting home late at night. Almost it wa s 
like those earl y days whe n she ha d first 
left Mrs. Boldin , except tha t now she ha d 
no hig h sense of adventure, no expectation 
of grea t things to come, whic h migh t buoy 
her up. She no longe r thought of phases 
and the prope r setting fo r he r beauty. Once 
indeed catchin g sight of her face late one 
nigh t i n the mirro r i n he r tin y work-room 
i n Orange , she stopped and scanned herself, 
loathin g wha t she saw there. 
"Yo u thing!" she said to the image i n 
the glass, "i f you hadn't been so vain , so 
shallow! " An d she had struck herself 
violently agai n and agai n across the face 
until her head ached. 
Bu t such fits of passion were rare . She 
had a curious sense of freedom i n these 
days, a feeling that at last he r brain , he r 
senses wer e liberated from some hateful 
clingin g thralldom. He r thoughts were 
always busy. She used to go over tha t last 
scene wit h Wynn e agai n and agai n tryin g 
to probe the inscrutabl e myster y whic h she 
felt was at the bottom of the affair. She 
groped her wa y towar d a solution, but 
alway s something stopped her. He r impuls e 
to strike , she realized, and his bruta l rejoinde r had been actuated by something 
more than mere sex antagonism, there wa s 
race antagonism there—two elements clashing. Tha t muc h she could fathom. Bu t 
that he despising her, hatin g he r fo r not 
being whit e should yet desire her! It 
seemed to her tha t his attitude towar d her 
—hate and yet desire, wa s the attitude i n 
microcosm of the whole whit e worl d towar d her own, towar d tha t worl d to whic h 
those few possible strains of blac k blond 
so tenuously and yet so tenaciously linked 
her. TH E 273 SLEEPE R WAKE S 
Once she got hold of a bi g thought. Perhaps there was some root, some racia l distinction woven i n wit h the stuff of whic h 
she was formed whic h made her persistentl y kin d an d unexacting. An d perhaps i n 
the same wa y this difference, helplessly, 
inevitabl y operated i n makin g Wynn e and 
his kind , crue l or at best indifferent. He r 
reading fo r Wynn e reacted to he r thought— 
she remembered the gratin g insolence of 
whit e exploiters i n foreign lands, the wreckin g of Africa n villages, the destruction of 
homes i n Tasmania . She couldn't imagine 
where Tasmani a was, but whereve r it was, 
it ha d been the realest thin g i n the worl d 
to its crude inhabitants. 
Graduall y she reached a decision. Ther e 
were two divisions of people i n the world— 
on the one hand insatiabl e desire for power; 
keenness, mentality ; a vast and crue l pride. 
O n the other there was ambition, it is true, 
but modified, a certain humble sweetness, 
too muc h inclinatio n to trust, an unthinking , unswervin g loyalty. Al l the advantages i n the worl d accrued to the first division . Bu t withou t bitterness she chose 
the second. She wanted to be colored, she 
hoped she wa s colored. She wished even 
that she di d not have to take advantage of 
he r appearance to ear n he r living . Bu t that 
wa s to meet an end. Afte r al l she ha d 
contracted he r debt wit h a whit e man, she 
woul d pa y him wit h a whit e man's money. 
Th e years slipped by—fou r of them. One 
day a letter came from Mr . Packard . Mrs. 
Wynn e ha d sent him the last penny of the 
sum received from Mr . Wynn e from Febru ­
ar y to November, 1914. Mr . Wynn e had refused to touch the money, i t wa s and would 
be indefinitely at Mrs. Wynne's disposal. 
She neve r even answered the letter. Instead she dismissed the whole incident,— 
Wynn e and all,—from he r min d and began 
to pla n fo r he r future. She wa s free, free! 
She ha d pai d back he r sorr y debt wit h la ­
bor, money and anguish. Fro m now on she 
could do as she pleased. Almost she caught 
herself sayin g "something is goin g to happen. " Bu t she checked herself, she hated 
he r old attitude. 
Bu t something was happening. Insensibl y from the moment she knew of her deliverance , he r thoughts turned back to a 
stifled hidden longing , whic h had lain , i t 
seemed to her, a n eternity i n he r heart. 
Those days wit h Mrs. Boldin ! A t night,— 
on her way to Ne w York,—i n the workrooms,—her mind was busy wit h littl e in ­
timate pictures of that happy, wholesome, 
unpretentious life . She could see Mrs. 
Boldin , clean and portly, i n a lila c chambra y 
dress, upbraidin g her for some trifling , yet 
exasperating fault. An d Mr . Boldin , im ­
maculate and slender, wit h his noticeably 
polished air—how kin d he had alway s been, 
she remembered. An d lastly, Cornelius; 
Cornelius i n a thousand attitudes an d engaged i n a thousand occupations, brown and 
near-sighted and sweet—devoted to his 
pretty sister, as he used to call her; Cornelius, who used to come to he r as a baby 
as willingl y as to his mother; Cornelius 
spelling out colored letters on his blocks, 
pointin g to them stickil y wit h a brown, 
perfect finger; Cornelius singin g lik e an 
angel i n his breathy, sexless voice an d late r 
murderin g everythin g possible on his terrible cornet. Ho w had she ever been able to 
leave them all and the dear shabbiness of 
that home! Nothing , she realized, i n all 
these years had touched he r inmost being, 
had penetrated to the core of her cold 
heart like the memories o f those early, mist y 
scenes. 
One day she wrote a letter to Mrs. Boldin . 
She, the writer, Madame A . Wynne , had 
come across a youn g woman, Am y Kildare , 
who said that as a gir l she had ru n awa y 
from home and now she would lik e to come 
back. Bu t she wa s ashamed to write . Ma ­
dame Wynn e had questioned the gir l closely 
and she wa s quite sure tha t this Miss Kil ­
dare had i n no wa y incurred shame or disgrace. It had been some time since Ma ­
dame Wynn e had seen the gir l but i f Mrs. 
Boldi n wished, she would tr y to find her 
again—perhaps Mrs. Boldi n would like to 
get i n touch wit h her. The letter ended 
on a tentative note. 
The answer came at once. 
M y dear Madame Wynne : 
M y mother told me to writ e you this letter. She says even i f Am y Kildar e had 
dona jomethin g terrible, she would wan t 
hfore. come home again. M y fathe r says so 
too. M y mother says, please find her as 
soon as you can and tell he r to come back. 
She stil l misses her. W e all miss her.
was a littl e boy when she left, but though 
I am i n the Hig h School now and pla y i n 
the school orchestra, I would rathe r see he r 
than do anythin g I know. If you see her, 
 I 274 TH E
be sure to tell her to come righ t away. M y 
mother says thank you. 
Yours respectfully, 
CORNELIU S BOLDIN . 
Th e letter came to the modiste's establishment i n Ne w York . Am y read it and 
went wit h it to Madame . " I have had won ­
derful news, " she told her, " I must go awa y 
immediately, I can't come back—you may 
have these last two weeks for nothing. " 
Madame , who had surmised long since the 
separation, looked curiously at the girl's 
flushed cheeks, and decided that "Mon ­
sieur Ween " had returned. She gave her 
fatalisti c shrug. Al l American s were 
crazy. 
"But , yes, Madame,—if you must go— 
absolument. " 
Whe n she reached the ferry , Am y looked 
about her searchingly. " I hope I'm seeing 
you for the last time—I'm goin g home, 
home! " Oh , the unbelievable kindness! She 
had left them without a word and they 
still wanted her back! 
Eventuall y she got to Orange and to the 
little house. She sent a message to Peter's 
sister and set about her packing. Bu t first 
she sat down i n the littl e house and looked 
about her. She would go home, home—how 
she loved the word , she would stay there a 
while , but always there was life, still 
beckoning. It would beckon forever she realized to her adventurousness. Afterward s 
she would set up an establishment of her 
 CRISI S 
own,—she reviewed possibilities—i n a ric h 
suburb, where whit e women woul d pa y and 
pa y for her expertness, carin g nothin g for 
realities, only for externals. 
"A s I myself used to care, " she sighed. 
He r thoughts flashed on. "The n some day 
I'l l wor k and help wit h colored people—the 
only ones who have reall y cared for and 
wanted me." He r eyes b'.urred. 
She would never make any attempt to 
find out who or wha t she was. If she were 
white, there would alway s be people urgin g 
her to keep up the silliness of racia l prestige. Ho w she hated it all ! 
"Citize n of the world , that's wha t I'll 
be. An d now I'l l go home. " 
Peter's sister's littl e girl came over to be 
wit h the pretty lady whom she adored. 
"Yo u sit here, Angel , and watc h me 
pack, " Am y said, placin g he r i n a littl e armchair. An d the baby sat there i n silent 
observation, one tin y leg crossed over the 
other, surely the quaintest, gravest bit of 
bronze, Am y thought, tha t ever lived. 
"Miss Am y cried, " the chil d told he r 
mother afterwards. 
Perhap s Am y did cry, but if so she was 
unaware . Certainl y she laughed more 
happily , more spontaneously tha n she had 
done for years. Once she got down on her 
knees i n front of the littl e arm-chair and 
buried her face i n the baby's tin y bosom. 
"O h Angel , Angel, " she whispered, "do 
you suppose Cornelius stil l plays on tha t 
cornet? " 
TH E ELECTIO N COMES 
ERNES T R . MCKINNE Y 
WE colored folk are again face to face 
wit h the ever recurrin g dilemma of 
"votin g it straight" , embarkin g on an uncharted sea wit h a new part y candidate or 
descending into hell wit h the Democrats. 
Onl y since 1912, after the indifferent 
treatment of us by Mr . Taft and the apostasy of Theodore Roosevelt, when he joined 
hands wit h Parke r of Louisiana , and refused to let us cross the Plai n of Esdraelo n 
wit h his holy crusaders, have we begun to 
think that there ma y be other ways out of 
the wilderness than the path over whic h 
our fathers strode i n childlik e fait h and in 
vain . No w we are tryin g to get our minds 
open to the trut h and follow the facts 
whereve r they lead, not i n submission to a 
seared idea l but wit h eyes tha t see, ears 
that hea r and feelings that have been outraged by reactionar y Republican s and 
Negr o hatin g Democrats. 
Ye t the awakenin g is by no means complete for there are hosts of us who close 
our minds and exclaim wit h all the fervo r 
of a Christia n martyr, " I am a Republican ; my fathe r before me was a Repub ­
lican ; I come of a lon g line of Republicans. " Ma y the line lose some of its tensile strength! 
Historicall y these Negroe s perhaps are TH E 275 ELECTIO N COME S 
light . I n the distant past the Republican 
Part y was our champion. It actively 
wished for us equality of opportunity and 
protection of the law granted under the 
constitution. Bu t this is not the case now. 
To begin with , the part y is not the same 
part y tha t it was sixt y years ago. Neithe r 
of the two grea t partie s is the same as i n 
the earl y days of their founding. The 
principle s fo r whic h they stood actually 
made them different. 
Bot h aimed at nationa l prosperity but 
through unlik e and often opposed articles 
of faith . 
Therefor e the Negr o today faces not the 
part y of the Abolitionists bu t bidders for 
votes, an d men lustin g for power and 
anxious fo r office because the office brings 
wit h it prestige and leadership. 
This change i n the Republica n Part y has 
been comin g for some time. Afte r the Civi l 
Wa r a menta l attitude established itself 
everywher e amon g Negroe s and among 
whites i n the Nort h who had helped forwar d this transformation . The whites became conscious of the fact tha t they had 
played a large part i n the freeing of the 
Negro . The y ha d made him a citizen, 
give n him the ballot and office. I n fact they 
set aside certai n positions fo r him and it 
became a traditio n tha t he was always to 
get them. The n they came to feel that for 
these benefactions so generously bestowed 
we should be eternally i n their debt and 
they have neve r ceased to remin d us of this. 
W e are al l familia r wit h the speeches that 
our whit e friends make i n our meetings 
after they have been glowingl y introduced 
by one of our leading Negroes. The y appea r before us as a kin d of mass Messia h 
who has delivered us from the southern 
Romans. Th e tragedy of the situation is 
that we have come to thin k as they. We 
feel tha t we owe them something that can 
never be pai d as lon g as the earth stands, 
so grea t is the debt. W e have never ceased 
to prostrat e ourselves before this rock of 
our salvation and cr y out around election 
time, "W e are coming. " The n we marched 
to the polls, i n mass formation, made one 
cross mar k and came awa y satisfied. 
Naturall y i n time the astute white folk 
realized tha t they were losing good whit e 
votes by standin g for our rights. They 
saw tha t it wasn't necessary. We had acquire d tremendous Republica n momentum. 
So they gave their time elsewhere, i n the 
South, for instance, the blessed South, bulwar k of the Democracy, but wit h an occasional flicker of Republicanism. N o talk of 
justice to the Negr o could wi n here, however, so we were gently set aside, the Constitution was not enforced, we were lynched 
and disfranchised but were rewarded wit h 
a grea t deal of kindness and light near the 
time to elect a new president. The y felt 
that they had us safe i n the fold and we 
felt that we belonged there. The y of course 
lost their respect for us, for no one respects a dog that wags its tai l when it is 
kicked. 
I have said that we are i n a dilemma , 
it's something lik e runnin g from the devil 
and jumpin g into the sea. Some of us no 
longer believe i n the Republican Part y but 
we believe fa r less i n the Democrats. We 
face a situation i n whic h our friends are 
in general passively for us but our enemies 
are always violently against us. Fo r in ­
stance, the South is consistent i n its opposition to us. It is passionate and murderous i n defense of its traditions of white 
domination and black serfdom. These tra ­
ditions dominate the politica l life. It has 
pushed past the frontiers of wha t is lawfu l 
and just, makin g nul l and void the Constitution,—yet the Republican Nort h is 
silent. 
Bu t durin g the coming months this silence 
wil l be broken. The Republicans want to 
come into power and they wil l attempt to 
use the same old propaganda among us. A s 
usua l a few Negroes wil l be offered jobs to 
swin g our vote in-line . There wil l be much 
talk about the righ t of every ma n to happiness, liberty and justice. We wil l be told 
by each candidate that he believes i n a 
square deal for us. Man y job huntin g Negroes are now climbin g enthusiastically on 
the band wagon. 
A s a rul e i n the past a Negr o has held 
such positions as Registe r of the Treasury , 
Recorde r of Deeds for the Distric t of Columbia , and a few others. 
The n to make a rea l impression they give 
us a job or two that we had never held before. It is hig h time, however, tha t we 
ceased to be fooled at this point. Ther e is 
no more reason for a Negr o always being 
made Registe r of the Treasur y than there is 
for a white ma n to always be Commissione r 
of Pensions. Whe n Mr . Tyle r was made 
Audito r for the Nav y Departmen t and Mr . 
Lewis was appointed Assistan t Attorne y 276 TH E CRISI S 
Genera l we threw our hats i n the air and 
sang praises to our Republica n captors. 
We forgot tha t we are stil l burned a t the 
stake, disfranchised, crushed to the bottom 
in industry , refused food when we are hungr y and crowded into the galler y when we 
seek amusement. 
Ye t the beginning of an awakenin g has 
come. Le t us hope tha t this yea r we wil l 
be freer men than ever before. One thin g 
that we must surely learn to do, is not to 
function as a racia l unit politically . We 
have got to develop independence! Part y 
leaders must come to know that they can 
never be certain how we are going to voce. 
We have come to the place where politica l 
organization among us is absolutely essential . Suc h organization must be free from 
taint and rule of the bosses and wor k for 
the election of Negroes to office, also whit e 
men, who can be depended upon to recognize us as America n citizens. 
Ou r new politica l leaders must be different 
from most of those we have at present. The 
majorit y now cannot be trusted. The y jump 
at the white man's word of command and 
smile at the rustle of his greenbacks. The 
most contemptible of these leaders is the 
preacher-politician. H e is money-thirsty 
and at election time he is quietly busy at 
part y headquarters emphasizing his prestige among his people. 
The youn g colored men must rise in their 
migh t and do awa y wit h our present venal 
leaders and substitute a new type i n their 
places. Th e leaders of the coming regime 
must be sacrificing, sincere and courageous. 
The y must not have a price. We must 
check them up and repudiate them mercilessly when they jeopardize our politica l 
safety. 
This yea r we wil l not be left to choose 
between Republicans and Democrats for 
there wil l be i n the field two other groups 
askin g fo r our suffrage. I refer to the 
Labo r Part y of the Unite d States and the 
Committee of Forty-Eight . Plan k three of 
the Committe e of Forty-Eigh t reads as follows: "Equa l economic, politica l and lega l 
rights for all , irrespective of sex or color. " 
. . . I n its Declaratio n of Principles, 
Section 3, the Labo r Part y says, "W e dedicate the Labo r Part y of the Unite d States 
to the principl e of complete politica l and in ­
dustria l equality of the sexes and races, na ­
tionalities and creeds." 
Whe n I read the literatur e of the Committee of Forty-Eigh t I wondered i f it 
would be anothe r Progressive Part y wit h a 
Parke r demanding tha t it be a "whit e 
man's party" . I wrote to the chairma n and 
asked him the followin g questions: (1 ) 
Does the Committe e of Forty-Eigh t intend 
to go before the country favorin g a n equa l 
chance for the Negr o to vote and hold office 
and have the same chance i n the courts and 
in industr y as whit e men? (2 ) Do the 
southern members of the Committe e favo r 
this ? (3 ) If the southern members object 
to Negr o equality wha t do the norther n 
members intend to do? Mr . J. A . H . Hop ­
kins, the Chairman , replied as follows: " I 
can perhaps answe r you r question, tha t 
when we declared for 'Equa l Rights' we 
meant exactly wha t we said and intend to 
go through. " 
In the preliminar y meetings of both these 
parties, these equal rights measures wer e 
enthusiastically adopted. Bu t the rea l test 
has not yet come. A politica l part y ge s 
into power throug h votes and votes are got 
by politica l manceuvering and the spending 
of money. Wh o can say that they wil l stand 
up for and i n defense of their Negr o adherents when the pressure is put on? It is a 
fine thin g tha t such a stand has been take n 
and we ma y be inclined to lend our ear. 
Bu t we must be careful and go slow. Th e 
time has come when Negroe s must cease 
to grow enthusiastic about an y of the 
things tha t whit e men say to them or about 
them. W e must keep an open min d and 
insist on deeds and not words, no matte r 
how good they sound. 
Al l partie s and candidates must know 
that we insist on the fullness of Unite d 
States citizenship and wil l neve r be satisfied wit h anythin g less. W e must have its 
privileges, its responsibilitie s and the protection of the country's laws, North , South, 
East and West. W e wil l support the part y 
that wil l give us tangibl e evidence tha t it 
recognizes this principl e and wil l carr y it 
into effect. W e wil l not compromise , fo r 
progress for us wil l not come throug h compromise. This has been trie d an d has miserably failed. W e must be true to ourselves and to our own. 
The n as the election comes let us pondei 
on these things, profitin g by the past an d 
the present, and fighting our wa y into the 
futur e wit h whateve r weapon is needed to 
achieve the goa l of complete America n citizenship. ENTRANC E HALLWAY , MR. HERNDON'S HOME, ATLANTA , GA. 
LIBRARY , DR. ELBERT' S HOME, WILMINGTON, DEL. 
277 National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People. 
FIEL D SECRETAR Y JOHNSO N BECOME S 
ACTIN G SECRETAR Y 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSON , Fiel d Secretary of the Associatio n since 1916, has 
been appointed as Actin g Secretary, pendin g final action by the Boar d of Directors, 
to succeed Joh n R. Shillady , resigned. Mr . 
Johnson is one of the best known colored 
men i n the Unite d States. Besides being 
field secretary of the N . A . A . C. P. he is 
widely known as contributing editor of the 
New York Age. H e is an author of note, 
havin g writte n several volumes, and has 
contributed to various periodicals such as 
the Century, The Independent, The Nation 
and TH E CRISIS. 
Mr . Johnson has been one of the greatest 
single factors i n the rapi d growt h of the 
Associatio n i n membership and in power 
durin g the past three years. Whe n he entered upon his work in the winte r of 1916 
the N . A . A . C. P. had 68 branches wit h 
a membership of 8,642. Today the Asso ­
ciation has 345 branches wit h a membership 
of approximatel y 100,000. This remarkable growt h has been due i n a large measure to the wor k tha t Mr . Johnson has done 
as field secretary i n buildin g up the strong 
chain of branches that the Association now 
has. Whe n he entered upon his work the 
Associatio n had only two branches in the 
Southern States. Mr . Johnson realized that 
the great strength of a movement like the 
N . A . A . C. P. la y to a large extent in fightin g where prejudice was greatest. H e therefore immediately started through the South, 
organizin g branches. On that tri p he organized personally fifteen branches, includ ­
in g that at Atlanta , one of the strongest i n 
the Association and host to the Elevent h 
Annua l Conference i n June , 1920; and from 
that nucleus the number has grown until 
today there are 165 Branches in Southern 
States wit h a membership of 50,000. 
The appointment of Mr . Johnson wil l meet 
wit h the ful l approva l of all the branches 
because of his unstinted service to the Association since his connection wit h it, and 
his abilit y as an executive. 
The loss to the Associatio n throug h the 
resignation of Mr . Shillady , who began 
work as secretary i n February , 1918, and 
whose energy and executive abilit y di d so 
much i n makin g the Associatio n the in ­
creasingly powerfu l organizatio n tha t it is, 
is regretted by every member of the Asso ­
ciation. Unde r the guidance of Mr . John ­
son the wor k of makin g the N . A . A . C. P . 
the most powerful weapon ever know n i n 
defense of the rights of colored people wil l 
be carried on wit h vigorous efficiency. 
INVESTIGATIO N O F HAIT I 
DURING the sprin g Mr . Johnson was sent 
to Hait i by the Associatio n to investigate the vague and fragmentar y rumors of 
oppression and brutalitie s there unde r the 
America n Occupation and of the exploita ­
tion of that country by grea t financial in ­
terests i n the Unite d States. H e found 
conditions worse tha n were suspected. In 
the September issue of TH E CRISIS an article appeared, writte n by Mr . Johnson, giv ­
in g some of the facts he learned. On Aug ­
ust 28th, he began i n The Nation a series 
of four articles on conditions i n Haiti . Als o 
in connection wit h other demands of the 
Negro, he recently took up wit h Senator 
Hardin g the question of Haiti . Mr . Hard ­
ing expressed surpris e at the facts given 
him, and stated tha t he woul d give the matter his attention i n the campaign . Mr . John ­
son's articles are attractin g wide notice, and 
it is probable tha t the revelation of conditions they contain wil l lead to a congressiona l investigation of facts that have been 
kept from the America n people. 
TH E NE W CITIZE N AN D HE R VOT E 
AFTE R repeated delays and man y disheartening failure s the advocates of 
woman suffrage succeeded on August 18 i n 
securing the ratification of the Nineteenth 
Amendmen t to the Constitutio n b y the Ten ­
nessee legislature—the 36th state to ratify . 
This gives the righ t to vote i n the November elections and i n all future elections to 
278 N 279 . A . A . C. P. 
more than 27,000,000 women i n the Unite d 
States. 
It was but natura l that the South should 
be the stronghold of the anti-suffrage forces 
—that opposition being based on the prospective participatio n i n politics of colored 
women. The task immediately before us 
now is to see that the colored woman voter 
does take advantage of her opportunity and 
that she does so wit h more intelligence than 
the Negr o ma n has done This wil l be an 
easier accomplishment i n that the major 
portion of all the contention fo r a large r 
opportunit y for the Negr o durin g the past 
half-century has been carried on by colored 
women, although they have not always received the credit for it. Withi n the next 
few years there wil l be man y attempts by 
southern legislature s to make disfranchisement laws cover colored women. Those efforts must be fought wit h all the vigo r that 
12,000,000 colored citizens can muster. 
Man y of the new voters recently enfranchised as well as a large proportion of the 
men voters wil l need definite instruction regardin g wha t must be done to qualify. In 
the September numbe r of the Branch Bulletin a pla n was outlined fo r an intensive 
course i n politica l education of a practica l 
sort. This pla n calls for the formatio n of 
classes for the study of the fundamenta l 
principle s underlyin g the use of the ballot 
—how to qualify—how and when to register 
—how to mar k a ballot—how to examine 
the past records of aspirants for office for 
whom votes are to be cast. 
The pla n as outlined i n the September 
Branch Bulletin provides fo r the immediate 
formin g of classes i n politica l education by 
the various branches of the Association . 
The N . A . A . C. P . is, and always has been, 
a politica l organizatio n i n the broadest 
sense of the word . It is the duty of the 
Association, both nationall y and through 
its loca l branches, to (1) teach colored voters how to unite to defeat all candidates 
for office who are unfavorable , and to support those who can be depended upon to 
deal justl y i n al l public questions, particularl y i n connection wit h the Negro's problems; (2) examine records of aspirants for 
office i n order to determine whether or not 
these aspirants can be trusted; (3) bind 
these candidates so effectively tha t they wil l 
not be able to neglect or forget their precampaign promises after they have been 
elected. 
Of greater importance than the election 
of a president, is the politica l complexion 
of the next Congress of the various State 
legislatures and the personnel of the state, 
county and municipa l officers. 
In the four pivota l states of Illinois, Indiana , Kentuck y and Maryland , the Negr o 
vote forms the balance of power, whil e i n 
Michigan , Ne w Jersey, Ne w Yor k and Ohio 
the total Negr o vote almost equals the 
number of votes whic h wil l decide the electora l vote i n each of these states. I n the 
states of Connecticut, Delaware , Iowa , Kan ­
sas, Massachusetts, Minnesota , Missouri , 
Pennsylvani a and West Virginia , i n each 
of whic h the Negr o vote has been largel y 
augmented through the migrator y movement of the last four years, the margi n 
wil l be almost, if not quite, as narrow. 
The Nationa l Office strongly urges all its 
branches to form these classes. Efforts 
should be made to reach every citizen of 
voting age. Qualified persons who are will ­
in g to serve should be secured as leaders of 
the various classes. A t the meetings, the 
leader should discuss, not academically, but 
i n a way that wil l keep alive the interest 
of the classes, the questions directly affectin g the voting problems of that group. 
Afte r the discussion by the leader, the class 
should be allowed to ask questions and discuss their particula r problems. 
Specific problems such as the qualifications necessary fo r registration and voting 
in the particula r state and community 
where the class is held should be taken up. 
Some states require educational qualifications; others the ownership of property ; 
some, the payment of a poll tax. I n all 
states, the prospective voter must have 
lived in that state a certain length of time. 
Next, the class should learn when and where 
the prospective voter should register. A 
great deal of wor k can be done by "flyin g 
squadrons " i n getting out as man y people 
as possible and havin g them register. Afte r 
registration has been accomplished, the next 
step is that of determining whic h of the 
candidates to be voted for are most worth y 
of support, and then votin g for those candidates on election day. 
Althoug h the time is short before the 
elections i n November, a great deal of effective wor k can be done b y the branches. Th e FORME
R HUNTER HOME, 
J. H. BLODGETT, Anacostia, D. C. Jacksonville, Fla. FORMER HOME OF DR. ELBERT, MB. HUGHES , Wilmington, Del, Springfield, Mass. CHARLES A. SHAW, DR. W. T. FULLE R Atlanta, Ga. Suffolk, Va. 
280 T
. H. HAYES MAGGI
E L
. WALKER , Memphis, Tenn. Richmond, Va, DR. L. L. BURWELL , L. M. BLODGETT, Selma, Ala, Los Angeles, Cal. "VILLA LEWARO". WILLIAM THOMPSON, Irvington-on-the-Hudson, N. Y. Nashville, Tenn. 
281 282 TH E CRISIS 
branches have been warned to guar d especiall y against attempts on the part of vena l 
politicians of both races who ma y attempt 
to unduly influence these classes when 
formed. These classes properly formed and 
prosecuting their work wit h vigo r can accomplish a great deal i n makin g the Negr o 
vote i n man y communities a most effective 
weapon in the Novembe r elections for the 
betterment of conditions affecting colored 
people. 
SERGEAN T CALDWEL L EXECUTE D 
ON Jul y 3 0 the closing chapter i n the 
lif e of Sergeant Edga r C. Caldwell 
was written when he was executed at 
Anniston, Ala., for the killing of Cecil Linton, 
a street car conductor in that city on 
October 1, 1919. Few cases have attracted such 
nation-wide attention as did this one. The 
whole story of the alleged crime, together 
wit h the long legal fight made to save the 
life of this .colored ma n who fought i n a 
southern town to save his own life has been 
told in previous issues of THE CRISIS. 
Following a dispute with the conductor of a 
street ca r in Anniston , Caldwell was kicked 
from the car. A s he was about to rise 
from the ground, the conductor and motorman of the ca r advanced on him wit h weapons i n their rands to attack him furthe r 
Caldwell drew his revolve r and firing from 
his hip, killed the conductor and wounded 
the motorman. Caldwell was arrested by 
civi l authorities, although he was a soldier 
and subject to militar y tria l and punishment if found guilt y by a court-martial. He 
was found guilt y of murde r i n the first degree and sentenced to be hanged. 
Through the splendid work of the 
Anniston-Hobson City Branch of the N. A. A. 
C . P., in which the Rev. R. R. William s of 
Annisto n was conspicuously active, the case 
was fought through the various state courts 
of Alabama , i n whic h fight the branch was 
aided by the other Alabam a branches and 
the Nationa l Office. The long fight was 
told of i n detail i n the Januar y issue of 
TH E CRISIS . Afte r reversals there, the case 
was carried to the Unite d States Supreme 
Court where again Caldwell lost. Fina l 
appeals to the governor of Alabam a to commute the sentence of death to lif e imprisonment were unavailing . 
The Nationa l Office wishes especially to 
commend the Alabam a lawyers who fought 
so determinedly to save Caldwell's life,— 
Messrs. Charle s U . Klin e and B . M . Allen , 
and to Messrs. Jame s A . Cobb and Henr y 
E . Davis of Washingto n who di d the same 
in the Unite d States Supreme Court. It 
also wishes to express its sincere apprecia ­
tion to the large numbe r of its friends, who 
are too numerous to mention individually , 
who aided i n such wholehearted an d loya l 
fashion in the defense. 
Sergeant Caldwel l is dead, but the efforts 
to save him are not lost. N o person who 
is conversant wit h the facts i n his case 
feels that he was guilt y of a crime when 
he fought to save his own life . N o redblooded person would have done otherwise. 
Caldwell has been sacrificed on the alta r 
of prejudice. His death means but one 
more addition to the lon g list of crime s 
whic h have been done i n the name of color 
prejudice. His end means but one more 
reason for a more unbending and relentless 
fight on the part of every Negr o and every 
right-minded person of every race to end 
this farce whic h allows color prejudice to 
blind justic e and judge a ma n not on his 
deeds but on the color of his skin. 
Caldwell's last words, spoken just before the 
noose was placed around lis neck, express 
his feeling toward the country that had accepted his services in battle and repai d hi m 
by a lega l lynching . The y close Caldwell's 
life histor y but who knows wha t part his 
death may pla y in the ending of the regime 
that caused his death? 
"/ am being sacrificed today upon the 
altar of passion and racial hatred that appears to be the bulwark of America's civilization. If it would alleviate the pain and 
sufferings of my race, I would count myself 
fortunate in dying, but I am but one of the 
many victims among my people who are 
paying the price of America's mockery of 
law and dishonesty in her profession of a 
world democracy." 
RAIN-MIST 
CHARLE S BERTRA M JOHNSO N 
ALL day withi n an upturned glass 
O f mist and clouds, the ghostly rains 
Streak down and listless winds tha t pass, 
Lik e vapor chilled on window panes. 
Gra y threads of color blurre d and purle d 
An d streamin g pencils taperin g white,— 
The autumn mood is on the world , 
An d I am helpless i n its might. THE Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
HOW to better the condition of the colored race, has long been a study which 
has attracted ray serious and careful attention; hence I thin k I am clear and decided as to wha t course I shall pursue i n 
the premises, regardin g it as a religious 
duty, as the Nation's guardia n of these 
people who have so heroically vindicated 
their manhood on the battlefield, where, i n 
assisting to save the lif e of the Republic , 
THE Y HAV E DEMONSTRATE D THEI R 
RIGH T T O TH E BALLOT , which is but 
the humane protection of the flag they have 
so fearlessly defended.—Abraham Lincoln. 
THE SCAPE GOAT 
TO man y people even i n the Nort h the 
good name of the Negr o race is nothin g and ma y be defamed fo r any purpose. 
Conside r this incident i n Pennsylvania . We 
clip from the Philadelphi a Bulletin on two 
dates: 
Waylai d by three Negr o highwayme n 
two squares from his home, Joh n E . Dalton , 
twenty-one, of Sharon Hill , was shot and 
killed shortl y after midnigh t today. 
To the Edito r of The Bulletin: 
Sir—Ma y I call you r attention to wha t I 
consider one of the most reprehensible acts 
by the so-called lega l authorities anywhere 
in this country? Al l of us have been readin g about the bruta l murde r of Joh n Dalton , 
of Sharo n Hill , and of how the Delawar e 
county authorities were scouring the countr y fo r three Negroe s who committed the 
crime. W e read of the swearin g i n of over 
a hundred ex-service men as special policemen, of how these men were searching Ne ­
gro quarters withi n a wide radius of the 
murder; how the whit e people have been 
aroused and open threats against unoffendin g colored people openly made. I note in 
The Bulletin the followin g statement: 
"Charle s H . Drewes, Corone r of Delawar e 
county, declares tha t from the first he had 
been convinced that Dalto n was kille d by 
one man after a bitte r struggle, but he said 
the authorities supported the theory that 
three colored highwayme n commuted the 
deed so as not to war n the rea l murderer. " 
It is to the eternal shame of the custodians of the law of Delawar e county that 
they are guilt y of such a mean, cowardl y 
subterfuge. Ha d there been rio t and bloodshed at Sharo n Hil l these "protectors of the 
people" woul d have been entirely to blame. 
Colored people of Sharo n Hil l and all other 
towns and cities are appealing for and demandin g fair play. W e are tired of being 
held up before the worl d as a mask to shield 
the fellow who does the dirt y work. We do 
not protect our criminals; for them we only 
ask the same treatment as others receive. 
I feel that all wil l agree that the authorities 
of Delawar e county have stooped to the 
very lowest plane of racia l antipathy. 
JOH N P. TURNER , M.D . 
* * * 
Nei l Steer, a southern white man, write s 
to the Durham, N . C , Herald: 
I have just read your editorials on the 
lynchin g of Red Roach i n Person county, 
and I feel I would be an unworth y citizen 
if I failed to state wha t I know about this 
matter. 
Whe n this Negr o was lynched, as innocent 
a man was murdered as would have been 
had you or I been the victim of the mob. 
He was workin g for me and was a quiet, 
har d working , inoffensive, humble Negro . 
On Monda y he came to me and stated that 
he was sick and wanted to go wit h me to 
Durham that night to see a doctor. I 
greatl y regret that I did not take him wit h 
me, for I believe his life would have been 
spared, but instead I arranged for him to 
go Tuesday night to Roxboro. He continued 
at his work all day Tuesday until about 
5:30 (bear i n min d the crime for whic h he 
was lynched occurred between 2 and 3 
o'clock that afternoon) when he asked permission of his foreman to stop and go to 
catch the trai n for Roxboro. Permission 
was given him and he left for the station, 
walking . A t 5:45 he passed the State's 
bridge crew (white men) and two men who 
were searching for the guilt y Negr o saw 
him and followed him up the road to Moun t 
Ters a station where he sat down and waited for the train . These two men sat down 
on the railroa d near him. Whe n the trai n 
came he got on and paid his fare to Rox ­
boro and got off the trai n there. H e was 
not arrested until he got off the train . I 
am advised by the chief of police, he asked 
wha t they had him for and told them he 
had not done anything, but he was not told 
until he got in jai l wha t they had him for. 
He denied it and told the little girl when 
she was brought i n that she was mistaken ; 
he was not the man, so the sheriff informs 
me. H e asked to be taken by my office to 
see my superintendent wit h whom I had arranged to carr y him to the doctor, but permission was refused him. H e had been 
workin g fo r me off and on for two years 
and on this particula r work since November 1, 1919, and was in every wa y a straightforward , inoffensive Negro.. His lif e has 
been taken for something he knew absolutely nothing about. . . . 
I make this statement i n the interest of 
truth and justice and wit h a ful l knowledge 
283 284 TH E
of the odium I am bringin g down upon m y 
own head i n doing so, but wit h the hope 
that his fearfu l crime ma y shock ou r people 
as to make its lik e agai n a n impossibility. 
NEGRO ART 
THE grea t Negr o gift of interpretin g 
Beaut y is being graduall y recognized. 
Cliv e Bel l write s i n the Englis h periodical, 
Arts and Decoration: 
Because i n the past Negr o art has been 
treated wit h absurd contempt, we are al l 
inclined now to overpraise it ; and because 
I mean to keep m y head I shall doubtless 
by m y best friends be called a fool. Judg ­
in g from the availabl e data—no grea t stock, 
by the way—I should say tha t Negr o art 
was entitled to a place amon g the great 
schools, but tha t it wa s no matc h fo r the 
greatest. Wit h the greatest I would compar e it ; I woul d compare it wit h the art of 
the supreme Chinese periods (from Ha n to 
Sung), wit h archai c Greek, wit h Byzantine , 
wit h Mohammedan , whic h fo r archaeologica l purposes, begins unde r the Sassanians 
a hundred years and more before the birt h 
of the prophet; I woul d compare it wit h 
Romanesque and earl y Italia n (from Giotto 
to Raffael) ; but I woul d place i t below all 
these. O n the other hand, whe n I consider 
the whole corpus of black art known to us, 
and compare it wit h Assyrian , Roman , In ­
dian, true Gothi c (not Romanesque, that 
is to say), or late Renaissance, it seems to 
me tha t the blacks have the best of it. 
And , on the whole, I should be inclined 
to place West and Centra l Africa n art, at 
any rate, on a level wit h Egyptian . Suc h 
sweeping classifications, however, are not 
to be taken too seriously. 
Al l I wan t to say is that, though the capita l achievements of the greatest schools do 
seem to me to have an absolute superiority 
over anythin g Negr o I have seen, yet the 
finest black sculptur e is so ric h i n artisti c 
qualities that it is entitled to a place beside 
them. 
* * * 
The Literary Digest says: 
A n Englishman , however, has heard a 
colored orchestr a i n Londo n and write s i n 
The Daily Chronicle tha t "i n the spontaneous musi c and naive accompanyin g bodymovements of these colored performers 
there wa s no trace of the vulgarit y and 
veiled indecency which , since their adoptio n b y the whit e man , have become characteristi c of the so-called jaz z tunes and 
the wriggling s and undulations of the socalled jaz z dances." Th e writer, b y name 
"Collum, " seems to seize a chance to relieve some of the recently accumulated irri ­
tation against America , and shows how we 
have missed the finer spirit of Negr o music : 
" I discovered tha t the characteristic s of 
this southern Negr o musi c are not, as 
Americ a has interpreted them fo r us, vul ­
garit y and bizarreness. The y are a n honest 
native sense of rhythm and a spontaneous 
response to the vis comica i n music, . . . 
 CRISIS 
the 'force of humor,' tha t bubbles u p i n it 
and makes each performanc e a delight not 
only to the average western audience, but 
to the musicians themselves. Wha t a 
piquant pleasur e i t is to go to a musica l 
show an d to be thoroughl y entertained—to 
be made to enjoy oneself withou t concentratio n of effort, to be sent off into ripple s 
and roars of happ y laughter, not b y anythin g untowar d or grotesque, but b y the 
sheer innat e fu n of the thing ! 
"Fo r years an d years i t has seemed almost an impiet y to thin k of humo r i n connection wit h music . Musi c as a n accompaniment to comedy an d farce , musi c as a 
handmaiden to the banalitie s of tha t mirth -
lackin g production of a blase age, the modern revue—ah, yes! Bu t humo r i n the mu ­
sic and the musicians themselves, oh, dear 
me, no ! Tha t were a contradictio n i n terms. 
"I f these colored musicians, i n their 
happy-go-lucky performances, their humorous improvisatio n embroidered, as you 
migh t say, al l about the motif of their desig n withou t i n the least destroyin g its 
rhythmica l balance or the stric t discipline 
of their ensemble playing—i f they ca n demonstrate to our sophisticated musica l scientists tha t musi c is not necessarily a serious 
business fo r the mathematician s an d the 
virtuosi, but can be also a n ebullitio n of 
spontaneous art instinc t wit h the vis comica 
to whic h musi c has been so lon g a stranger, 
they wil l have done muc h mor e fo r us than 
merely to give our blase Londoners a chance 
of a rea l good laugh. " 
UNIONS AND SCABS 
CERTAI N America n railwa y unions organized the Negroe s of the Cana l 
Zone. The y struc k against wage s o f $52 a 
month and foun d the whol e government 
against them. Th e Nation says: 
Eviction s of the strikers began promptl y 
on schedule time , bu t certai n landlord s i n 
Sa n Migue l and elsewhere decided to rent 
vacant houses and rooms onl y to dispossessed silve r employees, an d to collect no 
rents unti l the strik e wa s settled. Th e gold 
employees of the canal—the whites—showe d 
littl e sympath y wit h the efforts of the silve r 
workers to obtain a livin g wage , however, 
as is illustrate d b y the followin g statement 
from the Panam a Star and Herald: 
Th e nigh t service of the cana l telephone 
department wa s not interfere d wit h i n the 
least b y the failur e of the silve r operatives 
to report fo r duty. Th e shifts wer e so arranged b y the officials of the department to 
wor k the girls twenty-fou r hours a da y in ­
stead of unde r the old da y an d nigh t shifts. 
Th e girls who volunteered fo r the wor k 
found i t quite a novelty and no complaints 
have been made by them. 
* * * 
Th e strik e theoreticall y ended a t mid ­
night, Marc h 3, althoug h most of the me n 
were stil l out. Willia m P . Stoute, the leader of the strikers, asked naturalizatio n i n 285 TH E LOOKING GLASS 
Panama , but the Sub-Secretary of Foreig n 
Affairs—th e same Mr . Hazer a who had aided i n breakin g the strike by his efforts to 
keep the evicted familie s out of Panama ­
advised against it. Th e strikers were not 
only beaten but disillusioned, fo r they had 
confidently counted on help from their 
unio n i n the Unite d States, to which , they 
said, they ha d sent $100,000 gold ; but their 
appeals fo r assistance were unanswered. 
An d yet the Union s are terribl y angr y because Negroe s are scabs. 
ROTTEN BOROUGHS 
SOONE R or late r the South must surrende r its stolen politica l powe r or allow the Negr o to vote. Norther n papers 
have carrie d several despatches lately like 
this from the Ne w Yor k Times: 
Mr . Siege l sai d last nigh t that he was 
not committed on the new proposa l to apportion Representative s to the South only 
on the basis of the votin g population, but 
tha t he intended to hold ful l hearings on the 
subject. H e said the present agitation to 
force the South to permit Negr o votin g or 
suffer a shrinkage i n representation had 
grow n greatl y i n recent months. 
Congressma n Barbou r of California , one 
of the most active figures i n the agitation 
fo r votes fo r Negroe s i n the South, is a 
member of the Committe e on Reapportionment. Ther e ar e nine norther n Republicans 
and si x southern Democrats on the committee, an d it is understood tha t the committee is likel y to recommend a bil l excludin g fro m the basis of Federa l "apportionment al l classes of citizens excluded from 
the polls. Th e committee wil l have before 
it the entir e subject of reapportionin g the 
representation i n Congress, i n accordance 
wit h the final figures of this year's census, 
whic h wil l be completed i n September. 
Th e ma n i n the agitatio n fo r this change 
i n apportionment, based on the Negr o vote, 
Mr . Siege l says, is the Rev . Thoma s G . M . 
Birmingha m of Milford , Neb., who appeared 
before the Committe e on Resolutions of the 
Republica n Nationa l Convention and argued i n favo r of this plan . The Rev . Mr . 
Birmingha m an d his associates have flooded 
the Nort h wit h appeals fo r this movement. 
Congressman Siege l said, and had gained a 
considerable following . H e said tha t most 
of the propagand a was based on justic e to 
the Negro , but tha t there were also Re ­
publicans who objected earnestly to the 
practice of makin g Republica n Negroes, 
who ar e kept awa y from the polls, the 
means of increasin g Democrati c representation i n Congress. . 
SOLDIERS 
SECRETAR Y BAKE R says that Negr o 
pioneer regiments involve no race discrimination . Bu t the Fal l River, Mass., 
Daily News says: 
Is it possible tha t Secretary Bake r can 
suppose that his last statement can be credited by any considerable number of the people? It is patent to every observer that 
there is a sharp discriminatio n between the 
black and whit e races. If the decision is 
not a stigma on the colored soldier on account of his race, wh y does the Department 
not decree tha t Irish-American s or Franco -
American s or Polish-American s shall be 
made pioneers assigned to the drudgery 
corps? It is a race stigma that the decision affixes to colored soldiers. Secretary 
Bake r may think that the exigencies of the 
situation justif y the decision. But , i f so, 
let hi m tr y to justif y it without the falsehood that no race discrimination is intended. 
O f course it is intended.. 
THE SCHREINERS 
WE have a few friends even i n South 
Africa . The African World writes: 
The late Senator Schreine r was born at 
Colesberg, i n the Cape, i n 1844, and wa s 
the son of the late Rev. G . Schreine r of the 
Wesleya n Missionar y Society and an elder 
brother of Olive Schreine r and the late 
Hig h Commissione r of the Union , whose 
senior he was by thirteen years. H e received his education at the Wesleya n College, Taunton , and at the age of nineteen 
he became vice-principa l of the Shaw College, Grahamstown , a position whic h he held 
for five years. Thereafter he was headmaster of the Government School at Crad ­
ock durin g the period 1869-70. I n 1870 he 
threw up this promisin g academic career 
and joined i n the great rush to the Vaa l 
Rive r diggings and Kimberley . . . . 
I n the meantime he devoted himself more 
and more to the interests of the temperance 
cause. I n 1889 he went as Good Templa r 
delegate to America , and i n subsequent 
years he travelled extensively i n Europe , 
Egypt , and Asi a Mino r i n the same connection. A t the beginning of the present 
century he spent two years i n Englan d as 
the delegate of the South Africa n Vigilanc e 
Committee. I n 1904 he was elected to the 
Cape Parliamen t as Progressive member 
for Tembuland, and when the Unio n was 
formed i n 1910 he was returned for the 
same division i n the united Parliament. 
Ther e he stood forwar d as the champion of 
a libera l native policy, and i n his late r 
years it became the chief interest of his lif e 
to express the natives' point of view i n the 
deliberations of the Assembly . 
It was principall y for this reason that 
when his brother, the late Hon . W . P . 
Schreiner, was appointed i n 1915 from the 
Senate to the Unio n Hig h Commissionership i n London , he was nominated b y the 
Governor-Genera l as one of the Senators 
who, i n terms of the Constitution, are elected on the ground mainl y of their acquaintance wit h the reasonable wants and wishes 
of the colored races. I n this capacity and 
i n connection wit h the native policy whic h 
is now i n course of formulatio n i n the Unio n 
he rendered conspicuous service to the races 
whom he represented i n the Legislature . Men of the Month. ELIJA H McCO Y is regarded as the pioneer i n the art of steadily supplyin g 
oil to machiner y i n intermittent drops from 
a cup so as to avoid the necessity for stoppin g the machine to oil it. His lubricatin g 
cup has been i n use fo r years on stationary 
and locomotive machinery, includin g railwa y locomotives, boiler engines of steamers, 
on the Grea t Lakes, on trans-Atlanti c steamships and i n leading factories. The McCo y 
method of graphit e lubricatio n has a score 
of over 300,000 miles withou t repackingcylinders, whil e one piston valve superheater has covered over 100,000 miles with ­
out repacking. 
Elija h McCo y was born Ma y 12, 1844, 
and is the thir d of 12 children. His parents 
were Mildre d Gaines-McCo y and George 
McCoy , who fled to Canad a from slavery i n 
1837. His fathe r was a veteran of the 
Fenia n War , servin g wit h the Canadia n 
forces. 
Th e McCo y Graphit e Lubricato r represents Mr . McCoy's 67th invention, his 58th 
patent and his 46th patent or improvement 
upon lubricatin g devices. Mr . McCo y was 
granted his first patent July , 1872. H e is 
vice-president of the McCo y ManufacturingCompan y at Detroit, Michigan . 
THE late Edwar d Seabrook was born i n 
Aike n County, S. C , Novembe r 6, 1869. 
His schooling stopped at the fourth grade 
when he went to wor k on steamboats fo r the 
support of his mother, becoming i n time a 
first-class pilot. 
I n 1895 a t Savannah , Ga. , Mr . Seabrook 
entered the undertakin g business for which 
he built a 3-story bric k structure . Seven 
years ago he retired, selling to the Savan ­
nah Undertakin g Company, but retainin g 
considerable interest i n the company. H e 
was a director of the Wag e Earners' Savings Ban k and of the Consolidated Realt y 
Corporation ; a Knigh t of Pythia s and a 
Mason ; and a trustee of St. Phillip s A . M . 
E . Church . A t the age of 21 he marrie d 
Miss Nin a Trayus, who survive s him. 
IN 1891 the late Richar d W . Thompson 
associated himself wit h the Indianapolis 
Leader and learned the printin g trade ; he 
became managin g editor first of the Indianapolis World and then of the Washington Colored American, an d finall y established Thompson's New s Bureau , whic h sent 
weekly letters to the colored press. 
Mr . Thompso n wa s the first colored page 
in the Indian a Legislatur e an d afterwar d 
held Civi l Servic e positions of variou s 
grades, includin g a clerkshi p i n the Gov ­
ernment Printin g Office. H e is chiefly to 
be remembered, however, b y his news letters 
from Washingto n to the colored papers. 
The y were entertainingl y writte n and wide ­
l y read and represented a distinc t advance 
i n colored journalism. 
Mr . Thompso n wa s bor n a t Brandenburg , 
Ky. , i n 1866. A wif e survive s him. 
THE late Senator Charle s B . Dunba r of 
Liberi a was born i n Monrovia , Marc h 
6, 1875. H e was a student of Th e Alexande r 
Hig h School, of whic h the late venerable 
Senator Alfre d B . Kin g wa s head. H e came 
to the Unite d States an d wa s graduate d 
from Lincol n Universit y i n 1895. Return ­
in g to Liberia , he became a notable lawye r 
and served his government as Secretar y of 
the Liberia n Delegatio n to the Worl d Expo ­
sition at Chicago i n 1893; as a Commissione r 
to the Unite d States to seek advic e rela ­
tive to the encroachments on Liberi a at the 
hands of some of the grea t Europea n powers i n 1908; and as a delegate fro m Liberi a 
to the Worl d Peace Conference held at 
Paris i n 1919. H e wa s a 33rd degree Ma ­
son and for severa l years served wit h 
honor and distinctio n as Gran d Maste r of 
Masoni c lodges i n Liberia . 
TH E late Dr . J. H . Shepperd wa s the 
first Negr o to practis e medicine at Pe ­
oria , Ill., wher e he built a lucrativ e practic e 
among both colored and whit e people. H e 
served as chie f sanitar y officer a t Cam p 
Sam Housto n an d received specia l mention 
from the Surgeo n Genera l fo r sanitar y efficiency. H e ha d the ran k of Captai n i n the 
8th Illinois Regimen t of whic h he ha d been 
a membe r fo r 15 years. 
Dr . Shepperd wa s bor n i n Lynchburg , 
Va. , Februar y 22, 1865. H e studied at 
Howar d Universit y and received his medica l degree from Meharr y College i n 1899. 
286 ELIJA H McCOY TH E LAT E EDWARD SEABROOK 
TH E LAT E SENATOR DUNBAR 
TH E LAT E R. W. THOMPSON TH E LAT E DR. SHEPPERD 
287 The Horizon 
COMPILE D B Y MADELIN E G . ALLISO N 
INDUSTRY 
THE highest paid colored city eraployee at Cleveland, Ohio, is Dr . J. 
T. Sykes who receives $3,300 per yea r as 
Distric t Physician ; there are inspectors i n 
the garbage department, bookkeepers, 
weight masters, bathhouse superintendents, 
street foremen and 27 men on the police 
force at salaries of $2,000 per year; 30 men 
and women foremen and clerks at $1,500 
per year; and 200 garbage cart drivers at 
$5.50 per day. 
G The Ideal Progressive Laundry 
Corporation has been chartered as a $100,000 colored enterprise at Pittsburgh , Pa. , to do a 
general laundry , cleaning and pressing business. The promoters are C. E . Thomas, 
president; Mar k King , secretary; and Dr . 
J. F . Jackson, treasurer. 
C Bob Lindsey, a Negro , has realized on 
$15,000 wort h of cotton a t Gadsden, Ala . 
G At Superior, Wis., Mrs. Hallie R. 
Salters, colored, is manager of the Western 
Unio n Telegraph Office; she was previously 
a telephone operator at Minneapolis. Mr . 
Goins, a Negr o at St. Paul , is an operator 
i n the Posta l Telegrap h Cable Office. 
C The Wag e Earners' Savings Ban k at 
Savannah , Ga. , has resources of $1,036,000. 
G Harr y M . Legg , a Negro , formerl y of 
Birmingham , Ala. , is operating a wholesale 
and retail grocery business at Seattle. 
Wash. , valued at $65,000. H e employs 27 
clerks, wit h W . H . Banks, also formerl y 
of Birmingham , as manager. 
G Hinto n D . Alexander, a colored mai l carrie r at Chattanooga , Tenn., has been retired after 38 years' service. 
G The Parris Import and Export 
Corporation, capitalized at $200,000, has been established at Newport News, Va. , b y Negroe s 
for the import of tropica l products principally from Africa and the export of 
American products. Mr. O. Z. Parris is president of the company. 
CT Fitzherbert Howell , a colored rea l estate 
dealer, recently sold at $25,000 each, eight 
five-story houses i n West 135th Street, Ne w 
Yor k City , to colored buyers. 
G Tw o hundred colored clerks wer e appointed recently in the Bureau of the 
Census at Washington. The salary is $960 per 
yea r plus $240 bonus. 
C The Thrif t Commercia l Compan y has 
been organized at Washington , D . C , to 
conduct a chain grocery business. Negroe s 
i n the Distric t of Columbi a spend $18,250,­
000 annually , or $50,000 per day, fo r groceries, etc. 
G R. W . Westbury , a colored cotton dealer 
at Columbia , S. C , has profits of $100 per 
day ; J. C. Sawye r has a n income from cotton averagin g $40,000 per year. 
G A t the Webste r Witte r Farm , Beeville , 
Tex., a colored woma n 60 years of age, 
Nouman n by name, picks 430 pounds of cotton daily, or one-third of a bale. A t the 
rate of $1.50 per hundred pounds, he r wage 
is $6.50 per day. 
d Albemarle Bank has been opened by 
Negroes at Elizabeth City, N. C, with a paid 
in capita l of $25,000. Dr . E . L . Boffler is 
president. 
C Dr . Leonida s Crogma n of Atlanta , Ga. , 
has sailed fo r Brazil , wit h other colored men 
from the South, fo r the purpose of establishing business relations with South 
America. 
G Te n Negr o businesses wit h headquarters 
i n Atlant a are incorporated unde r the laws 
of Georgia , wit h capita l stock and assets 
of at least $100,000 each; wit h smalle r corporations operatin g out of Atlanta , the tota l capitalizatio n is nearl y $3,000,000. 
C Th e Delsart e Fil m Corporation , capitalized at $100,000, has been organize d by 
Negroe s i n Ne w York , wit h F . Harriso n 
Hough , president; Joh n S. Brown , Jr. , 
secretary-treasurer; and Clarenc e E . Muse , 
director-general. Amon g the players ar e 
Inez Clough , Susie Sutton-Brow n and Spah r 
Dickey . A part y of 12 players wil l sai l 
288 TH E 289 HORIZON 
durin g September for Haiti . In the fal l 
"Toussain t L'Ouverture , the Abraha m Lin ­
coln of Haiti" , wil l be released, featurin g 
Clarenc e E . Muse . 
J . Willia m Galewood, for 10 years employed as a colored genera l clerk i n the 
office of Cit y Comptrolle r E . S. Morro w at 
Pittsburgh , Pa. , has been promoted to Pa y 
Counte r Clerk . 
Th e Andrew s Asphal t Pavin g Company 
has opened a hotel wit h accommodation for 
400 colored laborers an d dining-room capacit y fo r 300 a t Hamilton , Ohio. 
Th e Cleveland Hardwar e Compan y has 
sent its colored foreman, Robert Hodges, on 
a tour through the South to present the opportunitie s offered by this plant to colored 
men and women. 
Mrs. M . H . Toland , a colored woman i n 
Chattanooga , Tenn., has invented the "Dri p 
Pa n Alarm, " a refrigerato r contrivance so 
operated as to rin g when wate r i n a drippan has reached a certain height. 
POLITICS 
LANGDO N HARRISO N and W . N . 
Moore , Negroes, wo n Republica n nominatio n fo r the State Legislatur e from St. 
Louis. 
Th e Ohio State Republican ticket has 6 
Negr o nominees: Willia m R. Green for the 
Senate; and Harr y E . Davis, Samue l E . 
Woods, Benjami n F . Hughes, the Rev. 
George L . Davis, and Henr y M . Higgin s 
for the Hous e of Representatives. 
W . Ashbi e Hawkin s of Baltimore , Md. , 
has been nominated by Negroe s as a colored 
candidate for the Unite d States Senate. 
A s a result of the migratio n from the 
South, it has been estimated that there 
wil l be 300,000 Negroe s i n the Nort h casting their first vote. 
At St. Louis, Mo., Mr. I. H. Bradbury 
has been elected a member of the Republican State Centra l Committee. Mr . Brad ­
bur y is a colored city garbage inspector. 
EDUCATIO N 
A NE W graded school is being built for 
colored childre n at Atchison , Kan . It 
wil l cost $150,000 and include a swimming -
pool and a gymnasium. 
A t Knoxville , Tenn., the scholastic population is 30,068, of whom 26,284 can read 
and writ e and 3,784 are illiterates; of 5,324 
Negroe s 4,756 can read and write , whil e 
658 are illiterates. 
The Unite d States Inter-departmenta l 
Boar d of Socia l Hygien e has approved the 
Howar d Universit y budget of $12,440 for 
social hygiene work ; the universit y wil l 
carr y $3,900 of this budget. 
The Hospita l and Healt h Boar d of Kan ­
sas City , Mo. , has established a free intensive trainin g school i n pathology and bacteriology for colored doctors at the Genera l 
Hospital. The Colored Divisio n of this hospita l has 300 beds, 8 internes, 40 nurses and 
a staff of 43 physicians. 
In Ne w Yor k Cit y there were 600 colored 
teachers attending summer school. The 
South had the largest representation, wit h 
Atlant a i n the lead. 
George W . Gore, Jr., a graduate of the 
colored Pearl Hig h School, Nashville , Tenn., 
is one of ten members of the freshman class 
of 500 at De Pau w Universit y to wi n an 
Edwar d Rector Scholarship for excelling i n 
scholarship durin g his first year. H e is the 
first Negr o to receive a scholarship at De 
Pauw. 
J. Henr y Alston , A.B., Lincol n University '17, and A.M. Clar k Universit y '20, has 
been appointed Instructor of Psychology at 
Morehouse College, Atlanta , Ga . Mr . Al ­
ston was formerl y Professor of Mathematics at Walde n Universit y and Principa l of 
the Hig h School Department of Pain e College. 
Lincol n Universit y at Chester, Pa. , has 
been promoted from Class 2 to Class 1 
among Negr o colleges. 
Professor J. E . K . Aggre y of Living ­
stone College, Nort h Carolina , is on a year's 
leave of absence for the study of educationa l missions i n Africa , under the PhelpsStokes Fun d Commission. 
B y authority of the State Department 
of Publi c Instruction, Cheyney Trainin g 
School for Teachers at Cheyney, Pa. , opens 
as a standardized State Norma l School. 
The school was founded i n 1837 and has as 
its principa l Lesli e Pinckne y Hill , A.B., 
A.M., of Harvar d University . 
MEETINGS 
THERE were 1,000 delegates in attendance at the annual convention of the 
Nationa l Negr o Business Leagu e held i n 
Philadelphia . Dr . R. R. Moto n of Tuskegee 
was re-elected president; three women, Mrs . 
Booke r T. Washington , of Tuskegee, Ala. , 
Mrs. Maggi e L . Walke r of Richmond , Va. , 290 TH E CRISIS 
and Mrs. Aaro n E . Malon e of St. Louis, 
Mo. , were elected vice-presidents. 
Over 100 delegates, representing 25 
states, attended the first annua l convention 
of the Nationa l Negr o Tailors' Associatio n 
held i n Ne w Yor k City . 
The Industria l and Commercia l Council 
of People of Africa n Descent wil l convene 
in Los Angeles, Cal. , September 25-27. 
Amon g matters to be discussed are agriculture, commerce, industry, labor, health, education, corporations, inter-state relations 
and a nationa l industria l exposition. The 
Hon . J. W . Coleman of Los Angele s is 
president. 
Negroe s of Alabam a and Tennessee have 
organized a Colored Fair, and Racin g Asso ­
ciation. Fairs wil l be held durin g August , 
September and October. 
FRATERNITIES 
COLORE D Knights of Pythia s of Indiana have held their annua l session at 
Marion . The 1921 session wil l meet at Indianapolis. E . G. Tidringto n of Evansvill e 
was elected Gran d Chancellor for the sixteenth consecutive time. 
Fiv e hundred delegates were i n attendance at the annua l meeting of the Gran d 
Lodge of Negr o Odd Fellows of Salisbury , 
N . C. Endowmen t policies have been in ­
creased from $200 to $300; the organization 
has a balance of $40,000. 
Kin g Solomon Chapte r of Roya l Arc h 
Masons has been organized at Sewickley, 
Pa . F . Quinc y Adams was elected Most 
Excellen t Hig h Priest. 
Mosai c Templars of Americ a has celebrated 37 years' achievement. Durin g 1919 
the income was $661,499, insuranc e i n force, 
$30,250,200; its assets are $690,353, wit h 
$125,000 invested i n Libert y Bonds; liabilities, $135,765. It has 18 state gran d lodges, 
100,864 members, and operates i n 26 states. 
Centra l and South Americ a and the West 
Indies. 
The Ancien t Orde r of Pilgrims, established at Houston, Texas, 5 years ago, reports resources of $57,959; it has a surplus 
of $49,062. B . H . Grime s is Supreme 
Worth y Shepherd. 
America n Woodmen, of whic h the Hon ­
orable C. M . Whit e of Denver, Colo., is 
Supreme Commander, reports the writin g 
of over $60,000,000 of insurance ; it has a 
fund of $500 000 to care for matured policies. 
Gran d Lodge Knights of Pythia s of 
Georgi a reports a balance of $208,031, wit h 
tota l assets of $409,041. Last yea r 11,634 
applications for membership were made. 
Th e Past Gran d Chancello r is J. J. Bole n 
of Savannah . 
TH E CHURC H 
THE Rev. Henr y Alle n Boy d of Nash ­
ville , Tenn., wil l sail durin g September for Tokyo , Japan , where he wil l be a 
Negr o delegate to the World's Sunda y 
School Convention. 
Mildre d Barrett , formerl y a teacher of 
Ga y Street School, West Chester, Pa. , has 
been received into the Orde r of the Oblate 
Sisters of Providenc e at Baltimore . She 
is the first colored gir l from this section to 
enter a Catholi c convent. 
NATIONA L URBA N LEAGU E 
THE pre-nata l clini c opened unde r the 
supervision of the Maternit y Cente r 
Associatio n in the offices of the Ne w Yor k 
Urba n League has already a dail y average 
of 10 patients. I n addition to the dail y 
clinic , Harle m physicians conduct a special 
weekly clini c for the Center. The Ne w 
Yor k Urba n League also sponsors a nursin g center in its office, directed by Henr y 
Street Settlement. The Visitin g Nurs e from 
this center visits at least 10 sick persons 
each day. 
Nineteen out of 24 applicants for social 
service fellowships wit h the Nationa l Ur ­
ban League passed their examinations; the 
successful candidates are Inabe l F . Burn s 
and Edwi n J. Morga n to the Ne w Yor k 
School of Socia l Work , and Lillia n S. Proc ­
tor and Joh n M . Wisema n to the Chicag o 
School of Civic s and Philanthropy . The 
fellowships are for $400 each. 
The Alte r Ligh t Compan y of Chicago , 
whic h is usin g colored girls furnishe d 
through the League , threatens to test the 
validit y of a clause found i n its lease forbidding the use of colored help, if the matter is furthe r pressed by the leaser. 
Ran d McNall y & Company , printers and 
publishers of maps, at the instigatio n of the 
Chicago Urba n League , have taken on 40 
colored girls in one of their offices wit h a 
colored woma n i n charge. Th e numbe r of 
girls to be employed wil l reach 200. 
Harve y B. Atkins. Industria l Secretar y 
of the Cleveland organization , reports tha t TH E 291 HORIZON 
colored girls are becoming expert operators 
of powe r machines at increasingly large 
wages. The Libert y Garmen t Company employs 75 such operators; the Manua l Prod ­
ucts Compan y employs more than 50. 
Th e Annua l Conference of Urba n 
Leagu e executives wil l be held i n Newark , 
N . J., October 20-23. Reports from local 
fields indicat e that it wil l be the largest 
annua l conference yet held by the League. 
Louis I. Dublin , Chie f Statisticia n of the 
Metropolita n Lif e Insurance Company, wil l 
discuss lif e insuranc e and the reduction of 
mortalit y as brought about by the Metro ­
politan. Othe r speakers of nationa l import 
wil l discuss the various phases of industry, 
includin g health and housing and special 
trainin g both i n industr y an d social service. 
Th e Associatio n of Negr o Industria l Wel ­
fare Workers wil l hold its annua l meeting 
at this time i n conjunction wit h the Na ­
tiona l Urba n League . 
Takin g advantage of the meeting of the 
Nationa l Medica l Associatio n i n Atlanta , 
the Atlant a Urba n League secured permission from 8 industria l plants employin g 
colored workers to have health talks given 
at the noon hour by the visitin g physicians. 
The y were enthusiastically received by the 
mixe d groups of colored and whit e workers 
whom they addressed. 
TH E GHETT O 
THE Legislatur e has passed a bil l providin g $50,000 for a par k for Negroes 
at Nashville , Tenn . 
Representative Danie l of Hear d County, 
Ga. , has introduced a bil l whic h provides 
that no person born on or descended from 
a person born on the continent of Afric a 
shall vote or hold office i n the State of 
Georgia . Th e bil l has been referred to the 
Committe e on Privilege s an d Elections. 
CRIME 
THE followin g lynchings have taken 
place since our last record : 
Ozark , Ala. , August 6—Sills Spink s and 
Justi n Jennings; attack on whit e woman . 
Pensacola , Fla. , August 13—Hose a Poole ; 
murder. 
Corinth , Miss. , August 28—Blutche r Hig ­
gins and Da n Callicut ; assaulting chaingan g guard . 
Tulsa , Qkla. , August 29—Ra y Belton ; 
murder. 
Oklahoma County, Okla. , August 30— 
Claude Chandler; murder. 
SOCIAL PROGRESS 
DR. A . C. BROWN E of Chicago, who 
served wit h the 366th Fiel d Hospita l 
(92nd Division), has returned to France . 
He wil l apply for Frenc h citizenship and 
practice at Cean (Calvidas) wit h a Frenc h 
dentist. Dr. Cobb, formerl y of the 366th 
Infantr y (92nd Division), upon his own request was discharged i n Franc e to engage 
in dentistry at St. Di e (Vosges). 
In a Civi l Service examination at Phila ­
delphia for Assistan t Teacher, Burea u of 
Recreation, Clarence J. Grinnell , colored, 
made an average of 90 per cent and was 
placed second on the list. 
Columbus Avenue Playgroun d at Boston, 
Mass., has been renamed Willia m E . Carte r 
Playgroun d i n memory of a colored veteran 
of the Worl d War . 
A thousand dolla r contribution of needlework by women of Africa , the West Indies 
and Nort h and South Americ a was exhibited 
at the Quadrennia l Mit e Missionar y meetin g held at Jacksonville , Fla . 
C John R. Shillady , formerl y secretary of 
the Nationa l Association for the Advance ­
ment of Colored People, has been appointed 
Executive Director of the Nationa l Con ­
sumers' League i n Ne w Yor k City . The 
latter organization has become recognized 
as the nationa l authority on the shorter 
work day, minimum wage, and other legislation affecting women and girl workers. 
Dr. F . S. Belcher, colored, has been appointed city physician at Savannah, Ga . 
Patrolma n Richar d H . Anderson , a Ne ­
gro, has passed the examination for Police 
Sergeant at Philadelphia , Pa. , wit h an average of 38 points above that of other applicants. H e is connected wit h the 19th 
District. In Philadelphi a there are 300 colored policemen. 
Negroes of Charleston, S. C , have completed the payment of $6,000 for a buildin g 
site for a Y . M . C. A . Mr . G. D . Brock , a 
graduate of Morehouse College, is i n charge. 
Adelaid e Childs, colored, has been appointed policewoman at Washington , D . C. 
She is 25 years of age. 
To oppose the migratio n of Negroes, at 
Canton, Miss. , the followin g sign is stretched 
across the main streets: "Come Whit e and 
Colored People and Let's Get Together" ! 292 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The State Boar d of Contro l at Charleston, W . Va. , has appropriate d $150,000 for 
the erection of "Ol d Lon g Farm" , a hospita l 
for insane Negroes. 
Th e followin g locations of colored regiments have been given : 9th Cavalry—3 4 
officers, 1,523 enlisted men—Camp Stotsenbery ; 10th Cavalry—4 0 officers, 900 enlisted 
men—Fort Huachuca , Ariz. ; 24th Infantr y 
—52 officers, 1,283 enlisted men—Camp 
Furlong , Columbus, N . M. ; 25th Infantry-— 
42 officers, 2,103 enlisted men—Camp Stephen D . Little , Nogales, Ariz . 
Joh n R. Holmes, a Negr o at Youngstown, Ohio, has been appointed meter reader i n the Cit y Wate r Department. H e was 
one of the highest two among 14 applicants. 
I n Chatham County, Ga. , there are 43,­
981 Negroe s who pa y taxes on 5,000 acres 
of lan d valued at $2,118,732. 
A t Philadelphia , a Burea u of Socia l Service is to be organized, i n connection wit h 
the Departmen t of Publi c Welfare , of which 
Mr . R. R. Wright , Jr. , has been appointed 
Secretary by Mayo r Moore . 
Negr o officials i n the Polic e Department 
are a Lieutenan t of Polic e at Chicago ; a 
Police Sergeant at Atlanti c Cit y and Boston; and a Detective Sergeant at Washing ­
ton. 
Mrs. Beatric e Moore , colored, has been 
appointed an Assistan t Postmistress at 
Philadelphia . 
A t a horse show at For t Meyer, Va. , 
Sergeant Augustu s G. Lindsa y of the Arm y 
Wa r College Detachment, won first place 
over 21 whit e competitors i n the jumpin g 
contest. H e was awarded a silver lovin g 
cup by Genera l Holbrooke . 
Th e colored branch of the Y . M . C. A . 
i n Chicago is conducting 4 glee clubs, 3 efficiency clubs and a baseball league wit h 9 
teams among workers i n 11 industria l 
plants. Th e organizatio n employs 10 secretaries, 3 of whom give their entire time 
to industria l work . Mr . George R. Arthu r 
is executive secretary. 
A t the Olympi c athletic meet, Sol Butle r 
pulled a tendon i n the broad jump and was 
forced to retire ; R. E . Johnson, runnin g i n 
thir d position, was stricken wit h cramps i n 
the fifteenth lap of the 10,000 meter ru n 
and wa s forced to leave the track ; H . F . V . 
Edwards, England's colored sprinter, finished thir d i n the short dashes, runnin g 200 
meters i n 21 4/5 seconds. 
The Brownies' Book 
A MONTHLY MAGAZINE 
Especiall y designed for our children 
but good as wel l tor "grown-ups." 
Pictures, Stories, History , Biography , Cur ­
rent News of the world—a unique and valuable publication, helpfu l for parents and 
teachers and children. 
COMMENT S 
From a father: Th e idea of the BROWNIES ' BOO K Is 
great. Yo u and I wil l probabl y never know 
wha t a blessing it is in reachin g the children and in giving the m inspiration an d 
knowledge as the y become the me n an d 
women of tomorrow, Mrs. Weave r and I 
quarre l monthl y wit h the children as to 
who should he the first to rea d the BROWN ­
IES ' BOOK . W e have decided tha t ther e 
shall he no quarrelin g i n the future . I a m 
to read it throug h aloud and each review 
it according to age. 
ARCHI E L . WEAVER , 
Chicago , Ill. 
From a mother: Yo u wil l find enclosed a money orde r for 
which please enter a year's subscription to 
TH E BROWNIES ' BOOK . Th e amoun t includes sufficient for the first seven Issues 
of TH E BROWNIES ' BOO K i n addition. M y 
children are too young to appreciat e it now, 
but I'm sure they'll miss something if I wait 
longer. HELE N McG . NICKENS . 
Merr y Point, Va . 
From a teacher: Pleas e send me 150 additiona l copies of the 
BROWNIES ' BOO K (100 copies wer e received 
yesterday). Pleas e send b y retur n mai l if 
possible. Th e children can scarcely wait for 
each number . ELL A LYNCH , 
Washington , D . C. 
From a Preacher: I a m sending herewith nineteen yearl y subscriptions and one six months' subscription 
to the BROWNIES ' BOOK . Fin d money order 
enclosed for the same. Th e BROWNIES ' 
BOO K fills a long felt need among our dear 
littl e ones. E . A . MOORE , 
Pasto r A . M . E . Church , 
Chape l Hill , N . C. 
From a Child: Enclosed please find thirt y cents for which 
please send me the last two number s of TH E 
BROWNIES ' BOOK . I like it ver y muc h and 
can tell al l of the stories tha t I have read 
in it. ELIZABET H COBB , 
Dalton , Mo . 
$1.50 PE R YEA R 15c. PE R COP Y 
Samples sent on request 
Agents Wante d Subscriber s Wante d 
D U BOIS and DILL, Publishers 
2 West 13th St. New York, N. Y . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 293 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
MANUAL TRAINING & 
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
FOR COLORE D YOUT H 
BORDENTOWN, N. J . 
A high institution for the training of 
colored youth. Excellent equipment, 
thorough instruction, wholesome surroundings. Academic training for all 
students. 
Courses in carpentry, agriculture and 
trades for boys, including auto repairing. 
Courses in domestic science and domestic art for girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly 
equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and 
modernly equipped. 
Terms reasonable. 
Fall term opened September, 1920. 
Fo r information address 
W . R. VALENTINE , Principal 
Missionary 
Training School 
for 
Negro Women 
Re-opened at Shaw University, 
October 1, 1920. For information write Mrs. J. L. Peacock, 
East Northfield, Mass. 
NOTIC E 
Laboratory Fees in Aut o Mechanics at 
the Prairie Vie w State Norma l and Industrial College wil l be increased September 15th, 1920. 
For further information write 
W. P. Terrell 
Supt. Mech. Dept. 
Prairie View Texas 
TH E UPWAR D PAT H 
A Reader for Colored Children 
Compiled by Myron T. Pritchard and Mary W. Ovington. Wit h 
an Introduction by R. R. Moton, Principal of Tuskegee Institute. Poems, stories and addresses by Negro authors. . . .$1.35 
This is the only book of its sort on the market; the first distinguished compilation to give an adequate comprehension of the 
depth and richness inherent in the literary product of our Negro 
authors. The book is illustrated by a Negro artist. 
"I regard 'The Upward Path' as a distinct contribution to the literature produced by 
Negro authors, and a book which will do much toward inculcating in the minds of 
Negro youth a pride in the achievements of colored writers. It should be in the hands 
of every person who desires to see the better side of the colored race." 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSON , Acting Secretary of TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OP COLORED PEOPLE . 
HARCOURT, BRACE & HOWE,. 1 W. 47th St., New York, N. Y. 
or from the CRISIS 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 294 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FOR YOUR GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla . 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary , Grammar , High , Normal , Vocational. 
Nurs e Trainin g at McLeo d Hospital a specialty. Term s reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , - - Principal. 
30-DA Y SYSTE M Positions Secured 
DERRIC K 
BUSINES S SCHOO L 
Th e School of Results 
Th e Only One of Its Kin d 
SHORTHAN D TOUC H TYPEWRITIN G 
BOOK-KEEPIN G OFFICE TRAININ G 
We teach a 30-Day Course. 
Impossible as it may seem—many students take dictation in 25 days. Ou r 
graduates are all over the country. 
As k them! Don't spend your valuable 
time LEARNIN G antiquated systems— 
when you can be EARNIN G with 
Lloyd's 30-Day Course. 
ENROL L IMMEDIATEL Y 
for Class Placement. Assignments are 
very limited—due to space. Announce ­
ment of removal to larger quarters 
very soon. 
Write for Catalog 14—Full 
Fall Term. 
Information of 
1435 CHESTNUT STREET, PHILA., PA. 
M . J. DERRICK , Prin. & Mgr. 
Berean Manual Training 
and Industrial School 
Fall Term Opened October 5th, 1920 
Ar e you looking for Trainin g in goodpaying Trades? JOI N BEREAN . 
Ar e you looking for special coaching in 
academic studies? JOI N BEREAN . 
Ar e you looking for sympatheti c instruction in elementary studies? JOI N BEREAN . 
Evenin g Classes. Moderat e Tuitio n Fees. 
Painstakin g Teachers. 
Write or Call on the Principal, 
MATTHEW ANDERSON 
1926 South College Avenue , Philadelphia , Pa . 
Opposite Girard College 
CHURCH , SCHOOL, LITERAR Y 
Vital, Essential, Indispensible! 
You r town has Churc h and 
School, why not Literar y 
also ? Organize at once! 
Send 20 cents in stamps for 
topics, supplies, etc. Paid 
worker s wanted. 
National Literary Association 
1230 Yo u St., N . W. , Washington , D . C . 
Walker's Business College for Colored 
JACKSONVILL E 
Located in our own $50.- FLORID A 
000 home. Large laculty of 
"trained teachers. Open day 
and night, all year. Rates 
about half those of other 
schools. Special correspondence courses for those who 
cannot attend in person. Send 
for illustrated catalogue and 
terms. Positions secured for 
graduates. 
415-417-419 Broad Street 
LARGEST COLORED BUSINESS 
COLLEGE IN U.S.A . 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
i n the cit y of Ne w Yor k 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurse s 
Lincoln Hospital and Home 
New York, N.Y . 
HALE INFIRMARY AND NURSE TRAINING 
SCHOOL, 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. 
Offers to Hig h School graduates and young 
women of higher education and good moral 
character, between the ages of 18 and 35, a 
three years' course in ti e profession of nursing. For further information apply to the 
Superintendent enclosing a stamp. 
For the most valuable books 
dealing with the Negro Problem 
Address The CRISIS 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUTE , 1227 s. 17th St., Phila., Pa. 
SHORTHAN D TYPEWRITIN G BOOKKEEPIN G 
Le t us equip you to take a position in a Business Office in a shor t time by takin g ou r cours e in Ben n Pitma n shor t 
han d Touc h Typewritin g an d Practica l Bookkeeping . Instructions given on the Multigraph, Mimeograph and Adding 
Machines. Classes in Touc h System of Typewritin g organized every Monday . Ou r certificated students are efficient an d 
are in deman d by business men all over the country, 
JO B WORK—W e typewrite social and business letters, circulars, postal cards, funera l notices, sermons, essays, poems 
addresses and duplicat e handwriting , musiocan d drawings. Mul t graphing a specialty 
Fal l term opens Oct. 4. 1920. EDWAR D T . DUNCAN . President. 
Mention The Crisis TH E 295 CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
The Political Session 
of the 
NATIONAL RAC E CONGRESS 
OF AMERICA , Inc. The Fifth Annua l Session of the 
National Race Congress of America , 
Inc., will convene at the John Wesley 
A . M . E. Zion Church, 14th and Corcoran Streets, N . W. , Washington, D. C. 
October 5—8, 1920 
Every organization in the race, including Churches, Leagues, and Fraternal 
Societies, is requested to send delegates 
to this Congress. Forwar d looking men 
and women of the race will be among 
the speakers. In view of the Presidential election this fall, this convention is 
of paramount importance. 
For Information address 
HEADQUARTERS 
903 Thir d St, N. W , Washington, D. C. 
W . H . Jernagin , President, 
John K . Hawkins, Executive Secretary. 
Books For Sale Darkwater—W . E . B . DuBois $2.00 
"Th e hook tha t stirs the heart like 
a trumpet. " 
Th e Risin g Tid e of Color—Lothro p Stoddard 3.00 
Th e Negr o Face s America—Herber t J . 
Seligmann 1.75 
Th e Shadow—Mar y Whit e Ovington... . 2.00 
" A story tha t penetrates." 
Th e Lif e and Time s of Frederick Douglass B y Himsel f 3.00 
Findin g a Wa y Out—Maj . R. R. Moton 2.50 
Send money order or check to 
Young's Book Exchange 
135 W . 135th St. New York, N. Y . 
NO W AR T 
READ Y Fo r 1921 CALENDAR S 
WIT H 
Beautiful Negro Subjects Samples Free to Busine
17 Exclusive Numbers 
Also pictures of your business place or yourself can be 
set in one of our beautiful Ar t Border s 
Only those who can produce creden- Salesmen Wanted- tials—State territory wanted. Writ e Today—It's Getting Late 
MERCANTIL E CALENDA R COMPAN Y 
413 Florid a Ave. , N . W . Washington , D . C . 
TH E HAITIAN REVOLUTION 
by T . G. STEWAB D 
Now is the time to read this book. Approved 
by Distinguished Haitians. 
PBIC E $1.25 
Address the author, T . G. STEWARD , Wilberforce, Ohio. Edition nearly exhausted. 
NEGRO YEA R BOOK Latest Issue On Sale 
1918-1919 Edition Price Postpaid, paper cover, 75c; board cover, $1.25. 
Address: Negro Yea r Book Company, 
Tuskegee Institute, Ala , 
TW O GREA T BOOK S for $2.50 
NO LIBRAR Y COMPLET E WITHOU T THE M 
(1) Th e Histor y of the Negro Rac e and Negro Soldiers in the 
Spanish-American War , Dating Back to Egyp t and the 
Pharoas—400 pages, 50 illustrations. (Retails alone for 
$1.25.) Was adopted as a textbook by North Carolina 
State Board of Education. 
(2) Th e Pictoria l Histor y of the Negr o in the Grea t Worl d 
War , giving a brilliant historical sketch, a description of 
battle scenes by Colonel Haywood, of the Fighting Fifteenth New York , Capt. Marshall, Sergeant Steptoe, Ralph 
Tyle r and others, with 150 excellent pictures of officers 
and men and war views. (Sells alone for $2.00.) 
Just Think , only $2.50 for these two great books. 
Agents wanted everywhere , large commissions paid 
ADDRESS : E . A . JOHNSON , 17 West 132nd Street, Ne w York , N.Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 296 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Neither the mailed fist nor resolutions will cure the present state of unrest. Bu t the everyday 
practice of the Business Golden Rule—"T o live and let live"—by all individuals, associations and 
corporations engaged in business, will do much toward restoring confidence and contentment to 
the public. 
Th e Southern Ai d Society of Va. , Inc., did not raise its rates of premiums during the war 
period—nor since. It did not reduce the benefits to its members by any form of evasion. It did 
not withdraw its Unmatched Policy of Ful l Coverage and Lir e Tim e Protection to its members— 
and as a result of this liberal treatment to its members, the Southern Ai d Society has now the 
good will of all its members and enjoys a larger patronage in its field of operation than ever before. 
Thousands of contented members are constantly expressing themselves like the following:— 
An Eminent Physician and Surgeon Writes 
267 W . Mai n St.. Charlottesville, Va. , 
Ma y 6th, 1920. 
T O WHO M I T MA Y CONCERN: — 
It is my pleasure to state that I have been engaged in the practice of medicine in this city 
for about sixteen years. Havin g had ample opportunity to observe the great Southern Ai d Society 
in action, noting their prompt payments and excellent business procedure. I take pride in recommending them as Above Them All . 
(Signed) Geo. R. Ferguson. M.D . 
Paid Claim After 3 Days Membership 
Anderson Ave. , Danville , Va. . 
Ma y 10th, 1920. 
T O WHO M I T MA Y CONCERN: — 
This is to certify that my husband, Sam Watkins, was a member of the Southern Ai d Society, 
receiving his policy on Monday , died on Wednesday, and I received his Death Claim on the following Monday. He had paid the Society only 50 cents dues, and I received $28.75. 
I wish to say that the Southern Ai d Society is the best company I know for the prompt payment of both sick and death claims. 
Wishing you continued success. I am, 
Ver y truly yours, 
(Signed) (Mrs.) Lizzi e Watkins 
Weekly Benefits Each Week for 4 Years 
Prominent Physician Certifies to Fact 
1607 Taylo r St.. Lynchburg , Va. , 
Apri l 3. 1920. 
T O WHO M I T MA Y CONCERN: — 
I, Laur a Jackson, of 1607 Taylo r St., Lynchburg , Va., carry a policy, No . 62573, Premiu m 
35 cents a week, with the Southern Ai d Society of Va. , was taken sick Marc h 1, 1916, and have 
received my weekly benefits every week up to and including Apri l 3, 1920. 
I recommend the Southern Ai d Society to be prompt in their payments, and can say truthfully that they carry a perpetual paying policy. 
I have received during my illness the amount of $710.93. 
(Signed) Laur a Jackson, 
(Witness) Irene Jackson. 
This is to certify that the above statement is correct and that I have filed certificates each 
week during Mrs. Laur a Jackson's illness. 
(Signed) J . A . Brown, M.D . 
No insurable person in Virgini a should be without the Superior Polic y 
issued by the— 
Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc. Home Office: 527 N. Second Street 
Richmond, Va. 
District Offices and Agencies thruout the State. Policy provides protection 
against Sickness, Accidents and Death—Al l for One Premium. 
A. D . PRICE-PRES . B. L . JORDAN—,SEC . W. A . JORDA N Ass't Sec. 
Mention THE CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 297 
TH E 
ABRAHA M 
LINCOLN 
Of Haiti 
A Super-photoplay 
Entitled 
"TOUSSAINT L'OUVERTURE " 
Wil l be released this Fall 
By 
TH E DELSARTE FIL M CORPORATION 
Featuring 
CLARENCE E. MUSE 
In the title role 
This stupendous photoplay, based upon Col. Charles Young's story and dramatized 
by CLARENC E E. MUSE , of the LAFAYETT E PLAYERS , is a n achievement of 
which the Delsarte Fil m Corporation is justlv proud. The setting of this masterpiece is laid in the ISLAN D REPUBLI C of HAITI . 
The Glamour of beautiful Haiti, the Hypnotic influence of the AFRICA N 
Voodoo, the thrill of true Patriotism, the tender touch of Love and Duty, all blended 
in radiant romantic Tragedy that creeps up close to your heart. 
Th e Movin g Picture Business has developed to such proportions that it is now classed by persons 
in position to judge as "the third largest American industry." To a limiled number of persons, who 
desire to invest in "the THIR D largest American industry," a few shares of Stock, listed at $10 0 
per share, are offered. Th e limit to each purchaser is 10 shares. 
Fo r particulars, write 
John S. Brown , Jr. , Secretary-Treasure r 
Dclsarto Fil m Corporation 
1919 Broadwa y 
Suite 54; Tel . Columbus 1514 
Ne w York , N . Y . 
F. Harrison Hough, President 
John S. Brown, Jr., 
Secretary- Treasurer 
Clarence E. Muse, 
Director General 
CAPITA L STOC K 
$100,00 0 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 29 8 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
MUSI C IN TH E HOM E 
PUT S SUNSHIN E I N TH E HEAR T 
Standard Songs Which Should be in Every Repertoire 
TH E ROUGH , ROCK Y ROA D(I'm Most Done Travellin
By W. C. HANDY 
A beautiful spiritua l with a heart-throb in every note, wit h a new arrangement by one of America's 
foremost composers. PRIC E 40c. 
THINKIN G OF THE E A LITTL E SON G 
By HARRY H. PACE PRIC E 20c. For littl e tots and school children. 
PRIC E 30c, A ballad par-excellent. Just what the name implies. 
PICKANINN Y ROS E ~ ~ 
PRIC E 30c. A wonderfully melodious mother croon. A Lullaby . The sweetest song on Broadway. 
AFRO-AMERICA N HYM N SPHIN X 
By J. BERNI BARBOUR By W. C. HANDY 
A soul-stirring, martia l hymn of beauty. Special PRIC E 30c. A n Egyptia n Intermezzo. 
Prices in lots to Choirs and Schools. 
W E CA N SUPPL Y YO U WIT H AL L TH E 
LATES T SHEE T MUSI C 
WH Y DID YO U MAK E A PLAYTHIN G O F ME ? 
By J. BERNI BARBOUR 
PRIC E 15c. A "Good Bye " appeal of a lover. Beautiful lvric s and wonderful music. A masterpiece of musical composition. 
LON G GON E ST. LOUIS BLUE S PRIC E 15c. Another "Casey Jones" or "Steam­ PRIC E 30c, Sung by Marion Harris on Columboat Bill" . Sung by Marion Harris on Columbia bia Record. It's great. 
Record. 
THA T THIN G CALLE D LOV E PRIC E 30c. Sung by Mamie Smith on Okeh Record. The first colored girl to make a record of popular song, and it's a wonderful record. 
Two Great Columbi a Records by 
BEAL E ST. BLUE S BER T WILLIAM S PRIC E 30c. Alway s a favorite. On all Playe r "IT' S YOU R MOV E NOW ' and Rolls and Phonograph Records. O DEATH , WHER E IS TH Y STIN G ?" 
THIN K OF M E LITTL E DADD Y 
By MISS ALBERTA WHITMAN . 
PRIC E 15c. A song brimful of life . Recorded by Sweatman's Orchestra on Columbi a Record. 
OUR MUSIC IS ON AL L PHONOGRAP H RECORD S AN D PLAYE R ROLL S 
We can fill your orders for Playe r Rolls. 
Our music may be had wherever sheet music is sold, and at the music counters of Woolworth . 
Kress, Kresge. McCrory. Metropolitan and National Stores, or direct from the Publishers. 
N . B.—I f it is Sheet Music you want we can supply you. If we don't publish it we wil l get it for you. 
PAC E & HAND Y MUSI C CO. , Inc . • 'PAC E & HAND Y BUILDING ) 
232 W. 46th Street Dept. C New York, N. Y. 
Mention THE CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 29 9 
Cleota J . Collins 
Lyric Soprano 
"Judging from the appear­ ance of a large number of music lovers, her sweet lyric voice held them spellbound. She was applauded again and again after each number."— Boston Chronicle. 
Address: 
156 HAMILTO N AVENUE , 
COLUMBUS , OHIO 
JOSEPHINE A. JUNIUS 
CONTRALTO 
"Miss Junius is the possessor of a Contralto voice, lovely in quality, which she uses artis­ tically."—Oscar Saenger. 
Address 
74 W. 142d ST. NE W YORK, N. Y. 
LUL A ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
Available for Concerts 
Telephone 6393 Morningside 
174 W. 136th Street New York, N. Y . 
Clarence Cameron White 
Violinist 
Recitals, Concerts, Instruction 
Studio: 
616 Columbus Avenue Boston, Mass. 
E. ALDAM A JACKSO N Graduate of Institute of Musical Art Organist-Director of Musi c of St. Marks M . E . Church; Concert Accompanist; Piano, Voice, Theory, Instruction, Conducting, Coaching. Harmony taught from beginning to com­ pletion. Private or correspondence. Geothius system. Studio: 185 W. 135th St., New York, N. Y. Telephone Morningside 1708. 
Th e Colore d Teachers ' Burea u 
Will Help You Get a Better Paying Position. 
REGISTER NOW SEASONABLE TEEMS 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 22, Wilberforce, O. 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
JOS. L. JONES, Pres. 
N. E. Cor. 8th and Plum Sis., Cincinnati, Ohio 
LUC DORSINVILLE & CO. MANUFACTURERS' AGENTS IMPORTERS AND EXPORTERS 
PORT A U PRINCE, HAITI 
EXPORT: IMPORT: 
COFFE E FLOU R COCO A SOA P CASTO R BEAN S HARDWAR E LIGNU M ViTA E MAHOGAN DR Y GOOD S Y LO G WOO D COTTO N FABRIC S 
COTTO N FURNITUR E 
COCOANU T PAINT S 
Colored American business men desiring to trans­ act business between Haiti and the United States of America are cordially invited to communi­ cate with us. 
WANTE D WANTE D Live Agents At Once To Sell 
DUDLEY'S FAMOUS AUTO POLISH 
for furniture, pianos, church pews, hard­ wood floors and hundreds of other things that have a varnished surface. Makes them look like new. Agents can make $50.00 to $75.00 per week selling Dudley's Polish to furniture dealers, drug stores, hardware stores, churches, housekeepers, automobile stores, paint stores and grocery stores. Special Offer: For 90 days we will ship to all new agents $10.00 worth of Dudley's Polish for $5.00. Take advantage of this special offer at once. 
Dudley & Porter Manufacturing Co. 116 South Main St., Muskogee. Okla. 
PHOTO FINISHING 
Developing roll films 10c. each, film pack 15c. each. Prints 4c. each, post cards 5c. each. An y size up to 3 1/4 by 5 1/2. Enlargements from negatives 5x7 , 25c; 8 by 10, 50c. Quality and service. A trial will convince you. Return postage paid. Send coin or money order. 
PHOT O SUPPL Y CO. , 
Box 66C, Evanston, Ill. 
Tel. 5487 Fort Hil l Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P . BENJAMI N 
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
84 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
Telephone, Baring 7794 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgages 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia. Pa . 
Agents Wanted 
to sell TH E CHICAG O ENTERPRISE , the greatest Negro Journal. Agents' terms, 3c per copy in advance. 
CHICAG O ENTERPRISE , 
3116 Indiana Avenue, Chicago, Ill, 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 300 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Madam Walker's Talcum Powder 
A PLEASINGL Y 
soft talcum, entrancingly perfumed with the 
attar of clusters of 
flowers. 
Light and pure, 
equalling the best and 
most expensive Talcum and taking its 
plac e as one of 
Madam C . J.Walker's 
Superfine Toile t 
Preparations. 
HAI R GROWE R 
TETTE R SALV E 
TEMPL E GROWE R 
VANISHIN G CREA M 
CLEANSIN G CREA M 
WITC H HAZE L JELL Y 
COMPLEXIO N SOA P 
TREK O TOILE T WATE R 
For Your 
Beauty's Sake We 
Make This Series 
of 
Superfine Toilettes 
GLOSSIN E 
SHAMPO O 
COL D CREA M 
TREK O ROUG E 
FAC E POWDE R 
DENTA L CREA M 
HAN D SOA P 
TREK O PERFUM E 
TH E MADA M C. J . WALKE R MFG . CO. , Inc. 
640 North West Street - - Indianapolis, Indiana 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 301 
ANOTHER OPPORTUNITY 
To Secure Lots Under Our Attractive Development Plan in Beautiful 
ORCHARDVILL E 
$5 6 FOR 
ONL Y 
EASY 
TERM S 
Al l who visited Orchardville this season, were so well 
pleased with everything that they either purchased more 
lots themselves or advised, their friends to do so. 
Nothing could serve as a greater testimonial than this. 
Havin g found that things are exactly as represented, 
the people are now urging their friends to act quickly 
and secure lots before they are all gone. Yo u can see 
how this will cause the demand to increase faster than 
ever before, and how important it is that YO U lose no 
more time in getting YOU R lots. 
Remember that each lot is 30 x 144 feet and is to 
have FIV E FRUI T TREE S AN D A SHAD E TRE E 
planted on it, and that the lots and trees wil l be 
taken care of for FOU R YEAR S WITHOU T EXTR A 
COST. The terms are only $6.00 down and $3.00 a 
month. Smaller terms on more than one lot. 
Each lot is guaranteed to be high and dry under a 
MONE Y BAC K GUARANTEE , and the title to the 
property is ABSOLUTEL Y CLEAR . A warranty deed 
is given without extra cost, also an abstract of title. 
Our beautiful booklet gives all the details of this offer, 
and contains a great many interesting photographs. Send 
for a copy TODA Y by simply filling in the attached 
coupon. DON' T WAI T BECAUS E TH E LOT S AR E 
GOIN G FAST . 
Arenso n Realt y Development Corporation 
19 S. L a Salle Street -:- -:- CHICAGO , ILL . 
Arenson Realty Development Corp. 
Chicago, Ill. Date 192 
Gentlemen:—I am interested in your Orchardville offer and would like to receive one of 
your booklets without obligation to me. 
Name Address 
Town State 
C-10-20 
Mention TH E CRISIS, 30 2 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
MADE to MEASURE 
$15.00 
EXPRESS OR POSTAGE PREPAID 
This offer is one of the biggest, most generous ever made by any tailoring house. It's 
your one big opportunity to get a finely tailored-to-measure 2-piece suit wit h box back, 
superbly trimmed and cut in the latest city 
style for only $15.00. 
WE'RE OUT TO BEAT 
HIGH TAILORING PRICES 
Your own local tailor couldn't and wouldn't 
make you a suit for $15.00, let alone supply 
the cloth, linings and trimmings. Wh y not 
save 50% on your next suit? We have such 
a tremendous business, buy all our materials in such large quantities and have such a perfect organization that we can make these wonderful prices—and 
remember we guarantee style, fit and workmanship or 
your money back. 
You Save$9 to $15 
This suit for $15.00 clearly proves our supremacy in the tailoring field. We offer 
dozens of equally good values. Let's tell Big sample outfit free 
you about them. We would rather you did 
not send us any money until we send our 
Write us today and we will mail you absolutely FRE E our beautifully illustrated 
pattern book showing dozens of the latest city styles and designs, also many large 
size cloth samples to choose from. You will be simply thunderstruck at the exceptional values we are offering this year. Don't delay; we urge you to act quick; today! 
TH E PROGRES S TAILORIN G CO . 
Dept. 60 1 CHICAG O 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 30 3 
Patti's Brazilian Toilette Luxuries 
Compounded with the same care as used in filling a doctor's prescription. 
Don't be ashamed and hide your face. Get Patti's Brazilian Secret Booklet 
and learn how to care for your skin. Eaoh day your skin grows smoother 
and your complexion clearer. 
Patti's Beauty Secret Book, how to care for your skin, and six Toilette 
Preparations for $5.00. 1,000 agents wanted. 
Anita Rose Perfume $1.25 oz. bottle 
Patti's Beauty Cream 68c Anita Lilac Perfume .. . 1.25 " " 
Patti's Night Cream 68c Anita Lotus Perfume .. . 1.25 " " 
Patti's Day Cream 68c Anita Trefle Perfume . . 1.25 " " 
Patti's "La Traviata" Powder 68c Anita Oriental Perfume. 1.25 » " 
Anita Djerkiss Perfume 1.25 " " 
Send 10c postage for mailing one article—2c for each additional article. 
Send for Anita Patti Brown's Columbia song record, "VILLIANELLE" , 
by mail $2.25. Agents Wanted—No Samples or C. O. D. Orders, 
Address all orders to A. A. Brown, Manager 
PATTI'S BEAUTY EMPORIUM 
4723 St. Lawrenc e Ave. , Apt . 3, CHICAGO , ILL . 
AGENT S EAR N $75.00 A WEE K 
Selling our Enlarged Photo Me ­
dallions, Photo Cuff Button, 
Photo Lockets, Photo Watch 
Charms, Photo Breast Pins. 
Photo Clocks and 
Lif e Size Portraits (16 x 20). 
We copy from 
an y Photograph 
and Return You r 
Origina l Photo. 
Agents' Enlarged 
Sample s 25c. 
Negro Books. Pictures and Post 
Cards. Prompt Shipments. 1000 
Agents and Dealers Wanted. Free Catalog.. Bethel Art 
Co.. 97 South St.. Jamaica. N. Y. 
WER E YO U IN TH E WAR ? 
Then you ought to have a set of officially 
taken pictures of colored troops showing various activities overseas, twelve views in attractive souvenir portfolio only $2.00. If you 
want something to show for your service get 
these fine views 4 1/2 x 5 1/2 inches. 
A . E. F. PHOT O SERVIC E 
302-G Riggs Bldg. Washington, D. C. 
WANTED 
Agents for TH E CRISIS, Dignified Work 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Churches and Clubs looking for a play that will afford an 
evening of Side Splitting Fun, should have 
The Slabtown Convention 
An entertainment in one act; full of wit 
and good humor. Scores of churches have cleared from 
One to Two Hundred Dollars in One Night. PRICE. 50c. 
MISS NANNIE H. BURROUGHS. Author 
Lincoln Heights. Washington. D. C. 
FREE FASHION BOOK 
MAILE D 
UPON REQUEST 
Rea l Huma n Hai r 
Al l our wigs are 
hand made and 
strictly to order, 
from maker to 
wearer. 
WIGS, Transformations, switches, and Braids and 
all other articles of 
hair goods. 
No. 604—Price $10.50 
We carry the largest .selection of Hair Dressers' Tools. 
The celebrated Mme. Beam's Preparations 
which makes the skin velvetlike, the hair 
silklike. 
Mme . Baum' s Mai l Orde r Hous e 
P. O. BO X 146, 
Penn. Termina l Station, New York , N . Y . 
When writing, mention this paper. 
Write for catalog Write for catalog 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
Beautiful Idlewild 
The most wonderfully ideal spot where young and 
old cast aside for the time all the cares and worries 
of their strenuous, nerve-racking routine lives and 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature in all her wondrous glory. The waters of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly 
teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
Do you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting? 
Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries ? 
Do you want a place to go where you can build up 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency? 
Do you enjoy mingling with the active, thinking 
progressive people of the day—people who do things? 
Do you believe in progress and do you want to 
have a part in one of the most progressive movements of the time? Surely! 
Then you will he interested in, and want to 
own a lot of your own in Beautiful Idlewild 
Michigan. If you act at once you can secure a beautiful lot for only $35.00 each-
$6.00 cash: $1.oo per week. When your 
payments are completed the lot will be 
transferred to you by an absolute 
warranty deed with abstract allowing clear title 
Good live energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 
1110 Hartford Bldg 
So. Dearborn St. 
Chicago, Ill.. 
Idlewild Resort Company, 1110 Hartford Bldg., Chicag
Mention TH E CRISIS . 30 4 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TW O GREA T NEGRO BOOKS 
AGENTS 
MAKING 
$60.00 
Per Week 
We Want 
You 
To Act In 
Your 
County 
Emmett J . Scott's 
War History 
( A Few Interesting Chapters.) 
Colored Officers and How They Were Trained. 
Treatment of Negro Soldiers in Camp. 
The Negro Combat Division. 
Negro Soldiers Overseas. 
Negro Heroes of the War. 
Negro Soldier as a Fighter. 
The Spirit of the Negro at the Front. 
Negro Music That Stirred. France. 
When the Boys Came Home. 
German Propaganda Among the Negroes. 
What the Negro Got Out of the War. 
The 38 chapters are interesting and instructive. There are 600 pages, size 7x9 inches; 
price $3.15. 
This binding is a beautifu
744 Pages—100 Pages of Negro Soldiers. 50 Pages of 
other appropriate and interesting pictures. 
THE KELLY MILLER HISTORY 
OF THE WORLD WAR 
is all that the title can possibly mean. The 
author takes up the Great Conflict, following 
it step by step through the thirty excellent 
chapters, including the Terms of Peace. 
The Negro's Wa r for Democratization—He 
braces Himself and Claims to be the Champion 
of Democracy—Enters the Arena of Combat! 
The German Indigent—The South Sensitive— 
The North Quizzical—The Whole Worl d Hesitant. 
The Negro Turns the Tide at Chateau ThierryH e Helps Hur l Back the Hordes of the Hun—Win s 
His Place and Right to a Voic e i n the Affairs of Man ­
kin d against Prejudice. Ridicule , Race Hatred and 
almost Insurmountable Obstacles. 
The book is bound i n durable cloth, with substantia l head band, price $2.50. In Full Kerotol Moroc ­
co, $3.50. Copy mailed to any address upon receipt 
of the price. Satisfaction guaranteed or money refunded. 
BOT H COMPLET E BOOK S I N CLOT H BINDIN G 
MAILE D TO ON E PERSO N UPO N RECEIP T OF $5.00. 
Ask For 
Catalog 
of 
160 Books 
It Is FREE 
Emmett J. Scott, Author 
Prof. Kell y Miller, Autho r 
Dear Reader—We have sold more of these great books than have been sold by al l other 
publishers and jobbers, If you wish to sell books, send 25 cents i n stamps for one prospectus, or send 40 cents and we wil l mai l both of them. Millions of these books are being sold, 
BI G MONE Y is being made by our SALE S PEOPLE , Wil l you join us i n the distribution 
of good helpful race books? 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO. 523 9th St., Washington. D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS, Let Us Send You a Suit 
MAD E TO YOUR MEASURE, PAYABLE 
AFTER RECEIVED, WITH THE CLEAR 
understanding that if the fit is not 
perfect, or if you are not satisfied in 
every way; if you are not convinced 
that you have received a fine, highgrade, stylish, splendid-fitting tailored suit made to your measure 
and have saved at least $15.00 
to $20.00, you are not under the 
slightest obligation to keep it. 
Don't hesitate or feel timid, 
simply send the suit back, no 
cost to you. Yo u are not out 
one penny. An y money you may 
have paid us is refunded at once. 
SEND NO MONEY-just your 
name and address for FREE 
samples and latest styles, 
beautiful NE W samplebook all sent FRE E — if you answer now. 
SAMPLES FREE 
AN Y MA N YOUNG OR OLD, INTERESTED IN SAVING MONEY, WHO WANTS 
TO DRESS WELL AND NOT FEEL EXTRAVAGANT, IS INVITED TO ANSWER AT 
once and get our free book of cloth samples and latest fashions, with everything explained. Simply write letter or postal today, just say "Send me your 
samples" and get our whole proposition by return mail. Agents write too, we have 
a special deal for you. Try it, costs you nothing—just a stamp, get the FRE E 
SAMPLE S and low prices anyway. Learn something important about dressing 
well and saving money. Send at once. 
KNICKERBOCKER TAILORING COMPANY 
Department 847. CHICAGO. ILL. 
TEAR OUT HERE—MAIL TODAY 
FRE E SAMPL E BOO K COUPO N KNICKERBOCKE R TAILORIN G COMPANY , Dept. 847, Chicago, Ill. 
Gentlemen: Please send me your complete book of samples and latest styles. Everythin g free and postpaid. 
Name ^ Address Nile Queen 
PREPARATIONS 
For Hair and Skin 
THE WORLD'S BEST 
Special money-making offer for live, hustling 
agents who wish to represent a high class line. 
Kashmir CHEMICA L CO. 
NE W KASHMI R BLDG . 
3423 Indiana Avenue CHICAGO , ILL. 