FEBRUARY, 1922 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY 
The CRISIS Turning Hard Times 
into Prosperous Times 
The year 1921 will ever he remembered as the period of "America's Hardest Times" following the World's War. Conditions would be worse than now were it not for the Herculean 
efforts of those determined spirits who are forcing- the wheels of progress to continue to revolve. THE SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VA., INC., is proud to be numbered among those 
who are trying to keep the Door of Opportunity open. The cut below shows the new 
$200,000.00 four-story and basement modern fireproof building erected by the Society at 7th 
and Tea Streets, N W. , Washington, D. C , to help turn Hard Times into Prosperous Times. 
Not only does the Superior Policy of Protection, issued by the Society, keep the wolf 
from the door of all Southern Aid Policyholders but its policy of constructing modern office 
buildings, in the various cities where it operates, makes it possible for our professional and 
business interests to have suitable quarters—like the best had by other races—in which to 
display their talents and wares and to do better business. Therefore by its Insurance Policy 
and, as well, by its Business Policy the Society is daily helping to turn Hard Times into 
Prosperous Times. 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VIRGINIA, INC. 
Home Office: 527 N. Second Street, RICHMOND, VA. 
District Offices and Agencies in Virginia and 
the District of Columbia 
Insures Against Sickness, Accidents and Deaths 
CARTER. PRES. B. L. JORDAN, SECTY. W. A. JORDAN, ASST. SECTY. TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHLY AND COPYRIGHTED BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY CONDUCTED BY W. E. BURGHARDT DU BOIS; JESSIE REDMON FAUSET, LITERARY EDITOR; 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, BUSINESS MANAGER. 
Vol. 23-No . 4 FEBRUARY, 1922 Whole No. 136 
COVER 
Page 
Drawing by Billie Ellis. 
OPINION 
The World and Us; The Year 1921, In Account With the American 
Negro; The Lynching Bill; Vicious Provisions of a Great Bill; Politics 
and Power; Africa for the Africans; Charles Young 151 
OUR GREATEST FAULT 
Edward H. Morris; Bishop C. H. Phillips; President John Hope 156 
PAINTED POEMS. The Peacock Feather. A Poem 
Mary Effie Lee Newsome 156 
HOWAR D UNIVERSITY. E. C. Williams 157 
SUNDAY AFTERNOON. An Essay. Jessie Fauset 162 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED 
PEOPLE 165 
A LYNCHING MAP OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. Drawn by 
Madeline G. Allison 168 
THE LINK BETWEEN. The late Natalie Curtis Burlin 170 
THE HORIZON. Illustrated 171 
THE LOOKING GLASS 179 
THE MARCH CRISIS 
The March CRISIS will print the Annual Report of the X. A. A. C. P., an article on Gandhi, 
the Indian leader, and our annual book review, including Maran's "Batouala". 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTION" TWENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTRA 
RENEWALS: The date of expiration of each subscription i» printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHAXGE OF ADDRESS • The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New 
York, under the Act of March 3, 1879. 14 8 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though It it young in history, the Institution fecli a juit pride in the work thru 
far accomplished, for iti graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Science* The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economic! 
The Department of Social Service 
For farther information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manual Training & Industrial School 
FOR COLORED YOUTH 
BORDENTOWN, N. J. 
A hlfh Initltutlon fsr ths training at colored 
youth. Excellent equipment, thorough Instruction, 
wholesome surroundIngi. Academic training for all 
•tudents. 
Course* In oarpentry, agriculture and trades tor boys. 
Including auto repairing. 
Courses In domestlo iclence and domestic art for 
girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and mo-dernly 
equipped. 
Terms reasonable. 
For Information address 
W. R. VALENTINE, Principal 
LINCOLN UNIVERSITY 
Pioneer in Collegiate and 
Theological Education 
Lincoln Men are Leaders in the various 
professions in Forty States. 
The College is ranked in Class I. by the 
American Medical Association. 
Address: 
Join B. jUndall. D.D., Lincoln TJnlvarsitj, 
Chester County, Penna. 
Cheyney Training School For 
Teachers 
Cheyney, Pa. 
Made to Its* an accredited State Normal School, 
offering, in addition to the regular Normal Course of 
two years, professional three year courses in Home 
Economics and Shop Work. A diploma from any of 
these courses makes a graduate eligible to teach in 
the public schools of Pennsylvania. A three-year 
High School Course is offered to all who have completed the eighth grammar grade. 
For further particulars and catalog, write 
LESLIE PINCKNEY HILL, Principal, 
Oha'ynay, Pa. 
THERE WILL BE NO SUMMER SCHOOL FOR 1121 
Wile y Universit y 
Marshall, Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas. Louisiana, Arkansas and Oklahoma State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University, University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented on its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1920. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W . DOGAN, President 
Mention T u Cuaia. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 14 9 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, 
Ga. The courses of study include High School, 
Normal School and College. Special emphasis 
is laid upon the training of teachers. Students 
come from all parts of the South. Graduates 
have a fine record for successful work. 
For further information address 
President Edward T. Ware 
Atlanta, Ga . 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Institution offers full courses in the following departments. College, Normal, High 
School, Grammar School, Domestic Science, 
Nurse Training and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
natural drainage, splendid dormitories. Expenses very reasonable. 
Winter Term Began December 7, 1921 
For catalog and other information address 
PRESIDEN T J. KEIX Y G1FFEN 
Knoxvllle, I enn. 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 1921 
ATLANTA . GEORGI A 
Over 100 acres of beautiful campus. Twelve buildings 
with new $150,000 administration building with modern 
chapel, gymnasium and laboratorh-s ready for use In 
September. Strong faculty—Religions atmosphere—Athletics^—Co-educatlonal. Admission only by application. 
RE-ARRANGE D COURSE S O F STUD Y 
Junio r High School—7th and SttL Grades and Is' and 
2nd years' High School Courses, with certificate. 
Junio r College—3rd and 4th Tear High School with 
Freshman and Sophomore years of College work, with 
Diploma. 
College—Four years above High School, or two years 
above Junior College Course, with degree of A.B. 
Domestic Selene©—Commerce—Normal— 
Pre-medlcal Course 
53rd year of nine months opened September 21, 1921. 
$150.00 per year pays tuition, board room and laundry 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING , President 
The Florida Agricultura l 
and Mechanica l Colleg e 
Offers courses leading to certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahasee , Florid a 
SIMMON S UNIVERSITY , Louisville, Ky . 
Pounded 1879. 
The only Institution In the State havlns for lt« object 
Collegiate, Ministerial, Medical, and Letal training tar colored citizens in Kentucky. . 
Special training In Insurance, Social Service, Nursin* and 
NcSal! CcSrnwcdal, Mu»lc. Domeatlc Selene Mlaalonary 
t£Z "SSL* eorreoondence courw. •»«^ -
President C . H. Parriah 
MOREHOUSE COLLEGE 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
A n institution famous within recent yean 
for its emphasis on all sides o f manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y. M. C. A., 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETTE AVERY McKENZIE, President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE . N . C . 
Blddle I'niverslty, operated under the auspice* of 
the Northern I'reebyterian Church, has four Departments—High School, Arts and Sciences, Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course ta tne requirement for entrance tu he first year 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the 
scientific, German is substituted for Grrek or Latin. 
The entraiue requirement for the Freshman Class Is 
15 units of Hi (ill School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely English, 
Greek and Hebrew are taught In ihe others. 
All students in the High School Dept. are required 
to take trades In the Industrial Dept. 
For further Information, address 
President H. L. McCrerey, 
Charlotte, N . C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga. 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of special 
ists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Chris 
tion influence. Well equipped dormitories; sanr 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses rea 
sonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College, High School, Nor 
mal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Sewing, 
Printing and Tailoring. 
For further information address 
JOH N H . LEWIS , Presiden t 
BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Chairman Trust Board 
Mentio n The Crisis 150 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Howar d Universit y 
Washington , D . C . 
Founded by GENERAL 0. 0. HOWARD 
J. STANLE Y DURKEE , A.M. , Ph.D., D.D. , President 
EMMET T J. SCOTT , A.M. , LL.D. , Secretary-Treasurer 
COLLEGIATE AND PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS 
I Winter quarter January 3, 4, 1922 
REGISTRATION j Spring- Quarter March 18, 20, 1922 
FOR CATALOG AND INFORMATION WRITE 
F. D. WILKINSON, Registrar 
HOWARD UNIVERSITY WASHINGTON, D. C. 
Founded 1899 Incorporated 1904 
BEREA N 
Manual Training and 
Industrial School 
(Non-Sectarian) 
S. College Ave . & N. 19th St. 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Winte r Term Opening January 3, 1922 
DAY AND NIGHT SESSIONS 
Write for Bulletin to the Principal 
MATTHEW ANDERSON, D.D. 
1926 S. College Avenue, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Talladega College 
Talladega, Alabama 
Founded in 1867 for the Educatio n of 
Negro Leaders 
Beautiful and Healthful Location. 
Literary, Scientific, Educational, Social Service, Theological, Musical, 
Business Administration, Journalism, 
Nurse Training Courses. 
Hig h Standards of Christian Manhoo d and Womanhood . 
Fo r further information address 
F. A. SUMNER , President 
VIRGINIA UNION UNIVERSITY 
(Richmond , Va.) 
In addition to regular high school, college, premedlcal and theological courses, now offers an especially arranged course in connection with the School 
or Social Work and Public Health of this city. 
This course will lead to a decree. For particulars 
address The President. 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES 
in the city of New York 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintendent of Nurses 
Lincoln Hospital and Home 
New York, N.Y . 
ROGER WILLIAMS UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE, TENNESSEE 
Founded 18 Location Ideal 
It offers courses in the Liberal Arts, Normal, Academic and Musical departments. 
For further information write 
SAMUEL A. OWEN, President 
COLEMA N COLLEG E 
GIBSLAND, LA. 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Home 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A, B. H. Society of New York. Students 
from six different states. Graduates siempted on first trad* by Loalsiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O. L. COLEMAN, President 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding ickool for girls, under the 
direction of the sisters of St. Mary. Address: THE 
8ISTER-IN-CHAEGE, 61S8 Germantown Avsnue, 
Philadelphia. Pa, 
"JUS T TH E PLAC E FO R YOU R GIRL " 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytona, Fla . 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment 
9>u™es include
 Ki °2 e
J' gar,
te 5 ; Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNF , . . Principal. 
Mention Taa Caisu. THE CRISIS 
Vol. 23. No. 4 FEBRUARY, 1922 Whole No. 136 
Opinion 
W. E. B. Du Bois 
THE WORL D AND US 
| ESTHONIA has nationalized 
the holdings of her great land 
holders and is beginning to 
distribute her farm lands to 
farmers. The United States is increasing tenancy and land monopoly. 
What with this, and our host of political prisoners, our mobs and lynching, 
our curb of free speech, our color 
caste, our unemployment and mock of 
democracy, we bid fair to lead the 
world—backwards. 
The Disarmament Conference has 
succeeded in limited expenditure for 
big battleships chiefly because these 
ships are of doubtful future efficiency 
and cost more than governments can 
easily raise by taxation. The conference has not decreased preparation 
for war, it has not freed China and its 
guarantee of the islands in the Pacific 
is a sleight-of-hand performance to 
conceal the end of a yellow-white alliance. Thus the color-line is drawn 
stronger and war is no less a prospective method of human culture. 
Ireland faces the question : is a half 
loaf better than war? Probably it is, 
but those who stand on principle have 
a right to be heard. Civilization advances with half loaves usually, but 
the goal remains the whole loaf. 
Some Republican politicians are 
aghast at the appearance of the bloc 
in Congress—that is, the little group 
which refuses to vote by parties. The 
bloc is the hope of democracy. Future legislatures' will more and more 
consist of little coalescing and dividing groups and not of two or three 
main parties. In the millennium, legislatures will consist of Individuals. 
Two men sit high before the world 
today—Eugene Debs and Abdul Baha. 
One is free of chains which should 
never have bound him—the other of 
Life which he tried to free of race 
and national prejudice. 
THE YEA R 1921 IN ACCOUN T WIT H THE 
AMERICA N NEGRO 
DEBIT 
FIFTY-NINE Negroes lynched 
Tulsa 
Jasper County, Ga. 
Helpless Haiti 
Harding at Birmingham 
Few Presidential appointments 
Garvey and the Black Star Line 
Thomas Jesse Jones 
Dismissal of R. T. Kerlin 
Loss of the Pennsylvania Civil 
Rights Bill 
Delay of Liberian Loan 
Apostasy of the Woman's Party 
Death of Dancy, Douglass, Tyree, 
Brown, Chase, Perry and Carr 
CREDIT 
Dyer Bill 
Second Pan-African Congress 
"Emperor Jones" 
Arkansas peons 
Exposure of the Ku Klux 
The Haitian Manifesto 
N.A.A.C.P. drive and 12t h annua) 
conference 
Atlantis 
The Liberian Commission 
Relief work of the Nation?! Urban 
League 
Governor Dorsey 
15 1 152 THE CRISIS 
13 Negro Legislators 
3 colored women as Ph.D. 
461 Bachelors in Arts 
Gourdin, Johnson, Carter and Slater 
Negroes at the Fifth Ecumenical 
Council 
Elections in Virginia, Kentucky, 
Pennsylvania and New York 
Duluth vindication 
Inter-racial committees 
The Howard Players 
"Shuffle Along" 
8th Illinois Regiment nationalized 
Solomon Porter Hood 
A Negro Phonograph Company 
BALANCE ON HAND 
365 days of unflinching courage and 
undimmed ideals. 
THE LYNCHING BILL 
THOSE persons who see technical difficulties and constitutional questions in any effort 
to stop lynching simply do not 
realize the enormity of this evil. 
Lynching is wholesale murder publicly approved by that section of our 
land where mob rule is an institution. 
It is the negation and failure of law, 
order and government. It is not a 
punishment for one crime or for any 
crime: it is simply and purely blood 
lust unparalleled in the civilized 
world. Not the bull fights of Spain 
nor the gladiatorial battles of Rome 
approach it in indecency, cruelty, 
monstrous sadism and orgies almost 
beyond belief. 
We do not realize the beastliness 
and barbarism of this national habit. 
We are drugged by its frequency and 
by familiarity with its details. But 
the world is not drugged: In Tokio 
and Shanghai, in Calcutta and Cairo, 
in Petrograd and Berlin, in London 
and Paris, they say: "This is the real 
America. This is the civilization of 
a nation that presumes to teach the 
world morals and religion, that poses 
as something new and fine and 'advanced.' America cannot at one and 
the same time lynch Negroes and lead 
civilization." 
We can stop lynching. Of course it 
is "unconstitutional" now. It was unconstitutional to stop secession ; it was 
unconstitutional to take charge of the 
railways; it was unconstitutional to 
do a thousand things that the national 
government has done; we did these 
things because we had to in order to 
survive; because no nation can survive which supinely submits to rebellion, or cannot regulate its traffic, or 
permits systematic and continued mob 
murder as a form of public debauchery. The man that opposes the Dyer 
bill or a similar enactment is a blind 
fool or worse. Lynching has nothing 
to do with the Race Question as such 
—it is a matter of downright decency 
and civilization. Either the United 
States can and will end lynching or 
lynching will end these United States. 
VICIOUS PROVISIONS OF A GREA T 
BILL 
THE CRISIS believes and has always believed in national aid 
to common schools, because of 
the shameful fact that the 
South spends only the miserably inadequate sum of $10.32 a head on the 
education of white children and only 
$2.89 for each colored child. 
The Smith-Towner Education bill 
now before Congress seeks to appropriate $7,500,000 annually "to encourage the States to remove illiteracy", 
and for this reason is directly in line 
with our wishes. But on reading the 
bill we learn: "All funds apportioned 
to a State for the removal of illiteracy 
shall be distributed and administered 
in accordance with the laws of said 
State in like manner as the funds provided by State and local authorities 
for the same purpose, and the State 
and local educational authorities of 
said State shall determine the courses 
of study, plans, and methods for carrying out the purposes of this section 
within said State in accordance with 
the laws thereof." 
Also the fifty millions appropriated 
for teachers' salaries in rural schools OPINION 153 
"shall be distributed and administered in accordance with the laws of 
said State in like manner as the funds 
provided by State and local authorities for the same purpose, and the 
State and local educational authorities 
of said State shall determine the 
courses of study, plans and methods 
for carrying out the purposes of this 
section." 
Finally rub your eyes and read this: 
"Apportionment may be made under 
the provisions of this section to a 
State prevented by its constitution 
from full compliance with the foregoing conditions if said conditions are 
approximated as nearly as constitutional limitations will permit." 
Do the supporters of this bill realize 
—can they possibly realize what 
these provisions mean ? Despite every 
effort on the part of the South to conceal the discrimination which it practices against Negro children, the 
truth is easily approximated. We repeat a statement published by the 
United States government and prepared by the government in co-operation with the Phelps-Stokes fund. No 
one could possibly discover Negrophile leanings in figures with such an 
origin. They are as favorable as they 
could be made: 
"In the 15 States and the District 
of Columbia for which salaries by 
race could be obtained, the public 
school teachers received $42,510,703 
in salaries. Of this sum $36,649,827 
was for the teachers of 3,552,431 
white children and $5,860,876 for the 
teachers of 1,852,181 colored children. On a per capita basis, this is 
$10.32 for each white child and $2.89 
for each colored child." 
This is the outrageous situation 
which this bill proposes to perpetuate. In this form the bill is not a proposal to decrease illiteracy. It is a 
bill to encourage lynching, peonage 
and ignorance in the South by perpetuating the present educational discrimination against igorant and helpless Negroes. Shame on the men, 
women and national organizations 
which have loaned their names and 
influence to this travesty on educational justice. 
POLITICS.AND POWE R 
OME persons continue to admonish the Negro that political power is not omnipotent, 
and that without it much may 
be done to uplift the people; while 
with it, much may be left undone. 
The real answer to this argument lies 
in the facts, and Mr. S. D. Redmond 
of Jackson, Mississippi, has furnished 
some facts to the editor of the Commercial Appeal, Memphis, Tenn., 
which the editor did not see fit to 
publish. 
Mr. Redmond points, for instance, 
to the fact that in Mississippi there 
are 525 consolidated rural schools 
combining grammar and high school 
grades, teaching vocal and instrumental music, domestic science and manual training. They have free teachers' homes and agricultural experiment plots, and 200 auto cars transport pupils to these schools at a cost 
of $99,477 a month. And yet, while 
525 of these schools are furnished to 
the 175,000 white school children of 
the state, not a single one is furnished 
to the 200,000 colored children. 
Again there are 400 city high 
schools for whites, but there is not a 
single separate high school for Negroes. There are four colored city 
schools which have the 9th and 10th 
grades, and one that has 12 grades. 
Again there are 49 agricultural high 
schools for the whites in the State and 
not a single one for Negroes. 
Not only is this true, but the Mississippi code of 1917 is so arranged 
that Negroes cannot even tax themselves for schools. The code says that 
whenever the "qualified electors" of a 
school district or county desire a consolidated rural school or high school 
they can, by petitions signed by a 
certain percentage, have an election 154 THE CRISIS 
called and issue bonds. Now as Negroes are seldom permitted to qualify 
as electors they cannot demand a bond 
issue. In only one case in the State, 
that is, the Negro town of Mound 
Bayou, have they been permitted to 
tax themselves and to build a $100,000 
school. 
On the other hand, when the white 
electors vote a bond issue, Negro 
property is taxed exactly the same as 
white property for the support of 
white schools. 
At its last session the Mississippi 
legislature appropriated $3,529,479.64 
for the support of the higher education of the white youth of the State, 
but only $50,000 for Negroes, in a 
single college that can not accommodate more than 350 students. White 
children are furnished institutions for 
the feeble-minded and a reform 
school. Negroes have neither. The 
State pays $32 a month for the education and reformation of an errant 
white youth while the Negro youth is 
sent to the county farm or penitentiary along with the most hardened 
criminals. The State provides an institution for the white blind but leaves 
blind Negroes to beg on the streets. 
If we turn from the State as a 
whole and confine our attention to 
Jackson, the capital city, where the 
white and Negro population is about 
equal, the whites have eight fine 
schools, one of them a city high school 
which cost nearly $300,000. The Negroes have two poor schools, one of 
six grades and the other of eight 
grades, no high school whatsoever, 
and white teachers receive more than 
twice the salary paid Negro teachers 
for the same grade work. Yet Mr. 
Redmond, a Negro citizen of Jackson, 
paid $4,000 in taxes last year. 
He calls attention finally to the fact 
that the Negroes have no public library, parks or playgrounds, that the 
streets in their district are unkept, 
not properly lighted and often without sidewalks and that if the Negroes 
should enter one of the parks for 
which he is taxed he would be arrested ! 
This is the cost of disfranchisement 
in Mississippi. 
AFRICA FOR THE AFRICAN S 
H E Associated Press in a Paris 
dispatch, put into the mouth 
of the editor a statement that 
colored Americans could not 
withstand the African climate, could 
not oust the Europeans, and did not 
desire to do so. 
It ought to go without saying that 
the editor never made any such statement. The American Negro is just 
as able to withstand the African climate as American white men and no 
more able. The climate is severe and 
trying, but a healthy man who follows the rules of tropical hygiene can 
live there. There is, therefore, no 
necessary barrier of climate to keep 
American Negroes out of Africa. 
On the other hand, it would be foolish for colored folk to assume that 
because their great grandfathers were 
Africans that the climate of Africa 
would have no terrors for them. It 
has its terrors for all men and these 
terrors can be overcome. 
The present opportunity for emigration to Africa is, however, exceedingly limited. There is absolutely no 
chance for colored laborers. Men 
with capital, education and some technical or agricultural skill, who have 
the courage of pioneers, good health, 
and are willing to rough it, can find 
a career in Liberia, in some parts of 
French, Portuguese and Egyptian 
Africa (if they speak the language), 
and in some parts of British West 
Africa, if they are British subjects. 
They will be objects of suspicion in 
British West Africa and will suffer 
some caste restrictions. 
On the other hand, in the Belgian 
Congo, in British East and South 
Africa and in Rhodesia, an American 
Negro would hardly be allowed to 
enter, much less settle. Black mer-OPINION 155 
chants and traders have chances in 
West Africa but they are at the mercy 
not only of the governments who are 
not eager to help them, but also of 
the great banks, corporations and 
syndicates who are in position to 
skim the cream of all profits. 
Again the editor distinctly believes 
that Africa should be administered 
for the Africans and, as soon as may 
be, by the Africans. He does not 
mean by this that Africa should be 
administered by West Indians or 
American Negroes. They have no 
more right to administer Africa for 
the native Africans than native Africans have to administer America. 
CHARLES YOUN G 
HE life of Charles Young was 
a triumph of tragedy. No 
one ever knew the truth about 
the Hell he went through at 
West Point. He seldom even mentioned it. The pain was too great. 
Few knew what faced him always 
in his army life. It was not enough 
for him to do well—he must always 
do better; and so much and so conspicuously better, as to disarm the 
scoundrels that ever trailed him. He 
lived in the army surrounded by insult and intrigue and yet he set his 
teeth and kept his soul serene and 
triumphed. 
He was one of the few men I know 
who literally turned the other cheek 
with Jesus Christ. He was laughed 
at for it and his own people chided 
him bitterly, yet he persisted. When 
a white Southern pigmy at West 
Point protested at taking food from 
a dish passed first to Young. Young 
passed it to him first and afterward 
to himself. When officers of inferior 
rank refused to salute a "nigger", 
he saluted them. Seldom did he lose 
his temper, seldom complain. 
With his own people he was always 
the genial, hearty, half-boyish friend. 
He kissed the girls, slapped the boys 
on the back, threw his arms about his 
friends, scattered his money in charity; only now and then behind the 
Veil did his nearest comrades see the 
Hurt and Pain graven on his heart; 
and when it appeared he promptly 
drowned it in his music—his beloved 
music, which always poured from his 
quick, nervous fingers, to caress and 
bathe his soul. 
Steadily, unswervingly he did his 
duty. And Duty to him, as to few 
modern men, was spelled in capitals. 
It was his lode-star, his soul; and 
neither force nor reason swerved him 
from it. His second going to Africa, 
after a terrible attack of black water 
fever, was suicide. He knew it. His 
wife knew it. His friends knew it. 
He had been sent to Africa because 
the Army considered his blood pressure too high to let him go to Europe! 
They sent him there to die. They 
sent him there because he was one of 
the very best officers in the service 
and if he had gone to Europe he 
could not have been denied the stars 
of a General. They could not stand 
a black American General. Therefore they sent him to the fever coast 
of Africa. They ordered him to make 
roads back in the haunted jungle. He 
knew what they wanted and intended. He could have escaped it by accepting his retirement from active 
service, refusing his call to active 
duty and then he could have lounged 
and lived at leisure on his retirement 
pay. But Africa needed him. He did 
not yell and collect money and advertise great schemes and parade in 
crimson—he just went quietly, ignoring appeal and protest. 
He is dead. But the heart of the 
Great Black Race, the Ancient of 
Days—the Undying and Eternal— 
rises and salutes his shining memory: 
Well done! Charles Young, Soldier 
and Man and unswerving Friend. OUR GREATEST FAULT 
Pretending: TO be learned when we 
are unlearned; to be 
rich when 'we are poor; to be great 
while we are small; to know when we don't 
know; to be true when we are false; to have 
when we have not. Pretending to be leaders 
when we are but followers; to be going 
East when we are running West; to stand 
for Right when we are walking hand in 
hand with Wrong ; to be brave and outspoken when we are afraid and silent. Pretending to be 'proud of our race when we 
are ashamed of it,—pretending—all the 
while pretending—and all the world knows 
it, but us. 
EDWAR D H . MORRIS , 
Grand Master, G.U.O. of Odd Fellows. 
LAC K OF 
INITIATIV E 
I VENTUR E the conviction 
that the lack of initiative 
is "Our Greatest Fault" . 
There is so much involved in this lack and 
such an interdependence between it and 
other defects that if the former is eliminated, the latter will disappear like the snow 
before the rays of the sun. One race very 
often patterns after another race, impersonates its achievements, assumes a resemblance to everything that enobles and dignifies and becomes influenced by a use of 
power acting from without, though the motives may be regarded as forces acting upon 
the will. But this is not the field which 
we must seek to cultivate. We must explore, initiate, create and exhibit an ability 
for original conception and independent action. We must blaze our own way, and produce forces and agencies that make and 
stimulate civilization and thus prove to mankind that if left to ourselves we could evolve 
a condition of organization and enlightenment that would demonstrate the interest, 
intrinsic, initiative attributes of the race. 
Fundamental to this idea of "The Lack of 
Initiative" should be the stern, staunch realization by the race of what great benefitswould accrue to it when once it learned its 
own inert strength, the power of organization, and the lesson of solidarity. Gripped 
and obsessed by this spirit of oneness the 
race would experience vast potentialities 
and out of its new birth a new place would 
be given the Negro upon the map of the 
world. 
C. H . PHILLIPS , 
Bishop of the Colored M . E . Church. 
THIN -
SKINNE D 
OUR greatest fault is hard 
to name, but one very 
great fault is that we are thin-skinned. 
Not only do we fail to thicken up sufficiently to get what has not been granted, 
but we also shrink from asking for what 
is actually allowed us. Now, what I call 
thin-skinned among us happens on closer 
examination really to be culture and 
Christianity. No matter what stratum you examine, whether the stiff collar or the overalls, the avenue or the alley, there is found 
the same attitude of our not desiring to 
force from people what they do not want 
us to have, not going where people do not 
want us to be. It is beautiful, but it is 
not American. The American characteristic is to go after things and get what 
you go after. Looked at in one way, our 
great fault is a virtue. Must we then allow 
it further to handicap us while continuing 
to teach a better Americanism? 
JOH N HOPE , 
Pres. of Morehouse College, Atlanta , Ga. 
PAINTE D POEM S 
THE PEACOCK FEATHER 
MAR Y EFFI E LE E NEWSOM E 
HEAV'N'S deepest blue, 
Earth's richest green, 
Minted dust of stars, 
Molten sunset sheen, 
Ar e blent together 
On this lithe brown feather, 
In a disc of light— 
Lithe, light! 
156 TH E CHAPE L A T HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y 
HOWARD UNIVERSITY 
E. C . WILLIAM S 
On Ma y 1, 1867, in a rented frame building, the Norma l and Preparator y De ­
partment of Howar d University wa s opened, 
with five students and without one cent in 
the treasury. In the yea r 1920-21, just 
ended, the University, housed in fourteen 
buildings, exclusive o f Freedmen's Hospital, and ownin g a campus of twenty acres 
on wha t is indisputably the most splendid 
site in the Distric t o f Columbia , ministered 
to 1,730 collegiate and professional students, 
to 50 certificate students in music , and 131 
correspondence students in religion, or a 
grand total, less duplications, of 1,893. In 
the 52 years intervening between the date 
of the opening and that memorabl e meeting 
in February, 1919, at which the trustees 
voted to uphold the hands o f the new administration and close the doors o f the secondary departments, the institution had 
passed through man y changes, but these, 
however interesting, we have not the space 
to record here. Suffice it to say, the change s 
initiated at the meeting o f the trustees cited 
above, and at subsequent meetings, have been 
the occasion fo r much comment and controversy, and it is the purpos e of this brie f 
article to set forth as clearly as ma y be in 
a summar y fashion just wha t those 
changes have been, and wha t are some, at 
least, of the University's claims as a national university for the twelve millions of 
Negroe s of the United States. 
Expressed hastily, and in comprehensive 
terms, the most obvious changes are the following : the elimination of all secondary 
work, and the reorganization of the collegiate wor k into a division, o f which the 
first two years are called the Junior College, and the two uppe r years the Senior 
Schools, including the Schools of Liberal 
Arts, Education, Commerc e and Finance, 
Applied Sciences, and Music ; the addition 
o f a Department of Architectur e to the 
School of Applied Sciences; the establishment o f a Department of Public Health and 
Hygien e in connection with the School of 
Medicine ; changes in the work of the School 
o f La w which mov e it up several points in 
the classification o f the Carnegie Founda ­
tion fo r the Advancement of Teaching ; the 
establishment of a Registrar's Office on the 
most modern lines, wher e all matters concerning records and admissions are centered; 
the centralization in a Secretary-Treasurer's office o f all the financial and business 
matters o f the University; the creation of a 
Department of Physical Education; the offering o f military courses in connection with 
the work of the Reserve Officers' Training 
157 158 THE CRISIS 
Corps; the establishment of University fellowships fo r the promotion of graduate 
work ; the authorization by the Trustees o f 
a journa l to promot e scholarship and research among Negroes; the substitution of 
the quarter fo r the semester system; many 
changes in the curriculum in line with the 
best college standards o f today ; the obtaining from Congress of an appropriation 
of $201,000 for a Home Economic s building; increases in teachers' salaries since 
1917-18 amounting to mor e than $64,000 
annually; and numberless improvements in 
the grounds, buildings, and physical equipment of the University. 
Since all of these things have been accomplished in the short space o f two and 
one-half years, and with the school running 
"full blast," it is no cause fo r wonde r that 
there should be a little confusion, a little 
grumbling, and even some misunderstanding 
and disagreement. In fact, the wonde r is 
that there has not been more . Indeed, the 
fact that there was not mor e may be taken 
as reasonably good evidence that most of the 
changes commended themselves almost immediately to the good sense of those wh o 
had to work with them. 
Fo r many years, both to the minds of 
many within the University and to disinterested schoolmen looking on from without, 
there had been three weak spots in its organization, namely, the presence of two secondary schools on the same campus with the 
college departments, and in part taught by 
the college instructors; the existence of 
what amounted in reality to two college departments running on almost parallel lines 
in warm rivalry with each other; and the 
almost autocratic power of the deans within 
their own departments—in other words, a 
decentralization of power, and a consequent 
duplication of work and multiplication of 
standards, out of all proportion to the size 
of the university and the resources at its 
command. An d though the fact that these 
conditions should be remedied wa s recognized b y many of the faculty and administrative officers, I presume it is not unnatural that, when the remedies wer e actually 
applied by a new administration with a resolute and unflinching hand, the changes 
made and the inevitable readjustments necessitated b y them should cause momentary 
feeling. 
It was natural, too, that there should be 
some who could not see the necessity of 
this or that change , and who would predict the evil consequences to follow. Fo r 
example , it wa s felt by some that the actual 
elimination of the secondary departments, 
the Academy and Commercia l College, which 
had planted their roots so deeply in the life 
o f the university, would cause not only a 
direct loss in numbers alone which would 
seriously damage the prestige of the university, but also an indirect loss through 
the destruction of one of the chief feeders 
of the college. But wha t wa s the actual result? A glanc e at the figures given below 
will convinc e the most skeptical that the 
closing o f the secondary departments has 
surely worke d no injury in the matte r o f 
reduced numbers. 
College Academ y Grand 
Yea r (exclusive and Tota l 
o f Commercia l fo r all 
Music ) College Divisions 
1911-12 382 457 1409 
1912-13 478 490 1453 
1915-16 500 369 1507 
1916-17 559 417 1565 
1917-18 706 413 1583 
1918-19 541 282 1360 
1919-20 766 None 1567 
1920-21 930 Non e 1893 
The educational life of Washington , as 
fa r as it concerns the Negro , is unique. 
Ther e is here presented a combination of 
opportunities unequalled elsewhere. Since 
the public schools and Howar d University 
are both supported largely b y government 
appropriations, they ma y be regarded, fo r 
the sake of argument, as parts of a single 
system, beginning at the kindergarten, and 
running the whol e gamut—gramma r schools, 
vocational schools, atypical schools, outdoor 
schools, academic, technical and commercia l 
high schools, city norma l school, and college and professional schools. An d just as 
the colored public school system of Wash ­
ington is without question the best o f its 
kind in the world—an d this wa s one very 
good reason for closing the secondary schools 
of the university—so is Howar d University, 
the capstone o f the local educational structure, unique in its field. Le t us see how we 
can justify this statement. 
First, it is the only institution in the 
world devoted mainly to the education of 
colored men and wome n that offers bona fide 
courses in all the mor e usual branche s of 
college and professional work, that is, in 
the liberal arts, education, commerc e and 
finance, engineering, architecture, domestic HOWAR D UNIVERSITY 150 
science, medicine, dentistry, pharmacy, law, religion, and music . 
Second, it offers no wor k below 
collegiate grad e to matriculating 
students, and is the only co-educational school fo r Negr o students which does not give wor k 
below that grade . Third, it has 
the largest bod y o f Negr o students of college grad e ever assembled in one institution. 
Fourth, b y its ver y situation in 
the capital o f the nation, it is able 
to offer its students, through the 
presence of such agencie s as the Bureau of 
Education, the Departmen t of Agriculture , 
the Arm y Medica l Museum, Freedmen's Hospital, the Bureau of Standards, and the Library of Congress, opportunities fo r the development o f scholarship unequalled by any 
other institution fo r colored youth. Fifth, 
in its organization it follows the standards 
set by the best universities in the country 
concentrating upon highe r education, and 
its bachelor's degre e is accorded recognition 
toward highe r degrees in graduat e schools 
of known standing. Sixth, the America n 
Medical Association, in its bulletin of approved Negr o colleges o f arts and sciences 
published in the spring of 1920, lists Howard as one o f the tw o colleges in Class I. 
Finally, the University is the first institution fo r colored youth to promot e graduate wor k b y the establishment o f fellowships. 
I wish that space would permit an expansion on some o f these special advantages, but one typical illustration must suffice. Le t us take the School of Medicine. 
The Nationa l Capital affords unusual facilities fo r the study of medicine and allied 
subjects. Th e finest medical library in this 
country is that o f the Surgeon-General's 
Office, which contains mor e than 200,000 
volumes on medicine and collateral sciences, 
and the Librar y o f Congress contains a 
very fine medica l collection. All o f these 
books are accessible to our students on the 
same terms as apply to other citizens. The 
Army Medica l Museum is the finest o f its 
kind in the world, havin g on display about 
30,000 specimens, and other agencie s fo r 
education ar e the Nationa l Museum, the 
Smithsonian Institution, the Museum o f 
Hygiene , and the Patent Office Museum. 
On the square fronting that on which our 
medical buildings stand the government 
PRESIDEN T 
J. STANLE Y DURKE E 
has erected the magnificent Freedmen's Hospital, at a cost of ove r 
.$600,000. This hospital, which 
has the advantage of being designed primarily fo r teachingpurposes, has about 300 beds, 
contains two clinical amphitheatres, a pathological laboratory, 
clinical laboratories, and rooms 
for x-ray diagnostic wor k and 
x-ray therapy. The medical faculty of Howar d University prac ­
tically constitutes the hospital 
staff. Special attention is given 
to bedside instruction, and clinics are held 
every day in the year, except Sundays, and 
examinations are made, prescriptions given, 
and surgica l operations performed in the 
presence of classes or sections of classes. 
The clinical laboratories are under the direction of the departments of internal medicine, 
surgery, gynecolog y and nervous diseases. 
The y are especially equipped for the scientific study o f cases, and are freely used by 
the students. War d and bedside instruction 
can be carried out mor e fully and systematically than in many other hospitals available fo r teaching purposes, and the prac ­
tical hospital wor k which students are able 
to do here is excelled by few medical 
schools. A large numbe r of the cases admitted to this hospital are from a distance, and are of mor e than ordinary interest. Ever y branch of medicine is represented by numerous and instructive cases. 
Whe n such a situation is compared with 
that which confronts most Negr o students 
of medicine in northern medical schools in 
connection with their practical wor k in the 
hospitals, it is not difficult to see wh y How ­
ard University claims the possession of unusual advantage s in this regard. 
Wha t is true of the Medical Department 
is true in a lesser degree o f other departments. Fo r any work requiring the use of 
books the situation of the university in 
Washingto n is peculiarly fortunate. No t 
only in the study of medicine, but of law, 
o f education, and of countless other subjects, are the resources o f the Library of 
Congress, with its two and a half million 
volumes, the Public Library of the District 
of Columbia, and the special libraries of 
the various bureaus and departments of the 
government, freely at the disposal of the 
students on the most liberal terms. The 
university's own library, too, is admittedly 160 THE CRISIS 
CARNEGI E LIBRAR Y 
the best o f any institution fo r colored 
youth, and includes a special collection of 
Negro-Americana. So that, from the standpoint of library facilities, the university 
has absolutely no rival among institutions 
for Negr o youth. 
The student body of the university is unusually interesting. The mere assembling 
in one school o f over 1,700 youn g men and 
women of college grade, and of Negr o descent, and drawn from 36 States and mor e 
than 10 foreign countries, is in itself tremendously significant. The foreign students 
number over 100, and French and Spanish 
are heard on the campus almost as freely 
as English. It may be remembered that it 
wa s the boundless energy and intelligent 
effort of this student group, fired by the 
enthusiasm of Major Joel E. Spingarn, 
which, as much as any one factor, made the 
Des Moines training camp for colored officers a reality. These students come from 
every class and condition in life, from affluence to poverty. A very large proportion 
of the male students wor k for all or part 
of their expenses, and they are, in consequence, more than ordinarily independent 
and self-reliant. 
A s might be expected, the student life at 
Howard is as rich and varied as such life 
can well be. Ever y form of college activity 
flourishes, and the exuberance of student 
vitality and interest is spent on football, 
baseball, basketball, track athletics, tennis, 
and in debating societies fo r both men and 
women, literary societies, German and 
French clubs, a dramati c club, two glee 
clubs, a university choir, a very spirited 
band attached to the R. O. T. C , and many 
State and regional clubs, which last are 
very popula r at Howard . Non e o f these 
are dead letter organizations, but every department o f norma l college life is vigorously represented. Th e greatest football games 
in the Negr o world are staged here, the 
grea t track meets, and a triangula r debating league is maintained with Lincoln 
and Atlant a universities. 
A unique featur e of the work of one department is a rather intensive effort to 
develop amon g the students dramati c art 
and a knowledge of dramati c technique, an 
attempt to stimulate interest in Negr o folklore and history as materials fo r dramatic 
composition, and to train the students not 
only in the art of acting, but in stage management and in the designing and construction o f scenery and costumes. In this 
field the Howar d Players represent the 
dramatic interests and efforts of the University befor e the public. This organization presents annually a series of plays 
staged entirely by students. Durin g the 
past yea r performance s wer e given of Dunsany's Tents of the Arabs, Torrence's Simon 
the Cyrenian, O'Neill's Emperor Jones, and 
Percy Mackaye's Canterbury Pilgrims. 
The Emperor Jones wa s given twice , once 
with Mr. Charles Gilpin in the title role, 
and onc e with a student in that part. Mr. HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y 161 
Gilpin has since shown his appreciation of 
the work of the students by offering two 
of them places in his own company. The 
aim of the Department of Dramatic Ar t 
and Public Speaking is, frankly, to develop 
the dramatic possibilities of the Negro, and 
to be one of the pioneers in a movement for 
the establishment of a national Negro theatre. 
Fraternity life flourishes at Howard. 
There are nine national fraternities with 
chapters on the campus, six for men and 
three for women. Two of the men's fraternities are professional. Five of the 
fraternities and one of the sororities have 
chapter houses. 
Side by side with the larger problems of 
reorganization has gone the more detailed 
work on the curriculum. A tremendous 
amount of checking up has been accomplished already, and there is still a great 
deal to do. It may be worth noting at 
this point that the work of the School of 
Liberal Arts has just been appraised by 
a commission representing the Association 
of Colleges and Secondary Schools of the 
Middle States and Maryland, and the school 
placed on the "approved" list of that body. 
This action is without prejudice to the other 
senior schools of the University, as this 
commission is at present investigating only 
schools of liberal arts. 
Recognizing the importance of the teacher, as one of the two indispensable components of any school, the administration of 
Howard University has in the past three 
years set about getting into sympathetic 
touch with every outstanding Negro scholar 
who might be available for the work of the 
university, and the faculty has already been 
strengthened by the addition of several 
scholarly, aggressive and forward-looking 
men. Paralle l with this effort to add to 
the faculty new strength and vigor from 
without has been the generous policy in 
force toward teachers on the staff who are 
ambitious to pursue further studies. Four 
such teachers have spent the past year on 
leave, engaged in study in the great universities of the North and West. It is interesting to record, in connection with this 
statement about the faculty, that one of 
the first research fellowships granted by 
the National Research Council was given 
to a professor in Howard University. 
No one, more than the writer of these 
lines, would deplore the rejection by all our 
Negro youth of the opportunities open to 
them in the great institutions of the North 
and West, and yet, under existing condiHAL L OF APPLIE D SCIENCE AND GYMNASIU M 162 THE CRISIS 
tions, there is a tremendous opportunity 
for Negr o institutions. Unde r these conditions there is one thing that a distinctively Negro institution can offer to our 
young people which no other type of school 
pretends to offer, and that is, the chance 
to develop all sides of the individual under 
absolutely normal social conditions. This 
includes those transcendently important elements, the development under natural conditions of the capacity fo r leadership, and 
the development of race- or group-consciousness. This last, though admittedly 
the father and mother of all wars and of 
nine tenths of the evils and abuses in the 
world, is at this stage of the Negro's development an absolutely indispensable offset to those force s so persistently working 
to degrade him. 
The new er a is upon us. Th e new spirit 
is nowher e mor e manifest than in our college group . Wha t wor k could be mor e 
worth while than the teaching o f these 
young men and women , the very flower o f 
the race, in the opening years of this new 
age ? Howard , like man y anothe r university, is unable to satisfy the needs she has 
created. He r usefulness is limited only b y 
her equipment and her resources. She 
needs new buildings, a mor e extensive 
equipment, a better library, and a large r 
teaching force . Ever y citizen of the United 
States and every friend o f education can 
help her get them, fo r Howar d is, in mor e 
senses than one, a national university. 
SUNDAY AFTERNOON 
JESSIE FAUSE T 
TO the visual-minded all impressions 
come in a series of little pictures. To 
myself, fo r instance, wh o can remember 
only b y opening and closing camera-fashion 
a little inward shutter—all my life stretches 
awkwar d in a group o f single detached 
visions. In one o f these, mor e vivid than 
the rest, I see myself a small gloomy child 
sitting dejectedly in my little red chair. 
"Wha t on earth is the matter? " asks a 
merry older sister. "Wha t are you cryin g 
about? " 
An d I answer as my tears break forth 
without reserve, "Toda y seems like Sunday. " 
Alway s Sunday afternoon has made me 
sad. But it is a sweet sadness. It must 
have been connected at first, I think, with 
the inhibitions which Sunday in a ver y conservative, not to say very religious household, placed, upon the small child. I might 
not sing songs, I might not play, I didn't 
know how to write letters, it wa s wron g 
to read even fairy-tales. I could not spend 
pennies for candy. An d the stretch between 
dinner and supper—one had old-fashioned 
suppers in those days, cold beef and prunes! 
—the distance between the two meals wa s 
interminable. Of course, there wa s Sunday School, but even that, which I truly 
liked, did not remove the feeling of restraint and forlornness which can come to 
a child on a dreary enforced holiday. 
Ther e wa s a Dante's Inferno in our 
house, I remember, illustrated b y Dore . 
Tha t was permissible reading. I could no t 
understand the text, but ho w I pored ove r 
those gloomy pictures. An d there was a 
Famil y Bible, too, a fa t leather-bound volume printed on stained brown pape r with 
the old-fashioned s and with an Apocrypha . 
I wa s used to the Old Testament, so used 
that its queer outlandish name s did no t 
seem queer to me. Bu t ho w I thrilled to 
those strange new titles, Esdras, Holafernes, Judith, Susanna! Their exoti c quality remains with me still. 
I can almost taste the atmosphere of those 
far-off times. Myself, with my precious 
book upstairs on the bed or on the floor, 
flat on my stomach, heels up, chin propped 
in my hands, and about me even on bright 
afternoons an indefinable sense of something gloomy , dark and melancholy. From 
below floated the sound o f my sisters' 
voices chatting with the casual Sunday Caller. Sometimes there wa s a burst of 
laughter, then presently the welcome clatter o f tea-things. Afte r suppe r there wa s 
music—hymns, played on the organ ; in 
summer-time a gathering on the front steps, 
a general sense o f good-fellowship and reunion in which I joined gladly. Bu t befor e 
that time in the late afternoon, gra y or 
golden as the season migh t bring,—fo r me 
nothing but aloofness and sadness. SUNDAY AFTERNOON 163 
Late r I came to cherish that period, 
came to sense its possibilities. I think I 
recognized it as the period o f m y greatest 
mental clarity. I seemed to be penetrated 
at such times with a startling realization 
of the value o f things. Perhaps in this very 
realization lay sadness. A t first I put, hardheadedly enough, this clarity, this mental 
keenness to a practica l purpose . In college I found that notes reread on Sunday 
afternoon stayed b y me , translations came 
more accurately and ye t mor e delicately 
But I wa s neve r satisfied. Underneath 
was a longing to be doing something else, to 
be being, if I ma y say so, a totally different 
creature. Th e something else wa s always 
just beyond my ken. I tried to translate it 
into action. If the chapel-bell ran g I 
thought I wanted to g o to chapel. But 
when I wen t I foun d I wa s disappointed. If 
I strolled along the path whic h meant so 
much to me during m y busy week, I found 
it meant nothing on Sunday. An d always 
there wa s that sense o f havin g missed 
something. M y precious Sunday afternoon 
had gone and I still had not fathomed its 
meaning. 
Lately I have foun d out wha t it means 
to me now. Th e realization came in 
France, as I sailed—not on a Sunday afternoon—on one o f those ridiculous little boats 
which ply up' and down the Seine. I wa s 
sitting idly apart not talking, not listening even to the othe r members of our little 
party, whe n ove r me came creeping that 
familiar Sunday feeling. It wa s not 
merely the menta l clarity, fo r that comes 
too on a lonely railroad journe y and is due, 
I think, to a certain sense o f physical detachment, but there wa s the old familiar 
sweet, sweet wholly satisfactory melancholy. 
"Doesn't to-day seem like Sunday? " 1 
asked m y astonished companions. 
It wa s in the blessed period befor e the 
war. Paris wa s still gay, the Seine wa s 
alive with small craft, its banks crowded 
with fishing gentry. Nothin g could be 
farther from the old-fashioned America n 
idea o f Sunday. Bu t my heart knew. 
Le t me see if I can put it into words. It 
is so nebulous, ye t to me so real. I found 
I wanted nothin g at those times but the 
Sunday afternoon itself (o r the time that 
seemed like that) and the sense o f completeness which it brings. An d perhaps it 
is this sense of wanting nothing beyond, 
which as a child made me so sad. The feeling which comes to me then is its own excuse fo r being. A m I triste? I would not 
be merry. Do I pine ? The desire is 
sweeter than its satisfaction. Do I dream? 
No dream that has ever come true is 
sweeter than those dreams on Sunday 
afternoons when I broo d "on no grea t 
things done, but grea t things undone" . In 
that sweet do-nothingness of attitude, mental and physical—everything takes o n an 
exquisitely true value which is immediately 
recognizable without any extra adjustment. 
It is as though the picture, the view had 
been focussed just fo r my special degree 
of short-sightedness. My heart and my 
mind are without strain. 
Just to think, then, becomes fo r me a 
jo y on Sunday afternoons. A t first, I 
used to save problems for that happy season, but 1 soon learned better. No w I relax and let the thoughts come to me. Ho w 
the difficulties resolve themselves. Sometimes it is a really vexing material puzzle, 
sometimes it is a bit o f verse, sometimes a 
situation in a play, an abstruse expression 
that baffles. If my mind reverts to the 
puzzle and I pick up the book I find myself 
porin g ove r it wit h the same intense concentration with which in my childhood I 
pored over Dor e or the Apochrypha . An d 
like then there is no sense o f effort. 
If I fail to give an idea o f the ineffable 
satisfaction which now I gain on these 
beatific afternoons, I have written vainly. 
Everythin g is perfect. I would not hurry 
or hold back one moment. I am like the 
gourme t caressing his wine against his 
palate, yet letting it go, knowin g he must 
not try too long to hold its flavor. Whatever I elect to do in those so brief hours 
is in itself an end. Sometimes I take out 
letters knowin g that I shall not answer 
them then. Or I ma y hunt feverishly amon g 
a heap o f papers fo r a half finished poem. 
Perhaps I add a line or two , but oftenest 
my content is complete in havin g unearthed 
it. Rarely I get out my accounts, but I 
believe I hav e never checked them up. 
Wha t I like most is to sit or lie motionless and let the stray sound or the glimpsing o f a picture bring me my thought. 
Churchbells on Sunday afternoon throw me 
into an ecstasy o f pleasant feeling — my 
college days drift back to me , and later 164 THE CRISIS 
wanderings in Quebec,—priests toiling 
laboriously up those tortuous streets to 
some house of prayer. 
The church-bells remind me, too, of a 
French story, so exquisite, so complete as to 
give one the sensation of assisting at the 
creation, the unfolding of a rare and perfect thing, a flower, a poem, an utterly 
melodious song. In the story the churchbells take win g on good Friday and fly to 
Rome , whence they return on Easte r Sunday. If one can spy them in their stately 
flight above the clouds, one's dearest wish 
will be granted. It seems to me nothing 
could be mor e exquisite, mor e French. I 
know I have found no conceit so restful, 
so pillow-y for the overstrung mind. 
There is a picture on my wall that intrigues me repeatedly. On Sunday afternoons I let its atmosphere envelop me, absorb me. It is Rossetti's "Dorige n of Brittany", a picture none too well-known in 
this country. 
The artist is illustrating a line from that 
much older artist, Chaucer. The picture, a 
soft platinotype, is full of all those harmonious unlikely things which the preRaphaelites insisted on grouping—ther e is 
a pipe-organ, a winding stair, a missal 
book, and a lady her arms outflung in despair to the sea just glimpsed through the 
open casement. 
"Is there not any ship on all the seas 
that will bring back to me my dearest lord?" 
Such is her plaint. Poor, mute, sad 
lady! If she only knew, she might be content. She has me to suffer vicariously for 
her. I picture the Breton fishing village, 
the angry sea, the tortured hearts of waiting women and my heart breaks with her 
own. 
Sundays in winter are sweetest. The 
soft, gra y closing-in of the afternoons between Novembe r and March induces a pleasant, restful melancholy. Wherea s the hot 
glare of summer Sundays, in the park, say, 
the ga y dresses, the motors, the boats, the 
very vividness of the trees—all these things 
cry for happiness. An d if one because of 
some lack either within or without cannot 
achieve it one suffers mor e b y contrast. On 
the other hand Sunday afternoon in a warm 
room with many books and fe w pictures 
and fewe r or no people ! Without, a hint of 
snow or the lowering that means rain; 
within, a flash o f fire on the walls! Pain 
becomes a pleasure. 
Of late I have spent my afternoons reading. Alway s the same thing. Th e Apology 
for Socrates and Crito—I cannot ge t away 
from it. An d every perusa l brings me 
fresh pleasure, a new and growin g satisfaction. Here, in this old man's sublime 
and fearless attitude towar d death, lies, 
it seems to me , the world's greatest brief 
fo r personal hono r and probity. See him 
a man o f seventy, with only a short while 
left. Surely he might be accounted blameless if accepting Crito's offer, he left the 
thankless Athenians and spent his fe w remaining years in Thessaly. But, listen to 
his noble simplicity,— 
"No t life, Crito, " he says, "but living 
well is to be prized. " 
Other men perhaps have said the same 
thing, but for me these word s are unspeakably touching from the lips o f this 
grand old pagan. All that he says is so 
sane, so balanced, so possible to weav e into 
the stuff of one's own life. 
"In all times o f peril, " he continues, 
"there are way s o f escape if one will submit to any baseness. Athenians, it is not 
so hard to shun death, but hard indeed to 
shun evil, fo r that runs mor e swiftly than 
death. I, you see, an old man and slow of 
gait, have been overtaken b y the slower 
runner." 
I find myself transported with his dignity and sonorousness. 
The years pass and I with them have 
passed from the childhood o f that melancholy little girl to the not unmixed pleasures of womanhood . Throug h the bye -
gone days gleam to m y visual mind those 
precious afternoons like little emerald islands in a vast water y expanse. No t a jo y 
but has been mad e fuller, not a grie f but 
has been calmed and soothed b y the influence of those fe w hours which induce, 
That sweet mood when pleasant thoughts 
Bring sad thought to the mind. 
The warfar e o f modern living beats and 
seethes about m y consciousness as it does 
about the rest o f the world . Bu t on Sundays, I lose some of its overwhelmin g impingement. Throug h the long years to come 
I see stretching befor e me a vista of 
blessed oases, little havens whithe r m y tired 
heart and mind shall, not vainly, seek repose. An d this vision is not the least o f 
my indebtedness to Sunday afternoon National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored-People. 
LYNCHINGS IN THE UNITED 
STATES 
TABULATE D figures as to lynching in 
the United States begin with 1885. 
From January 1, 1885, to January 1, 1922, 
4,015 persons are known to have been 
lynched, as follows: 
1885 181 
1886 133 
1887 123 
1888 142 
1889 175 
1890 91 
1891 194 
1892 226 
1893 153 
1894 182 
1895 178 
1896 125 
1897 162 
1898 127 
1899 109 
1900 101 
1901 135 
1902 94 
1903 104 
1904 86 
1905 65 
1906 68 
1907 62 
1908 100 
1909 89 
1910 90 
1911 71 
1912 64 
1913 48 
1914 54 
1915 96 
1916 58 
1917 50 
1918 67 
1919 83 
1920 65 
1921 64 
Total 4,015 
Georgia 429 
Mississippi 405 
Texas 354 
Louisiana 326 
Alabama 292 
Arkansa s 231 
Florida 201 
Tennessee 199 
Kentucky 171 
South Carolina . 128 
Oklahoma 99 
Missouri 85 
Virgini a 80 
North Carolina 63 
Wyoming 34 
West Virginia. . 32 
California 29 
Illinois 24 
Kansas 24 
Montana 23 
Colorado 20 
Indiana 19 
Nebraska 18 
Maryland 17 
Washington .. . 17 
New Mexico. . . 13 
South Dakota. . 13 
Ohio 13 
Idaho 11 
Arizona 8 
Iowa 8 
Minnesota 7 
Alask a 4 
Michigan 4 
Nevada 4 
Oregon 4 
Pennsylvania . . 1 
Wisconsin 4 
New Yor k 3 
North Dakota . 2 
Delaware 1 
Maine 1 
New Jersey .. . 1 
State unknown. 11 
Total 3,436 
The following states have had no lynchings: Utah, Vermont, New Hampshire, 
Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut 
and the District of Columbia. 
1885 1925 
200 
100 
INCREAS E AN D DECREAS E OF LYNCHIN G B Y YEAR S 
The figures for lynching before 1889 
were not kept in enough detail to allow us 
to use more than the totals. The following figures therefore, except where noted:, 
refer to the period from January 1, 1889 
to Jaunary 1, 1922, in which ptriod 3,436 
persons are known to have been lynched. 
These lynchings have been distributed as 
follows by states: 
If we confine ourselves simply to Negroes 
who have been lynched we have the following table, showing a total of 3,038 between 
1885 and 1921: 
1885 78 
1886 71 
1887 80 
1888 95 
1889 95 
1890 88 
1891 127 
1892 155 
1893 114 
1894 128 
1895 110 
1896 79 
1897 124 
1898 103 
165 166 TH E CRISIS 
1899 87 
1900 89 
1901 108 
1902 84 
1903 87 
1904 79 
1905 60 
1906 64 
1907 59 
1908 92 
1909 75 
1910 80 
1911 63 
1912 61 
1913 47 
1914 49 
1915 53 
1916 51 
1917 48 
1918 63 
1919 77 
1920 57 
1921 58 
Total 3,038 
For the alleged causes of these lynchings 
of Negroes we must again confine ourselves 
to the years 1889-1921, and to the 2,714 
lynchings 1 of Negroes which took place in 
those years. 
Murder 957—35.3% 
Rape 527—19.4" 
Attacks upon women 245— 9.0 " 
Other crimes against the person 276—10.2 " 
Crimes against property 214—• 7.9" 
Miscellaneous crimes 330—12.1 " 
Absence of crime 165— 6.1 " 
N . A . A . C . P. ANNUA L MEETIN G 
THE National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People held its 
annual meeting in New Yor k on January 3, 
receiving the report of work done during 
1921 at an afternoon session and reporting 
progress on the Dyer Anti-Lynchin g Bil l at 
a night mass meeting in the Palace Casino. 
A t the afternoon session, Dr. Ernest H . 
Gruening, Managing Editor of the Nation, 
who accompanied the Senate investigating 
committee to Haiti , charged the senators 
with having "whitewashed" the occupation 
of the black republic and with having spent 
insufficient time there to take the necessary 
testimony on atrocities alleged against 
marines. 
The Annua l Report of the officers of the 
Association recited the work of the 
Association for the year. These reports will be 
published in condensed form in the March 
CRISIS and later will be issued in pamphlet 
form. 
35.3/, 
MURDER 
19.4% 
RAPE 
12.1% 
MISC. 
10.2% 
PERSON 
9.0% 
ASSAULT 
7.9% 
Property 
6.1% 
No 
Crime 
CAUSES OF TH E LYNCHIN G OF 2,714 NEGROES , 1889-1921 
During 1921, 58 Negroes and 6 white persons were lynched, making a total of 64. 
Of these, 62 were men and 2 were colored 
women. Of those lynched 32 were hanged, 
17 were shot, 4 were burned, and 2 were 
drowned; in 9 cases the method of lynching 
was not reported. Of the 58 Negroes 
lynched, 21 were accused of rape and attacks upon women, 16 of murder, 10 of miscellaneous crimes, 7 of crimes against the 
person (outside of those mentioned), 1 of 
crime against property, and 3 of no crime. 
Georgia led the lynching states with 14 
cases; in Mississippi there were 13 lynchings ; Texas and Arkansas each had 6 cases; 
South Carolina, Louisiana and Florida had 
5 cases each; North Carolina 4; Alabama 
2, and 1 each in Kentucky, Missouri, Vir ­
ginia and Tennessee. 
Charles Edward Russell, orator and 
author, spoke at the night mass meeting of 
the Association, at which there was music 
by the band of the 15th Regiment N . Y . 
N . G., New York's crack colored regiment. 
Mr. Russell welcomed the advent of the 
new Negro who, he declared, was ready to 
stand up for his rights. Mr. Russell ridiculed President Harding's assertion that 
there was an "impassable gulf " between 
white and colored people in the United 
States and advocated that, before attempting to lead the world to disarmament, the 
United States disarm the lyncher within 
her own borders. 
Walte r F . White, urging continued and 
vigorous support of the Dye r Bill , asserted 
that lynching was one of the means of perpetuating peonage and the economic exploi-N. A. A. C. P. 167 
tation of the Negro in the United States. 
"Lynching protects money," said Mr. 
White, "and money is being spent throughout the United States to keep up lynching 
so that the exploitation of the Negro may 
be continued." 
Mordecai W. Johnson spoke also on lynching. 
At the meeting telegrams were read from 
Representative Dyer, Representative Martin Madden of Illinois and from James Weldon Johnson, Secretary of the Association, 
who had to be in Washington on the night 
of the meeting in order to confer with Republican leaders on the progress of the 
Dyer Bill. 
In his telegram to the N. A. A. C. P., 
Representative Madden said: "The time has 
arrived when the crime of lynching should 
be recognized by the nation as outlawed and 
all who participate in it as outlaws. I am 
heartily in favor of the anti-lynching bill 
now before Congress." 
Mary White Ovington, chairman of the 
Board of Directors of the N. A. A. C. P., 
presided at both afternoon and evening 
meetings and made a stirring plea that in 
the coming struggle for passage of the Dyer 
Bill colored Americans continue their efforts 
in its behalf unabated. Secretary Johnson's telegram reported that Republican 
leaders were confident of the Bill's passage 
but that steady support of the Bill must not 
be slackened. 
At the business meeting of the Association, the following were elected directors to 
serve until 1924: 
E. Burton Ceruti, Los Angeles, Cal.; 
George W. Crawford, New Haven, Conn.; 
Bishop John Hurst, Baltimore, Md.; Paul 
Kennaday, New York City; Joseph Prince 
Loud, Boston, Mass.; Mrs. Ella Rush Murray, Catskill, N. Y.; Dr. W. A. Sinclair, 
Philadelphia, Pa.; Charles H. Studin, New 
York City; Neval H. Thomas, Washington, 
D. C ; Rev. G. R. Waller, Springfield, 
Mass.; Butler R. Wilson, Boston, Mass. 
EARLY VOTE EXPECTED ON DYER 
BILL 
A
T the time that this is written, Congress 
has reconvened after the holiday recess and now has under consideration the 
Dyer Anti-Lynching Bill, H. R. 13. Southern Democrats are vigorously opposing the 
bill. James Weldon Johnson is in Washington in daily conference with the members 
of Congress who are fighting for the bill, 
and will remain in the capital until a vote 
is taken. 
At this time, the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People 
wishes to urge strongly and solemnly every 
colored voter and every right-minded white 
voter to watch how his Congressman votes. 
In November every member of the House 
of Representatives and 32 members of the 
Senate are to come up for re-election. If 
your Congressman votes against the Dyer 
Bill, mark him down as your betrayer in 
the hour of trial and defeat him by every 
legitimate means when he asks your suffrage next fall. In the same way, reward 
those who met the test without flinching. 
HOW LYNCHINGS HAPPEN 
ON August 13, about seven o'clock in 
the morning, Miss Jessie Parker, a 
white school teacher, was attacked while on 
her way to school in Inskip, greater Knoxville. Her assailant dragged her from the 
railway, along which she was walking, into 
a cornfield where she was beaten and left 
unconscious. When she recovered consciousness, Miss Parker found her way to 
the home of a friend to whom she related 
her story. She reported that she had been 
attacked by a Negro who carried a bundle. 
This was all she could remember then about 
her assailant. 
Citizens gathered and went to the scene 
of the attack. From the top of a passing 
freight train, Frank Martin, a colored man, 
was forced at the point of guns; but the 
posse became convinced by physical facts 
that he was not the man. He, however, 
was arrested and taken before the girl, who 
was not positive that he was the man who 
had attacked her. When he was taken before her the second time, she said that she 
believed that he was the man but that she 
did not want to harm an innocent man. 
When he was brought before her on the 
next day for the third time, she stated that 
she was positive that he was her assailant. 
Martin was then confined to the county 
jail. 
That night a mob formed near the jail 
for the purpose of lynching Martin; however, the sheriff and his deputies dispersed 
the would-be lynchers after wounding more 
than a score of them. 
Frank Martin established his alibi and 
the judge ordered him released. A LYNCHING MAP OF THE 
Drawn by 
Each dot on this map represents one of the 3,436 Iynchings which took place in the United States between 1889 and 
in the exact localities of the 
168 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
Allison 
period of 32 years. The dots are all in the states where the lynchings occurred, but naturally they could not 
within the state boundaries. 
169 THE LINK BETWEEN 
WHAT gives us hope for the final solution of this trying race problem is 
the willingness of persons in each encampment to link hands occasionally across the 
dividing line. Sometimes the impetus is 
given by common interests in art, in work, 
in religion. Sometimes it is stirred by 
sheer human kindness. Whatever the cause 
the phenomenon recurs. 
One such figure, Natalie Curtis Burlin, 
died last October in France, but not before 
she had devoted years to the work of interpreting one group to the other. 
Natalie Curtis, daughter of Dr. Edward and 
Augusta Stacey Curtis, was born in New 
York City. 
She was always a musician and 
was fortunate enough 
to have opportunity to 
cultivate 
her favorite 
i n t e rest. 
Her s was 
n o mea n 
training, — 
F r iedheim, 
Dvorak, Giraudet i n 
Paris, Wolff 
in Bonn, Busoni in 
Berlin an d Julius 
Kniese at the WagnerSchule in Bayreuth were THE LATE NATALIE CURTIS BURLIN 
her teachers. 
Primitive music attracted her most. 
Bit by bit she became immersed in musical myth and folk-lore of primitive peoples. She sensed so completely the cultural 
and interpretive possibilities of this class of 
music that she determined to turn her interest to some open manifestation. The Indians and their vanishing tales and music 
claimed her attention first and she set 
about planning a compilation in which the 
Indians themselves should record their 
native effusions. 
Her methods were practical. She succeeded in interesting President Roosevelt 
in her plan to such an extent that he included in his annual message to Congress 
a plea for the preservation of Indian Art. 
She visited the Indian Reservations in an 
attempt to learn, to compare and to 
contrast their distinctive melodies and 
rhythms. It was the task of years to 
work out a comprehensive system of musical 
notation which should adequately transcribe 
the melodies which she had recorded. 
By 1907 the work was completed. She 
had already issued separately in 1905 the songs 
sung by the Pueblo 
Indians when grinding corn . 
These were 
called 
"Songs of 
Ancient 
America" . 
Th e later 
book, being 
natural1 y 
more inclusive, was 
called "The 
Indians' 
Book" and 
contained a 
collection of 
the songs 
and legends 
of the various tribes. 
It was an instant success both for its accuracy of transcription and 
notation, and for the knowledge which it 
gave of primitive man. 
Her success in this field induced friends 
of Hampton Institute to request her to 
record Negro Folk Music of the South. 
This she readily undertook to do and so in 
1919 produced "Songs and Tales from the 
Dark Continent". This book is really of 
surpassing value since she was helped in its 
compilation by Kamba Simango, a Portuguese East African, and Madikane Cele, 
from Zululand. In this work Miss Curtis 
did her best to prove to the world that Af170 THE HORIZON 171 
rican and American Negroes are something 
more than a mere "labor supply". 
The fame of this compilation wa s even 
more instant and more widely spread than 
that brought by her former volume. 
Isn't it a splendid thing that she lived 
and that she did come to know us? Think 
of the entirely new impression of colored 
people which she was able to get and to 
disseminate. And think of the much more 
valuable effect she was able to produce on 
colored people by showing them that here 
was some one willing and eager to learn to 
know them, and to exhibit them at their 
best. 
Although her husband, Paul Burlin, and 
her family must grieve for her sorely, yet 
they may take comfort with us in the 
thought that her comparatively short life 
has left on both races its ineffaceable imprint. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MRS. BURLIN'S 
WORKS 
"Dearest Where Thy Shadow Falls", G. 
Schirmer, New York, 1898. 
"Songs from a Child's Garden of Verses", 
G. Schirmer, New York, 1902. 
"Songs of Ancient America", G. Schirmer, 
New York, 1905. 
"The Indians' Book", Harper Brothers, 
New York, 1907. 
"Hymn of Freedom", G. Schirmer, New 
York, 1918. 
"Negro Folk Songs", G. Schirmer, New 
York, 1919. 
"Mary's Baby", Huntzinger & Dilworth, 
New York, 1919. 
"Dar's a Star in de East", Huntzinger & 
Dilworth, New York, 1919. 
"Songs and Tales from the Dark Continent", G. Schirmer, New York, 1920. 
"Victory Song of the Pawnees", G. Schirmer, New York, 1920. 
"A Cow-boy Song", G. Schirmer, New 
York, 1920. 
The horizon 
COMPILE D B Y MADELIN E G. ALLISO N 
THE Railway Men's International Association will hold a three days' convention 
beginning February 12, in Birmingham, Ala. 
The American Negro Academy has held 
its 25th annual meeting in Washington, 
D. C. The speakers included Prof. Leo 
Wiener of Harvard University, on "The 
Problems of African Civilization"; Duse 
Mahomed of London, on "The Necessity of 
a Chair in Negro History in Our Colleges"; 
L. M. Hershaw, on "The Growth of Negro 
Population in the United States"; Alain 
Le Roy Locke, on "The Problem of Race and 
Culture"; and Arthur A. Schomburg, president of the organization, on "The Negro 
Soldier in the Civilization of America." 
The Louisiana Federation of Colored 
Women's Clubs held its third annual convention in Monroe. Reports told of playgrounds being established in Lake Charles, 
a Y. W. C. A. in Baton Rouge, and the securing of lights and night police protection 
for the colored section of Oakdale. 
The State Board of Education has taken 
control of Cheyney Training School for 
Teachers, at Cheyney, Pa. The school has 
been a private institution under the direction of the Society of Friends. Professor 
Leslie Pinckney Hill is the principal and the 
institution has an enrollment of 106 students. The State obtained the property for 
$75,000; it is estimated to be worth $300,-
000. 
A teacher of four classes in Freshman 
English at the Parker High School, Dayton, 
Ohio, writes us: "In two of them, the only 
classes in which there were colored children, 
the best work during the past month was 
done by colored children. The highest average for the month was secured by Emma 
Buckner and Gwendolen Overly, both colored—and admirable girls in every particular." 
Fisk University at Nashville, Tenn., has 
been admitted as a beneficiary of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of 
Teaching. 
An appropriation of $100,000 has been 172 THE CRISIS 
Y. W. C. A. TRAINING COURSE AT HAMPTON 
granted by the legislature of North Carolina for a tuberculosis sanitarium for Negroes. The institution will be manned by 
Negro physicians and nurses. 
A Negro church in Philadelphia,—East 
Calvary, has the largest Methodist congregation in America; its communicants number 3,420. St. Mark's, in New York City, 
has 1,946 members. The strongest white 
congregation,—North Woodward in Detroit, 
has a membership of 3,117. 
M. Albert M. Pourriere, a French West 
African merchant, has been promoted from 
a Chevalier to an Officier de la Legion 
d'Honneur. In recognition of his work, 
pieces of handsome silver-plate were presented to him at the Liverpool offices of the 
Compagnie Francaise de l'Afrique Occidental. 
According to Mr. Milne Stewart, Comptroller of Customs in Nigeria, the total volume of trade for the year amounted to £42,-
515,000, being an increase over the 1919 
figures of no less than £15,498,000. There 
was an increase of £13,200,000 in the import trade and of £2,260,000 in the export 
trade, as compared with 1919. Duties on 
imports amounted to £2,279,000; on exports, 
£838,000. 
The National Board of the Y. W. C. A. 
recently conducted a three weeks' training 
course at Hampton Institute. Eighteen 
THE SECOND PAN-AFRICAN CONGRESS IN BRUSSELS THE HORIZON 173 
women, representing 15 states, attended. 
Most of these women have already had experience as girls' work, departmental and 
branch secretaries in city organizations. 
They went to Hampton for special training 
in the technique of the organization, in 
order to render more efficient service. The 
instructors were leaders from the National 
Board. 
During the second Pan-African Congress, 
a group of members was photographed in 
the garden of the Palais Mondial in the 
Park Cinquantenaire, Brussels, Belgium. In 
the group are Senator and Mrs. La Fontaine; Professor and Mrs. Paul Otlet; 
Blaise Diagne, president of the Congress; 
W. E. B. Du Bois, secretary; Paul Panda, 
assistant secretary; groups from America, 
France, the Congo, and other delegates. 
The 15th New York National Guard 
which made such a brilliant record in the 
World War as the 369th Regiment has been 
reorganized. Arthur Little, one of the 
white officers who was with the regiment in 
France, is the colonel and the officers are 
both white and colored. One of the colored majors, Major W. Hubert Jackson, 
served in the Spanish-American war. Recently the State and city of New York appropriated $500,000 for a new armory. The 
ceremony of breaking the ground for the 
armory, which is situated at 142d Street 
and Fifth Avenue, New York City, was 
attended by a parade and speeches. Our 
illustration shows the reviewing stand with 
Mayor Hylan, Colonel Little, Comptroller 
Craig and W. E. B. DuBois, who acted as 
chairman. 
Roland Hayes, the Negro tenor, recently 
sang in Philharmonic Hall, Liverpool; at 
the concert of the Madrigal Society in Halifax; and in Mayfair houses where he received very warm congratulations. West 
Africa reports: "On 5 consecutive nights— 
March 27, 28, 29, 30 and 31—he is to sing 
before a society whose subscribing members 
number 12,000. As the hall has only a 
seating capacity for 2,000, there is already 
some speculation locally as to who will be 
unable to secure admission to hear the gifted 
singer." Mr. Hayes has an outstanding 
engagement in the spring in Scotland. 
THE MAYOR OF NEW YORK AND PARTY REVIEWING THE 15TH N. Y. N. G. 174 TH E CRISIS 
HOME OFFICE N. C. MUTUAL INSURANCE CO. 
Ten state organizations have been allied 
with the National Colored Women's Legislative Bureau of Washington, D. C. The purpose of this Bureau is to keep colored women 
in touch with all the legislative bodies, and 
to send out from time to time statements as 
to the action that is necessary for them to 
take along the line of national legislation 
and in the interest of their race. Mrs. 
Mazie Mossell Griffin is national director. 
The opera "Martha" has been successfully 
rendered by a Negro cast in Chicago. Mr. 
James Mundy was general director, and 
Cleo Dickerson musical director. Leading 
roles were sung by Nellie Dobson and Lillian Hawkins Jones. 
The 43d annual fair of North Carolina 
was held in Raleigh under the presidency 
of Berry O'Kelly. The exhibits were large 
and varied and the fair was visited by the 
Governor and numbers of visitors. 
The new home office of the North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, in 
Durham, was erected at a cost of $250,000. 
The company has $33,444,396 worth of insurance in force; its bank has assets of $1,-
115,312; the company employs 1,444 persons 
and operates in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Maryland, Mississippi, North 
Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia and the District of Columbia. The officers and directors are: A. M. 
Moore, president; J. M. Avery, vice-president; C. C. Spaulding, secretary-treasurer; 
C. H. Donnell, medical director; W. J. Kennedy, director. 
The first Negro agent to do extension 
work among Negro farmers was appointed 
in 1905. In 1908, 7 agents were being employed at a cost of $4,184; last year the 
force had increased to 224 agents employed 
at a cost of $302,798. Of these, 157 are 
men and 67 are women. As a result of extension work, Negro farmers in 1920 introduced pure bred live stock as follows: 377 
horses, 1,688 dairy cattle, 149 beef cattle, 
2,848 hogs, and 700 sheep. There were 
68,199 cattle dipped, and 134,799 head of 
live stock were treated for diseases and 
INTERIOR OF ONE OF THE N. C. MUTUAL OFFICES TH E HORIZO N 175 
pests. A total of 329 farmers' clubs were 
organized with a membership of 16,960. 
At the George Peabody College for 
Teachers in Nashville, Tenn., a white institution, R. H. Levell has been appointed 
Professor of Race Relations. Mr. Levell, although a white Texan, is liberal-minded 
and proposes to offer courses which will 
make the teachers trained at that great institution "aware of the Negro population 
as a part of the community". 
The British Colonial Office is beginning 
to take some notice of the needs and demands of the crown colonies especially in 
the West Indies where the overwhelming 
majority of the population is of Negro descent. A deputation is being sent to Grenada 
and other islands to inquire into their recent demands for representative government, and a West Indian agricultural college is to be established probably in TriniThe Prix Goncourt is a highly coveted 
French prize. It carries five thousand 
francs in cash, assures a large sale for the 
book that received the prize and means a 
continued market for the future productions 
of the author. This prize for 1921 has been 
awarded to Rene Maran. Maran is a fullblooded Negro, born in Martinique. He is 
in the French Colonial Service and is now 
at his post near Lake Tchad in Central 
Africa. It was there that he gathered the 
material for his novel "Batouala," which 
won the prize. Batouala is an African chief 
to whose land the white man has brought 
"their magic, their invention, their evil 
ways." In the preface of his book Maran 
makes a strong defense of the Negro and 
charges the white colonists with much of 
the evil that occurs. On the other hand, 
in the book he has given a real picture, 
with the good and the bad of the native life. 
Howard University conferred the degree of Doctor of Laws upon Ferdinand 
— Underwood & Underwood 
RENE MARAN 
HOWARD UNIVERSITY CONFERRING A DEGREE ON MARSHAL FOCH 176 TH E CRISIS 
CARTER, JOHNSTON AND GOURDIN 
Foch, Marshal of France. There is a 
rumor that strenuous effort was made 
by army officials and others in Washington to keep Marshal Foch from visiting 
the University, but he came and a demonstration in his honor was held. The choir 
sang the Hallelujah Chorus. President 
Durkee greeted the Marshal and the Marshal responded. The degree was conferred 
by Justice Peelle, President of the Board 
of Trustees. 
At the track meet of the Y. M. C. A. held 
at the 13th Regiment Armory in Brooklyn, 
N. Y., Joseph Carter, Ned Gourdin and 
Earl Johnston outclassed their white rivals. 
Gourdin finished the 100-yard dash in 10 1/5 
seconds; Carter won the 70-yard dash in 
7 3/5 seconds; in the two-mile handicap 
Johnston won, his time being: 9 minutes 
36 4/5 seconds. Joseph Carter is from Boston University; Earl Johnston, of Pittsburgh, is national ten-mile champion; Ned 
Gourdin, of Harvard University, is the 
holder of the world's running broad jump 
record. 
Freedmen's Hospital cared for 3,318 patients during last year. Of these, 1,833 recovered from their ailments, 1,394 improved, 
215 were unimproved, 12 were not treated 
and 210 died. There were 854 pay-patients 
whose fees amounted to $24,219. Total receipts for the year, including Congressional 
appropriations, were $173,739; disbursements, $173,246. The report says that limited funds prevented proper development of 
the professional side of the work, but "in a 
general way the results of the activities at 
the hospital show improvement over the 
preceding year." There are 449 nurses 
holding certificates from Freedmen's. 
Sometime ago wide publicity was given 
to the suit brought against Dr. R. B. McRary, a colored physician of Lexington, N. 
C, by a white man who accused the doctor 
of alienating the affections of the white 
man's wife. Dr. McRary was prominent in 
the city and in the M. E. Church and was 
reputed to be well to do. After long delay, 
the case has been settled and Dr. McRary's 
attorney writes that all charges against him 
have been withdrawn by the accuser and 
settlement made on the basis of Dr. McRary's innocence. 
TWENTIETH NATIONA L CONFERENCE TH E HORIZO N 177 
In Cincinnati the 20th national conference of the colored men's department of the 
Y. M. C. A. was held in the beautiful local 
building. Among the speakers were Dr. 
Mott, President John Hope, Bishop R. E. 
Jones, Dr. R. R. Moton, President J. S. 
Durkee, and others. The conference was 
under the general direction of Mr. J. E. 
Moorland. 
Half a century ago Dr. Barth wrote that 
the province of Katsena in the Sudan, 
Africa, was one of the finest parts of Negroland. It was situated just at the water 
shed of the Tchad and the Niger, at a general elevation of twelve to fifteen hundred 
feet. It was well watered and well drained 
and its productions were rich and varied. 
Katsena became one of the leading countries of Negroland during the 17th and 
18th centuries. In the latter part of the 
18th century it was at the height of its 
prosperity. It was important not only in 
commerce and politics, but also in learning 
and literature. After the Moorish conquests and the conquests by the Fula, the 
importance of Katsena declined; but nevertheless it is today an important country. 
It has a population of 400,000 people and 
an annual revenue from direct taxation of 
$400,000. Recently Mohama Giko, the present Emir, visited England. He was received by the King, visited the theatres and 
the stores, was interested in the school of 
tropical medicine, the museums, the banks, 
etc. He remained in England from June 17 
to July 16, when he departed for his country. 
A recent meeting of the New York 
Cameraderie, affiliated with the League for 
Industrial Democracy, held at the Civic 
Club of New York, was devoted to a presentation of "Negro Spirituals and Some Modern Negro Music". The demonstrating 
artists were Charlotte Wallace Murray, Soprano; Garfield Warren Tarrant, Baritone; 
and Hall Johnson, Violinist. In addition to 
examples of the old Spirituals, the program 
included works of Coleridge-Taylor, Dett, 
Burleigh, Johnson and Cook. Augustus 
Granville Dill was the speaker and also the 
accompanist. 
Miss Maria Baldwin, the most distinTHE EMIR OF KATSENA 
OF COLORED Y. M. C. ASSOCIATIONS 
20th Nat'l Confcrance 
Y.M.C.A Colored Dept. 
Dec. 1921 178 TH E CRISIS 
The Late Dr. Jackson L. M. Peace G. C. Wilkinson G. E. Davis 
guished public school teacher of the Negro 
race, died suddenly in Boston while lecturing before the Robert Gould Shaw Society 
at Copley Plaza Hotel. 
Garnet C. Wilkinson, formerly principal 
of Dunbar High School, Washington, has 
been made Assistant Superintendent of 
Schools in succession to R. C. Bruce. Mr. 
Wilkinson was born in South Carolina in 
1879, was educated at Oberlin and has been 
teaching in the Washington schools since 
1902. 
Among graduates from Wilberforce University who have distinguished themselves 
is the late Dr. Thomas Henry Jackson. Dr. 
Jackson entered Wilberforce at the age of 
14, graduating with the first class, in 1870. 
In 1865, he was converted and entered the 
active ministry of the A. M. E. Church, 
thus serving 56 years. He pastored 
churches in Ohio, Arkansas and South Carolina and was a delegate to every General 
Conference since 1872 and to the Ecumenical Conference in London in 1901. As an 
educator he served as a Professor at Wilberforce University; President and Dean 
at Shorter College, Little Rock, Ark., and 
Professor at Payne Seminary, Wilberforce. 
He was also treasurer of Wilberforce University for the last 5 years. He was born 
in Philadelphia, Pa., March 13, 1844 and 
died in Wilberforce, Ohio, November 24, 
1921. 
There have been few cases where American Negroes have been appointed to a chair 
in the larger universities. This is chiefly 
because prejudice of race prevents them 
from securing fellowships and instructorships. In a few cases, however, there have 
been such appointments. One is the case 
of Mr. L. M. Peace, who is one of the oldest 
teachers in the University of Kansas, at 
Lawrence. Mr. Peace is instructor in the 
Department of Biology. He is a graduate 
of the University, a successful teacher, and 
well-liked. 
Professor George Edward Davis was born 
at Wilmington, N. C, March 24, 1862. In 
1883 he was graduated from Biddle University with first honor; then he studied 
medicine for 2 years at Howard University. 
He was the first colored teacher appointed 
to Biddle, where he has served 34 years and 
held the chairs of Latin, Science and Sociology; for 30 years he was secretary of the 
Faculty and for 15 years, Dean. He resigned the Deanship on October 15, 1920, 
to become Rosenwald Building Agent and 
Director of Negro Interest in the Public 
Schools of North Carolina. On September 
16, 1889, Mr. Davis married Miss Mary E. 
Gaston, a public school teacher of Savannah, Ga. They are the parents of 5 living 
children, 2 of whom are teachers. 
Through Congressman George S. Graham 
of Philadelphia, the Congressional Record 
contains the full text of a report on "a private investigation of discriminations between colored and white employees in the 
Panama Canal Zone", by the Rev. Dr. Matthew Anderson of Philadelphia. 
The editors of TH E CRISIS were so engrossed with the changes in the arrangement 
of the January issue that they failed to give 
the name of the artist who designed the 
cover. We take great pleasure in announcing it as the work of Miss Hilda Rue Wilkinson. The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
THOMAS CURTIS CLARK in Unity: 
In every meanest face I see 
A perfected humanity; 
All men, though brothers of the clod, 
Bear promise of the sons of God. 
No human ore that does not hold 
A precious element of gold; 
No heart so blackened and debased 
But has for Him some treasure chaste. 
* * * 
One of the important literary phenomena 
of the year is the publication of the Revue 
des Coloniaux (Colonial Review) which is 
owned by its editor Isaac Beton. M. Beton 
is a native of Guadeloupe, a man of wide 
classical and literary training and a teacher 
in one of the lycees (institutions of high 
school rank) of Paris. 
The magazine contains articles relative 
to the lives and problems of France's 
colonials. It also attempts to give an international review of events to colored people 
all over the world. Thus the volume at 
hand contains not only accounts of the 
sugar industry of Madagascar and of the 
second Pan-African Congress, but of the 
Olympic contests and pictures of black athletes from all over the world including our 
own Gourdin and Butler. 
TH E CRISIS hopes that the Revue des 
Coloniaux will gain the following which it 
so richly deserves. 
THE DYER BILL 
THE Dyer Anti-Lynching Bill is a drastic measure but proposes to punish a 
drastic crime, by employing, after all other 
methods have failed, the only ones which 
promise relief. The New York Evening 
Post says: 
To punish a local official who fails to do 
everything within his power to prevent a 
lynching; to punish anybody who participates in a lynching mob, and to make any 
county in which any person is lynched 
liable to the victim's family in the sum of 
$10,000—these are the "teeth" in the AntiLynching Bill now before Congress. The 
Federal Government bases its right to act 
upon the Fourteenth Amendment, which 
provides that no State shall deny to any 
person the equal protection of the laws. A 
State which does not protect its residents 
against a mob is deemed to have denied 
them the equal protection of the laws. The 
section of the bill holding a county liable 
for damages embodies a principle which 
has already been recognized by statute in 
the South. Gov. Dorsey has recommended 
its extension to Georgia. The Federal Government cannot be charged with hasty 
action in this matter. Sentiment the country over favors more effective measures 
against lynching. The bill should be given 
a trial. 
* * * 
The passage of this bill will establish a 
precedent for the federal centralization of 
the powers and rights of the various States 
thinks the New York World in a bitter editorial entitled "Lynching the Constitution": 
If Congress can validly make this kind 
of offending a Federal crime, there is no 
felony or misdemeanor known to the laws 
of any State which cannot be made a Federal crime and imposed upon the Federal 
authority for detection, prosecution and 
punishment. . . . 
The Dyer bill is a mischievous and essentially a lawless measure and every effort 
should be made to prevent its enactment. 
* * * 
The Springfield, Mass., Republican has a 
ready answer for those who feel that this 
bill means the federal usurpation of state 
rights: 
The need of such a law as this has been 
glaringly apparent for a long time. Under an easy-going theory of state responsibility for the policing of its own domains 
both the rights guaranteed to citizens by 
the federal constitution for the equal protection of the laws and the treaty obligations toward alien residents have too long 
been neglected. State responsibility will 
remain if the law is passed, but the right 
of the state to neglect its responsibility 
will have been effectivelv denied. 
* » * 
A striking feature in the controversy is 
that advocacy for and against the bill 
seems to be based on sectional lines, the 
South of course showing passionate disfavor. The New York Globe points out the 
evil attendant on such a stand, for the Dyer 
Bill no matter how severe is certainly an 
attempt to enforce law and order: 
If the white South could bring itself to 
stand as a unit for the enforcement instead 
of the breaking of the law it would gain 
179 180 TH E CRISIS 
the respect of the world and the co-operation of law-abiding southern Negroes. Its 
present attitude naturally wins it the distrust of the world and the bitterness of its 
colored population. If the Negro is a danger in the South, lynching will not make 
him less dangerous. If he is in need of improvement it will not improve him. Barbarity begets barbarity, not civilization. 
This is what Mr. Garrett and the South 
must learn. 
* * * 
The New York Tribune considers such a 
stand only natural in the circumstances: 
Even apart from the international aspect lynching is a disgrace too long endured. 
It is the negation of law and civilized methods of justice. It influences savage passions. It lowers the morale of a community. 
Since state authority has failed to suppress 
this evil, and Federal intervention is perfectly legitimate, it is only common sense 
for Congress to take a hand in making 
lynching more hazardous and expensive for 
those who countenance it or take part in it. 
* * * 
How can anybody prate of the machinery 
of law when a scene is enacted in Paris, 
Tex., which makes the Rev. L. C. Kirkes of 
that town declare: 
I cannot agree with those who say the 
burning was justifiable, but the dragging 
of the dead bodies over the streets made it 
an act of inhuman cruelty. That does not 
appeal to me. 
After liquid fire has been applied to the 
quivering flesh of living men, it is a matter 
of nothing in comparison when their lifeless bodies are subjected to ghoulish inhumanities. 
» * * 
Yet in spite of these horrors the special 
grand jury appointed to investigate the 
condition of that lynching reports: 
We have been in session fourteen days 
and examined 112 witnesses. We have done 
our best in trying to locate the guilty parties and have worked hard and faithfully. 
After doing all that we could to locate 
the guilty parties we are unable to find out 
whether the parties committing the crime 
lived in this county or came from some 
other locality except the ones we returned 
the bills against. 
We herewith hand you five bills of indictment for felonies and ask to be discharged. 
* * • 
If the Dyer Bill passes, the members of 
that Grand Jury will find their wits considerably sharper. 
A NEW POLITICS FOR OLD 
CORRESPONDENT of a Houston, 
Tex., paper writes: 
A Negro candidate for governor of Virginia polled 20,000 votes in the recent election. 
There it is, gentlemen. 
It is coming. 
President Harding's pitiful blunder is 
going to precipitate more trouble, more 
bloodshed and discord in the South than 
any utterance that ever came from any 
President save when Lincoln ordered the 
advance of northern troops. 
Negroes buoyed by the President's words 
will seek to secure office, and in places 
where there is a preponderance of Negro 
voters will attempt to take charge of 
county and municipal affairs, and you know 
where that will lead to, don't you? 
I am just asking you. 
We may expect a string of saddle-colored aspirants for office all over the South. 
We may have one or two limelight-seeking 
Negroes in Houston, but we will have no 
Negro officers, not as long as the Ku Klux 
lives and breathes. 
Boys, we may as well understand this 
thing right now. This country is rapidly 
shaping itself into a condition where it 
cannot do without the Ku Klux Klan. 
* * * 
The Brooklyn Eagle thus characterizes 
the political tactics of the now famous Congressman Slemp from Virginia: 
Mr. Slemp conceived the idea that if the 
G. O. P. would simply ignore the Negroes, 
ostracize them, rob them of their weight 
in Republican conventions, it could win the 
Commonwealth with white votes, "Lily 
White" votes, alone. The plan was widely 
advertised. Gossip is that it was more than 
half indorsed by President Harding and by 
Will H. Hays as Republican national chairman. It was not openly indorsed. At any 
rate it won a test. 
The blacks were indignant. They formed 
a "Lily Black" party and nominated a candidate. But the Democrats were somewhat 
divided and with an imperfect organization, and Slemp had hopes. His friends 
were claiming the State by 25,000 the day 
before election. The returns show a Democratic victory by 60,000. Only about 20,000 
votes were polled by the "Lily Blacks." 
The assumption is that a much larger number voted the Democratic ticket. 
This may be fairly called the fading 
away of the "Lily Whites" in southern politics. It is a warning to a Republican Administration that there is no hope in deserting their Negro allies. 
* * * 
The colored St. Luke's Herald of Richmond, Va., hopes that the triumph of the 
Democrats will effect a reconciliation between white and black Republicans: 
The "Lily Whites" who compassed the 
heavens and the earth in their cock-sure 
campaign "On the Race Question", who 
maintained a whole floor of clerks at the 
Jefferson Hotel, who threw away thousands 
of dollars trying to capture the Governorship, are now sensible of the futility of their 
ill-advised procedure by whitewashing their TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 181 
party at Norfolk. They have earned the 
full force of the joint-rebuke which the 
Democrats and colored Republicans administered. Instead of gaining in-roads on the 
electorate, the "Lily Whites" lost eight delegates in the Virginia House. Instead of 
twelve delegates which were in the House 
before "The Colonel" ousted the Negroes, 
the Republican party now has only four 
delegates in the 1922 House. This sure 
decline and convincing failure should bring 
about a reconciliation of the two Republican wings of the party in the State. 
* * * 
James Stemons writes in the Philadelphia, Pa., Public Ledger of the unfairness 
of political parties toward their colored 
constituents. There is a very large group 
of Negro voters in Philadelphia. Yet they 
are rarely recognized and this of course 
leads to their voting along racial lines. Mr. 
Stemons asserts: 
Not more than twice in twenty years 
have the independents sought the confidence 
and co-operation of Negroes by nominating 
one for the most insignificant office. George 
Edward Dickerson, for example, is a colored lawyer of high standing. For more 
than fifteen years Mr. Dickerson has stood 
squarely behind every independent movement that this city has had. Yet he informs me that he has been virtually read 
out of the movement by its present leaders, 
simply because of his modest request for 
some recognition of his race. 
It is such short-sightedness that forces 
the Negro to vote on purely racial lines. 
Personally, I believe it would have been far 
better for the race had some Negro of 
education and recognized ability, preferably 
a man versed in the law, been nominated 
and elected as a magistrate instead of Mr. 
Scott. 
Mr. Scott was nominated and elected by 
the political faction to which he adhered. 
Colored people knew that with them it 
was a choice between Scott and no one. 
They are becoming sick and tired of having 
no representation in a government of which 
they form so large an integral part. They 
knew that a movement was under way to 
rob them of this petty recognition by mercilessly cutting Scott (chiefly because of his 
race), and they, to my mind, most wisely 
decided to do a little cutting on their own 
account, thereby teaching politicians of this 
city a lesson in political strategy that they 
will not soon forget. 
IN THE LAND OF THE FREE 
THIS is what can happen to colored 
people in America. Vardaman's Weekly 
reports: 
An affair happening in Jackson, or 
rather close to Jackson, Sunday, that has 
attracted some little attention, is the alleged 
taking of Drummond Leonard, a Yazoo City 
Negro, from the Y. and M. V. train by 
white men and the administering to him of 
a rather sound thrashing. 
According to the story, Leonard, a wellto-do Yazoo City barber, desired to send 
his two daughters to school at Atlanta. For 
the purpose he wanted sleeping car accommodations and attempted to reserve them 
in Yazoo City where the agent informed 
him he would, if a sleeper was desired, do 
well to engage a drawing room in order 
that the children would not come into contact with other passengers. 
According to the story, Leonard came to 
Jackson Sunday afternoon and asked for 
his sleeper tickets, which the agent refused 
to sell him. He is said to have then become 
indignant and to have cited the law to the 
effect the agent could not refuse to sell him. 
He later is said to have obtained a drawing 
room and placed his daughters on the A. 
& V. train. 
Leonard took the Y. & M. V. train to 
Yazoo City and when the train reached 
Annie, a short distance from Jackson, he 
is said to have been taken off by some white 
men of this city, carried into the woods 
and thrashed; after the whipping, he was 
told to run and is said made good time 
obeying orders. 
A conversation with a gentleman at 
Yazoo City revealed that Leonard returned 
to his home yesterday morning, that his 
shop had been closed all day and the impression prevailed he had left the city for 
good. . . . 
White supremacy is going to prevail in 
Mississippi. 
* * * 
The New Orleans Times-Picayune gives 
an account of southern courtesy at Meridian, Miss: 
Dr. Robinson had driven his car up to a 
local ice plant, and asked the Negro, Edwards, an employee, who waited on customers, to bring him out a piece of ice. The 
Negro complied but the ice he brought 
was white with ammonia, and the physician 
told him to carry it back and bring a better 
piece. Edwards is alleged to have insultingly replied: 
"You are mighty hard to please." 
Dr. Robinson stepped quickly from his 
car and slapped the Negro, saying that he 
would go and select the kind of ice he 
wanted. He walked towards the salesroom 
and the Negro, who had gone off a short 
distance, opened fire. After emptying his 
pistol, Edwards fled and every effort to 
locate him had failed at a late hour tonight. 
But the hunt had in no way abated and it 
is feared that a lynching is likely should 
the Negro be captured. 
Hopes are held out for the recovery of 
Dr. Robinson, the bullet, according to physicians, having glanced downward passing 
into the fleshy part of the neck to the rear, 
but it as yet has not been located. 182 TH E CRISIS 
A colored student at the 1921 summerschool of the University of Pennsylvania 
writes us: 
From the time school opened up to Thursday, July 21, things went as well as could 
be expected, in a group of this kind. On 
the morning of the above date, Mr. Cromie, 
director of our department, gave out notices 
in class that a Class Picture would be taken 
in the gymnasium on the following Friday. 
Following that, he read out the names of 
the colored students and notified those not 
present to meet him in the office at ten 
o'clock. We reported at said time. 
He opened his remarks by saying that he 
supposed that we knew that social conditions were quite different in the South from 
what they were here and that colored and 
white people did not mix, etc. He concluded by saying that there were southern 
students in the school and also southern 
teachers, who were told when they accepted 
their positions that there would be colored 
students who must be treated the same as 
other students. He felt, however, that there 
were some things that were expedient and 
right to do, namely, asking us not to report 
when the class was called for the picture 
and not to attend the Friday dances. 
Personally, he didn't object, but there 
were southern women in the class who objected to being photographed with us, and 
as it was purely a social affair, he felt 
that their wishes should be respected. 
He stated further that this is a white 
man's school and the picture will be used 
for advertising purposes, "and we don't 
want an influx of Negroes, although we can 
handle a certain number." 
After he told us how much he thought of 
colored folk, etc., he stated that no difference had been shown in classes, although 
there had been much contention about our 
going into the swimming pool, and that no 
darky had ever been mistreated in his 
classes or something similar. 
BITS FROM EVERYWHERE 
HENRY JOHNS GIBBONS writes in 
the Philadelphia, Pa., Public Ledger: 
Ledger: 
A headline in this morning's issue of the 
Public Ledger reads, "Bandits Ate Marine 
in Haiti, Witness Says," by which I am 
reminded of a bon mot by James Weldon 
Johnson, the brilliant Negro poet. He got 
this off in a discussion of Caribbean Sea 
affairs in New York recently, which I attended. It was to this effect: "I don't know 
personally about rumored cannibalism in 
Haiti and San Domingo, but you can take 
your choice between eating your human 
flesh without cooking it in that benighted 
island and cooking your human flesh without eating it in possibly no less benighted 
Mississippi." 
The Bishop of Peterborough said recently 
in an address at Leicester, England: 
"We ought to attempt more than we have 
done to make people realize the danger 
to the future of a colossal world conflict 
between the white and colored races. 
"The world is drifting rapidly to dissension in the matter of color division." 
* * * 
Peggy Shippen, a staff writer of the 
Philadelphia Public Ledger, recites two interesting happenings based on color: 
When at school in Paris about that time 
[1862], I remember two mulatto girls appearing one day who were assigned desks 
next to mine in the classroom. My mother 
being a Southerner and the owner of a 
plantation in Louisiana, I had been brought 
up with unreasonably strong race prejudice, and being only a little girl, I stubbornly declined to sit next to the girls. In 
my country, I stoutly declared, such a thing 
would have been unheard of. It was explained to me that these colored girls were 
the daughters of the president of Haiti, President Geffrard—if I remember right. The 
fact did not interest me. I stuck it out. So 
did the authorities; and I was put in Coventry. But in the end I won, as they moved 
eventually. Of course, I was wrong and I 
deserved all I got. But it was an ordeal 
and I had to bring to bear upon the question the influence of my guardian in Paris. 
Apropos of the lack of race feeling among 
the French, one of my elders told me that 
she was paying an afternoon visit to a 
friend on her way at home, where among 
others present, was a quiet, good-looking 
woman of the brunette type. The conversation turned on Alexandre Dumas the 
elder, and one of the guests asked if it were 
true that he was a Negro. After some discussion as to the amount of negroid blood 
in the famous novelist's veins, the quietlooking woman settled the point for the company, adding: "I think you may credit my 
statement, as I am Alexandre Dumas' daughter!" Tableau! Embarrassed silence! ! ! 
* * * 
M. Georges Scelle, professor of international law of the Faculty of Dijon, writes 
in l'information (Paris) of M. Louis, 
Dantes Bellegarde, Haitian Minister to 
France: 
We knew that French culture was still 
preserved in the largest island of the 
Antilles, but we would have had difficulty 
in imagining that the black republic could 
send us a man of this worth and ability. 
As soon as he began to speak on the question of the organization of intellectual work, 
the Haitian minister made an impression. 
His discourse on the mandates was a masterpiece of logical construction, of solid 
thought, of measured eloquence. 
When he spoke of the Pan-African Congress, when he demanded for a colored man 
a position on the Commission of Colonial 
Mandates, M. Bellegarde not only convinced 
but aroused the entire Assembly. THE CRISIS 
JOSEPH K. BRICK AGRICULTURAL 
INDUSTRIAL and NORMAL SCHOOL 
BRICKS, N. C. 
This School offers a first-class High School 
Course, including Domestic Science, Domestic 
Art, Agriculture, Work in Wood, Iron and 
Mechanical Drawing, Piano and Vocal Music, 
Night School. 
Teachers and officers, 25; enrollment, 350; 
boarders, 220. Cottage and buildings, S4. 
School farm, l,129'/2 acres. Strong athletic, 
literary and Christian associations. School term 
84 weeks. Environment fine. School receives 
four mails a day. Our postoffice handles money 
orders, registered matter and parcel post mail. 
For further information write 
T. S. INBORDEN, Principal, BRICKS, N. C. 
MANASSAS INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
MANASSAS , VIRGINI A 
Beautiful location, 191 acres, fourteen buildingi. Direct 
railroad connections. 
The only school of Ha kind In historic Northern Virginia. 
State standard Pour-Tear High School Course. 
Advanced Grade School. Business and Trade Courses. 
High moral standards. Prepare boys and flrlj to become 
useful men and women; terms reasonable. 
For Information address 
EDWAR D D. HOWE . PRINCIPA L 
The State Agricultural and 
Mechanica l Colleg e 
ORANGEBURG, S. C. 
desires the names and addresses of 
its graduates for the 
Twenty-fifth Anniversary 
Celebration 
Kindly communicate with 
President R. S. WILKINSON. 
ADVERTISER 183 
KINDERGARTE N DEPARTMEN T 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY 
In full operation since 191 2 
Professional course of two years 
Address 
Kindergarten Department 
Atlant a Universit y Atlanta , Ga . 
The Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Will Help You Get a Better Paying Position. 
KEGIITEX NOW REASONABLE TERMS 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 28, Wilberforce, 0. 
A MONEY GETTER because it - « A CROWD GETTER 
Churches and Cl'Iba lookiug for a play that wlu afford an 
- VIIIN K of Slde-Spllttlnfl Fun . should bare 
Th e Slabtow n Conventio n 
A » entertainment la one act; full af wit 
•nd good humor. Scores of churches have cleared from 
Ona to Tw o Hundred Dollars In One Night. PRICE . 50«. 
MIS S NANNI E H. BURROUGHS . Author 
Lincoln Helghti Washington. P. 0. 
IMPROV E YOURSEL F 
HELP OTHERS I 
Easy, pleasant* dignified 
work. $2 per hour. Unusual 
opportunity. Send 50c in 
stamps for membership, supplies, etc. 
National Literary Association 
1230 To o Si N. W., Wash., D. C 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COLORED 
GRADUATE NURSES 
and 
BUREAU OF INFORMATION 
For Colored Graduate Nurses 
Central Headquarters 
317 West 138th St., 
New York, N. Y . 
Telephone Andubon 5602 
Water's Mechanical Evening School 
Courses of instruction 
Automobile Construction 
Automobile Driving 
Mechanical Drawing 
Mechanical Mathematics 
JOH N F. WATERS , Principal 
739 Bainbridge St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
THE STENOGRAPHERS' INSTITUTE 
Let us qualify you to be an expert stenographer, 
bookkeeper and speed typist. It is easy to write 
from 100 to 150 words per minute in shorthand 
and 40 to 90 words per minute on the typewriter. 
Tuition within the reach of all. Edward T. 
Duncan, Principal, 1227 S. 17th St., Pkiladelphia, Penn. 
St. Philip's 
Normal & Industrial School 
San Antonio, Texas. 
(FOR GIRLS) 
Normal, Academic, Junior and Music Courses, 
Teachers' Training, Domestic Sciences and 
Arts, Dressmaking, Ladies' Tailoring, Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookeeping and Spanish. 
Boarding facilities. Ideal location. 
Faculty from leading Universities. 
Write for Bulletin. 
Artemisia Bowden, Principal 
ENROLL NOW! 
DERRIC K BUSINES S SCHOO L Derrick Bldg. 1514 Pine st 
ONLY SCHOOL OF ITS KIND 
SHORTHAND, TYPEWRITING, BOOKKEEPING, OFFICE PRACTICE, FILING. 
8AVE TIME AND MONEY DORMITORIES, $2.50 PER WEEK BOYD'S 30-DAY SYSTEM 
M. J. DERRICK, Principal and Manager 
Mention The Crisis. 184 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Full size of book, 6y2x&y2 
490 Pages. Price $2.50 
B Y KELL Y MILLER 
The Following Are Some of 
the Inspiring Chapters 
It Contains 
Progress in Education. 
History of Negro Education. 
The Early Teaching of the Slaves. 
Education as a Soldier. 
Church Schools After the War. 
Independent Schools. 
Church Denominational Schools. 
The Coming Men of the Race . 
The Turning Point. 
Earning Respect for His Race . 
Increase of Opportunities. 
In the Employ of the U. S. Government. 
The Colored American in the Service of God. 
Leaders of America Whos e Ears are Close to 
the Ground. 
The Colored American's Nationality. 
The World's Congress of Races. 
Ethiopia, the Great Black Empire. 
The Genius of Colored Americans. 
Development of the Race in the TJ. S. 
The Overground Railroad. 
Opportunity for Business Life. 
Optimism, Pessimism and Indifference. 
The Victory of the Man Wh o Dares. 
Send $2.50 and we will mail you the 
book and one large photo of Dean 
Miller. Don't miss getting all of 
Kelly Miller's books. 
AGENTS WANTE D 
W e want agents to sell this wonderful human interest story in every community. W e offer you the Agency. 
Send 25c for Prospectus, and be 
FIRST in the field. 
AUSTI N JENKIN S CO. 
523 Ninth St., Washington, D. C. 
HOMES 
I am in a position to sell you a 
beautiful home in CORONA , L. I. 
Attractive one and two family 
homes in the most delightful section of New York City. All city 
improvements, best of schools 
and very convenient to any section of New York City for 5 
cents. 
Or will build to suit the demands 
of any one. 
Full information cheerfully given 
L. S REE D 
46 East Jackson Ave. 
CORONA , N. Y . CIT Y 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
JOS. L. JONES, Pres. 
641 W 9th Si. Cincinnati, Ohio 
SALES AGENTS WANTED 
"Write for our stock selling- agency in your city. 
Splendid chance with solid, growing company. 
FLORENTINE FILM MFG. CO., INC. 
903 Yo u St., N.W. , Washington, D. C. 
STUDENT S 
We would like to secure the services of 
students during the school term to act as agents 
—taking subscriptions and selling single copies 
The CRISIS 
Liberal commission is offered 
Address: A. G. DILL 
70 FIFTH AVENTTE NEW YORK. N. Y. 
MME . G. B. NEEDLES 
FINE FURS 
FUR GARMENTS MADE TO ORDER 
Remodeling, Repairing, Redyeing 
2202 Seventh Ave., New York, N. Y . 
Telephone Morningside 7590 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 185 
PRESIDENT HARDING'S 
Birmingham address challenged by Prof. Kelly Miller, Dean of Howard 
University. 
Have you read President Harding's address? Read it but by all means you 
MUS T read what Kelly Miller has to say about President Harding's statement of the "fundamental inescapable and eternal differences of the Race." 
Read his OPEN LETTE R TO TH E PRESIDENT . 
Keep abreast of the times. 
In pamphlet form sent to any 
address for 25c. 
Agents Wanted 
Here is your chance to make money, everybody wants a 
copy of this great "challenge." Six copies for $1.00 postpaid. Be the first in your territory to handle it. 
WRIT E TODAY . Order at least one copy anyway. 
Austin Jenkins Co. 
523 Ninth St. Washington, D. C. 
Prof. Kelly Miller, 
Author of "Disgrace of 
Democracy", of which 125,-
000 copies have been sold. 
=Y0U R EDUCATION 
IS NOT COMPLETE 
Until You Have Read 
THE HISTORY OF 
THE NEGRO CHURCH 
(.illustrated—830 pp.) 
by 
CARTER G. WOODSON, Ph. D. 
(HARVARD) 
A gripping treatise of the rise and development of the greatest Negro institution—THE 
CHURCH. No home should be without a copy 
—no individual can consider himself informed 
without an intimate knowledge of tkis great 
book. Just off the press. 
$2.15 per copy 
THE ASSOCIATED 
PUBLISHERS, INC. 
1216 U Street, N. W. Washington, D. C. 
AMERICAN CIVILIZATION 
AND THE NEGRO 
(ILLUSTRATED ) 
By C. V. ROMA N 
"The soul of a man has gone into this book." 
(Dial.) 
"W e especially commend the volume to those 
of colored blood. " (Independent, New 
York.) 
"The most comprehensive work on this subject written by a colored man." (Crisis.) 
Postpaid $3.00 Net 
Address L. E. BADGE R 
1303 Church St. Nashville, Tenn. 
New Catalog Ready 
This year we offer new articles and more big values 
than in any previous year. If you want to sell goods 
and make big profits, we have the right kind of goods. 
If you want to use our mail order department, then 
you will want our catalog. It is free. 
AR T NOVELT Y COMPAN Y 
2193 Seventh Avenue Dept. M New York, N. Y. 
YOUNG'S BOOK EXCHANGE 
The only establishment dedicated to collecting 
and distributing the history and literature of 
the African and his descendants. Books out 
of print a specialty. 
135 WEST 135th STREET 
NEW YORK , N. Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 186 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Cleot a Collins, 
Lyric Soprano 
' "She combines an excellent voice with artistic hn 
ish of the most mature kind. Her singing proved ai 
charming as anything the concert programs will offei 
this season."—Detroit Daily News. 
GEOEGE LACY, Manager, 
166 Hamilton Avenue Columbus, Ohio 
E . ALDAM A JACKSO N 
Graduate of Institute of Musical Art 
Organist-Director of Music <t{ St. Marks M. £ 
Church; Concert Accompanist; Piano, Voice, 
Theory, Instruction, Conducting, Coaching. 
Harmony taught from beginning to completion. Private or correspondence. 
Geothius system. 
• radio: 1(0 W. 138 th It., New York, N. T. 
Telephone Morningside 1708. 
AGENTS WANTED 
For a tugh grade line of Calling Cards, Business Cards. 
Invitations. Social Stationery, etc Big demand everywhere. 
Liberal commissions. Prompt deliveries. Write for sample* 
and terms. 
THE HOUSE OF CHOWNING, INDIANAPOLIS, IND. 
HAVE YOU A COPY OE 
THE CRISIS Calendar 
for 1922? 
It is our 
"Negro Homes Calendar" 
and contains twelve elegant pictures of beautiful and attractive homes in possession of 
Negroes in various parts of the United 
States. 
The cover carries a remarkable picture of 
"Villa L-ewaro", the home of the late 
Madam C. J. Walker, at Irvington-on-theHudson, N. Y. 
Price Fifty Cents. 
Supply limited. 
Let your orders come at once. 
Immediate attention assured them. 
SPECIAL OFFER:— 
A copy of our 1922 CRISIS Calendar will 
be sent free to any one sending us at one 
time three paid up yearly subscriptions to 
THE CRISIS. 
THE CRISIS is $1.50 per year. 
Address 
TH E CRISI S 
70 Eifth Avenue New York, N. Y. 
Is there a CRISIS agent in your 
community? If not. will you recommend some energetic and reliable 
person who will serve us in your 
locality9 Our terms to agents are 
liberal. 
Agents Wanted 
tailored - to-measure 
Suits and Overcoats 
at the sensationally Low Price of 
to sell the finest ALL-WOOL 
Nothing like it in America! 
$Q /^5 Q Values positively sensational $(%{*5Q 
— Competition swept aside wV — 
You get your profits in ad
Understand that $26.50 is the price for 
which you sell to your customers. Understand that at this price you give Guaranteed ALL-WOOL Fabrics, hand-tailored, 
Serge and Alpaca lined. Understand that 
this price includes a very handsome profit for 
yourself and above all understand that you get 
these profits in advance—cash in hand—every time 
you take an order. 
Now is the time to sign up 
The Selling Outfit we supply is the greatest thing of its kind ever gotten out. It's put up 
in a handsome carrying case containing everything necessary to do business and besides the 
Tailoring Samples and Fashions contains a 
complete display of Men's Furnishings Good 
Agents make $75 a week easy. Lines are going 
fast. If you want yours — write us — right away. 
Address Dept. 1 .'0! 
GOODWEA R (Inc.) Chicag o 
S weate r F re e 
Fin e Serg e Pant s 
BARGAI N 
valu e No w $09 8 
\ 
Postage 
Paid 
SEND NO MONEY 
Here is one of the biggest 
values offered to readers of 
this paper. Will send this 
splendid pair of serge pants 
and with it this fine sweater 
FREE--without asking for one 
cent with the order. PANTS 
are made of extra quality blue 
serge, well tailored in every 
way. Extra heavy pocketing, 
all seams serged, no raw 
edges, bar tacking, strong belt 
straps. Waist 30 to 44, inside 
seam length 30 to 36 inches. 
Be sure to give inseam length. 
SWEATER we give free is 
made in the popular Shaker 
Knit, of commercial wool yarn, 
1
 V-neck style. COLOR—Khaki. 
SIZES—36 to 46. 
GET A SWEATER FREE 
| Just send your name and address, 
giving sizes wanted. We'll send 
both pants and sweater by parcel 
| post prepaid. Tou pay mailman 
when delivered. Your money 
back if not pleased. Here la 
positively a big $7.00 valuo 
for only $3.98. Send 
NOW as the number of 
Order by No. 291 C55. free sweaters is limited. 
HOWARD LUX CO., DEPT. 291 CLEVELAND. 0. 
.Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 187 
BLACK SWA N RECORD S BLAC K SWA N RECORD S BLAC K SWA N RECORD S 
this is for you 
W e Wan t Men and Women 
With a Backbone and a Desire 
to Earn $100 a Wee k 
W e want these Men and Women 
to do one of the biggest and most 
dignified jobs of selling in America. 
Many of our Salesmen are earning 
$100.00 a week in spite of existing 
conditions. 
W e want $100.00 a week Men and 
Women who don't care what $20.00 
a week people think. W e want 
them to sell BLAC K SWA N 
Records,—a product of, by and for 
colored people. 
If YO U are a hard-hitting, aggressive Man or Woman, desirous 
of earning real money and connecting with an aggressive, growing 
Race concern,—then this advertisement is meant for You. 
Write, at once, for full particulars 
to C. Udell Turpine, General Sales 
Manager. 
Pace Phonograph Corp. 
2289 Seventh Avenue 
New York City, N. Y . 
to 
r 
> 
o 
O 
d 
BLACK SWA N RECORD S BLAC K SWA N RECORD S BLAC K SWA N RECORD S 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 188 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
GOIN G FAST ! 
ACT QUICKLY IF YOU WANT 
ORCHARDVILL E LOT S 
at $ 2 9.§2
 eac h 
$3.00 DOWN AND $1.50 A MONTH 
This offer is meeting with GREA T 
SUCCESS . People from AL L 
OVE R TH E COUNTR Y are taking advantage of it, and the demand 
for the lots is INCREASIN G B Y 
LEAP S AN D BOUNDS . 
The lots are size 30 x 144 feet each and 
have plenty of room for a house, garden, chicken yard, etc., besides a few 
fruit trees which can be planted later 
on. Each lot is sold under a MONE Y 
BAC K GUARANTE E and the title to 
the property is ABSOLUTEL Y 
CLEAR . 
The location of Orchardville is ideal 
and everybody who has been there so 
far has expressed himself or herself as 
being HIGHL Y PLEASE D with everything. That is why the demand for the 
lots is increasing so fast. 
This offer should receive your careful 
consideration because it may be just 
what you have been looking for. You 
can get all the details by simply writing 
your name and address plainly on the 
coupon below and sending it to us 
RIGH T AWAY . We will then send 
you booklets telling you all about it. 
MAI L TH E COUPO N TODAY . 
ARENSON REALTY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
CHICAGO, ILL. 
19 S. La Salle Street 
WRITE PLAINLY 
Date 19*. 
ARENSON REALT Y DEV'FT CORP. 
CHICAGO. ILL. 
Gentlemen:— 
I would like to receive all the details regarding: yoirr new lot offer, without any obligation on my part. 
Name 
Address. . . 
CRI-N-O-S-2 2 
.Town and State. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 189 
A NEW WAY 
T O GE T YOU R CLOTHE S 
ABSOLUTELY FREE 
and a New Plan to Make Big 
Money During Your Spare Time 
Something different, better, bigger, more 
liberal than any offer ever made. Lower 
prices—better clothes—bigger cash profits 
—express or postage prepaid on everything. 
If you are a live, wide-awake man, we 
want you to get one of our elegant suits 
made to your measure, ABSOLUTELY 
FREE. All we ask you to do is to wear 
it, show it to your friends, and take a 
few orders for our high-grade, made-tomeasure clothes. 
DOUBLE PAY 
Free Clothes and Cash Profits Besides 
You can easily earn $30.00 cash extra, 
every week, during your spare time, taking 
orders for our made-to-measure clothes. Other houses make their 
agents use their cash profits to get their own clothes. That's 
not our way of doing business. When we say "FREE" we mean 
"FREE". OURS IS THE GREATEST OFFER EVER MADE. 
Free Fifty-six, real cloth samples—colored fashion plates, 
* IVC'-C i inside wholesale prices—everything FREE. Just drop 
us a line today and we will send you COMPLETE OUTFIT FREE. 
SPENCER MEAD COMPANY 
Wholesale Tailors Dept . B-21 7 Chicag o 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 190 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Agents Wanted 
In Every 
Town and 
Locality. 
GOOD PAY 
Catalog Free 
TH E EAS T INDI A 
TOILET GOODS 
MFG. CO. 
316 N. Central Dept. B] 
OKLAHOMA CITY, OKLAHOMA1 
AWARDED FIRST GRAND PRIZE 
(Philadelphia Autumn Fair) 
October 16-29th. 
SOPHIA' S 
Incomparable Preparations 
FOB THE 
HAIR, SCALP and COMPLEXION 
(Special Combination Offer No. 1 ) 
All For 
$1.8 5 
Mailed p o s tpaid in the 
United States. 
1—50c Hair Dressing 
1—50c Whitening Cream 
1—50c Glycerine Shampoo 
1—50c Complexion Powder 
(any shade) 
1—35c Glossine (X-Ray ) 
$2.35 
CLIMA X 
A cream of perfection for particular MEN. 
Used with X-RA Y HAIR SHINE, the finishing Gloss—FULL TREATMENT, postpaid, 
$1.35. 
AGENTS WANTED—GOOD PROFITS 
(Send for Illustrated Catalogue today.) 
G. T. YOUNG , Incorporated 
Manufacturers, 
SOPHIA'S BUILDING 
61 9 South 15th St. PHILADELPHIA, PA. 
Quino Offers Opportunity 
Special Opportunity offered 100 Ladies—Just 100—To 
Take by Mail Our Full Courses in Beauty Culture and 
SELL - 20 big Toilet Specialties. Courses practically 
FREE. Big Commissions. Everything Guaranteed. Limited Number for Limited Time. Write. 
QUINO Dept. D. Nashville, Tenn. 
$85.00 AN D UPWARD WEEKL
FOR AGENT S 
70,000 
Already 
Sold 
You—yourself—can positively make $R5 to $100 a week. I want 
men. hustling, energetic, ambitious fellows, anxious to make 
money, who are willing to work with me. Not for me, but with 
me. Are you that kind? I want you to advertise, sell and appoint local agents for the biggest, most sensational seller in 50 
years—THE ROBINSON FOLDING BATH TUB. Demonstrating Tub Furnished. Here's a truly wonderful invention—nothing like it. Makes instant appeal. Sells easily. Gives every 
home a modern, up-to-date bathroom in any part of the house. 
.No plumbing, no water-works needed. Folds in small roll, 
handy as umbrella. Self-emptying, positively unleakable. Absolutely guaranteed for 10 years. Remember, fully 70 per cent 
of homes have no bath rooms. More than 70,000 already sold. 
FREE Demonstrating Tub FREE 
Three salea a day means $90 a week. H&reeze of Idaho, made 
$400 profit in 30 days. Rev. Otto Schulze, Mo., got $1600 to 
date. Burkholder, Mont, orders $1072 in 17 days. Hamlinton, of Wyo., made $60 first two days. Hundreds like that. 
Pleasant, permanent, fascinating work. Write a post card. 
Let me write you a long letter. No experience needed, no 
capital. Your credit is good if you mean business. But you 
must be ambitious, you must want to make money. That's 
all. Write a postcard now. I want to pay you $85 to $100 
every week. THE ROBINSON HOUSEHOLD MFC. CO. 
908 Factories Building Toledo. Ohio 
AGENTS ARE EARNING 100 $ 
$25.00 PER WEEK , SPARE TIM E 
Selling COSMO S TOILET ARTICLES 
Fine Perfumes, Extracts, Flavor Essences, Toilet Waters, 
Cold Creams, Hair Growers, Oils, Pomades, Tonics. Fine 
business for College Students. 
Address, Chemical Cosmetic Co., Inc., Dept. C. 
P. O. Box 204.. Newport, R. I. 
Send 2O Stamp for Agent's Confidential Price List. 
COSMO S LABORATORY " 
C. DURHA M CAMPBELL , A . B. 
Analytical and Consulting Chemist 
Practical advice given at reasonable fee for manufacturing 
Perfumery and Toilet Preparations. 
Let me solve your problems, perfect your formulae or 
furnish you with new formulae. 
Analysis of anything made correctly. 
Reliable and Confidential advice given by mail. 
Address, P. O Box 204 Dept B. Newport, R. I 
LINCOLN MOTION PICTURE CO 
Est. 1916. Capitalized $75,000 
$50,000 common, $25,000 8% preferred. 
Oldest Film Corporation in the World Producing Negro Photo-plays. 
1121 CENTRAL AVE., LOS ANGELES 
Tel. 6417 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGAR P. BENJAMIN 
ATTOIHIT AND CORJNINXOI-AT-LIW 
14 SCHOOL STREET BOSTON, Mast. 
WANTED 
Agents for THE CRISIS. Dignified Work 
70 Fifth Avenue, N-;w York 
Mention TH E CRISIS. A Selected List of Books 
Dealing with the Negro Problem 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
Two COLORED WOMEN WITH THE AMERICAN EXPEDITIONARY 
FORCES. (Hunton and Johnson) $2.5 0 
TH E HEART OF A WOMA N AND OTHER POEMS. (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1.50 
TH E SOUL OF JOHN BROWN. (Stephen Graham) 2.0 0 
A NARRATIVE OF THE NEGRO. (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.5 0 
SOULS OF BLACK FOLK. (W. E. B. DuBois) 2.0 0 
A CENTURY OF NEGRO MIGRATION. (Carter G. Woodson) 1.1 0 
TH E CURSE OF RACE PREJUDICE. (James F . Morton) 2 5 
HISTORY OF THE NEGRO. (Benjamin Brawley) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO MIGRANT IN PITTSBURGH. (Abraham Epstein)... .5 0 
GRANNY MAUMEE AND OTHER PLAYS FOR A NEGRO THEATRE. 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.7 5 
HALF A MAN. (Mary White Ovington) 1.2 0 
AFTERMATH OF SLAVERY. (William Sinclair) 1.5 0 
UNSUNG HEROES. (Elizabeth Ross Haynes) 2.5 0 
TH E SHADOW. (Mary White Ovington) 2.0 0 
JOHN BROWN. (W. E. B. DuBois) 2.0 0 
NEGRO IN AMERICAN HISTORY. (J. W. Cromwell) 2.0 0 
PRINCE HALL AND HIS FOLLOWERS. (George W . Crawford).. 1.00 
TH E VOICE OF THE NEGRO. (Robert T. Kerlin) 2.5 0 
TH E NEGRO. (W. E. B. DU Bois) 9 0 
T h e EDUCATION OF THE NEGRO PRIOR TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO FACES AMERICA. (Herbert J. Seligmann) 1.75 
DARKWATER. (W. E. B. DuBois) 2.2 5 
POEMS OF PAUL LAURENCE DUNBAR 2.5 0 
AFRO-AMERICAN FOLKSONGS. (H . E. Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
BOOKER T. WASHINGTON. (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) 2.0 0 
A SOCIAL HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN NEGRO. (Benjamin 
Brawley) 4.0 0 
TH E NEGRO IN LITERATURE AND ART. (Benjamin Brawley).. 1.50 
FIFTY YEARS AND OTHER POEMS. (James Weldon Johnson). . 1.5 0 
TH E HISTORY OF THE NEGRO CHURCH. (Carter J. Woodson).. 2.1 5 
TH E UPWARD PATH. (Pritchard and Ovington) 1.3 5 
Address: TH E CRISIS , : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y. ACCEPTABLE GIFTS 
MADAM C. J. WALKER'SWONDERFU L HAI R GROWE R 
VEGETABL E SHAMPO O 
TETTE R SALV E 
TEMPL E GROWE R 
GLOSSIN E 
PERFUM E 
ROUG E 
COL D CREA M 
DENTA L CREA M 
TOILE T WATE R 
TALCU M POWDE R 
ANTISEPTI C SOA P 
COMPLEXIO N SOA P 
CLEANSIN G CREA M 
VANISHIN G CREA M 
SUPERFIN E FAC E POWDE R 
(WHITE , ROSE-FLESH , BROWN ) 
For a 
Chapless 
winter use 
our Witch 
Hazel Jelly 
World renowned and Supreme 
in reputation, Madam C. J. 
Walker's Superfine Preparations make ideal gifts at any 
time. An exceptional opportunity to acquaint your friends 
with their high standard of 
excellence. 
Walker Agents and Druggists 
will supply you. 
Th Madam C. J. Walker 
Mfg. Co. 
640 N. West St. 
Indianapolis, Indiana 