The CRISIS 
Vol . 19—No. 3 JANUARY , 1920 Whol e No . 111 
ONE DOLLA R AN D A HAL F A YEA R FIFTEE N CENTS A COP Y I RESOLV E 
T O JOIN the Nationa l Associatio n for the Advancemen t of 
Colore d Peopl e if I a m not alread y a member. 
T O RENE W promptl y m y membershi p for 1920 if I wa s formerl y a member. 
T O WOR K as neve r before for equal justice to all men regard ­
less of the color of their skins. 
T O REALIZ E the inherent and acquire d characteristic s of 
merit of the colore d race an d shake off the apologeti c air whic h 
T sometime s assume whe n the Negr o is criticize d an d ma ­
ligned . 
T O SEE K the trut h about the Negro , whethe r favorabl e or 
unfavorable , an d help counterac t wit h facts the lyin g propa ­
gand a against hi m bein g spread b y his enemies. 
T O VOT E for me n wh o are square on the Negr o problem an d 
against those whos e service consists solely of prett y but mean ­
ingless phrases. 
TO STAM P OUT tha t type of Negr o leader wh o wil l sell out 
his race for persona l gain . 
T O KEE P this resolution . 
National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
Presiden t 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y 
Chairma n Boar d o f Directors 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
Actin g Treasure r 
MAJO R T. E . Spingar n 
Secretar y 
JOH N R . SHILLAD Y 
Directo r o f Publication s an d Researc h 
DR . W. E . B. DUBOI S 
Fiel d Secretar y 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSO N 
Assistan t Secretar y 
WALTE R F . WHIT E 
National Office: 70 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y . SIXTY-FOU R PAGE S AN D COVER . 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED MONTHL Y AND COPYRIGHTED B Y TH E NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORED PEOPLE, AT 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NEW YOR K CITY. CON ­
DUCTED B Y W. E . BURGHARD T DU BOIS: JESSIE REDMON FAUSET. LITERAR Y EDITOR; 
AUGUSTUS GRANVILLE DILL, BUSINESS MANAGER. 
Vol. 19-No. 3 JANUARY, 1920 Whole No. 111 
PICTURES 
Page 
COVER . WOMA N O F SANT A LUCIA. Photograph by Brown & Dawson. 
TH E RAVIN E A T WILBERFORC E 111 
PARAD E O F NEGRO UNION MEN 114 
RECEPTION T O MRS. A . W . HUNTO N 121 
TH E ST. PAUL, MINN., FOLK-SONG COTERIE 124 
MEN O F TH E MONT H 127 
SIX NOTABL E NEGRO BUILDINGS 132-133 
A NATIV E O F FUMBA N 135 
ARTICLES 
TH E SUCCESS OF NEGRO MIGRATION. Walter F. White 112 
TH E MURDE R ON NINTH AVENUE . A Story 115 
WHER E ELIZA CROSSED TH E ICE. Illustrated. Felix J . Koch 118 
TH E OPTIMIST. A Poem. Ethyl Lewis 120 
TH E CATHOLI C CHURC H AN D TH E NEGRO PRIEST. George J . MacWilliam 122 
ORIFLAMME. A Poem. Jessie Fauset 123 
CALLING DREAMS . A Poem. Georgia Douglas Johnson 134 
DEPARTMENT S 
OPINION 105 
TH E OUTE R POCKE T 123 
MEN O F TH E MONT H 126 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D 
PEOPLE 129 
TH E LOOKIN G GLASS 136 
TH E HORIZON 145 
TH E FEBRUAR Y CRISIS 
The February CRISI S will contain an article on "Prehistoric Negroids," by Dr. Frances 
Hoggan; "The End of Jim Waters"; a double-paged photograph of the Sudanese deputation to the 
King of England, and "The Centenary of a Negro Congregationalist Church, " by Rev. Edward 
F. Coin. 
FIFTEEN CENTS A COPY; ONE DOLLAR AND A HALF A YEAR 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIV E CENTS EXTR A 
RENEWALS : The date of expiration of each subscription is printed on the wrapper. When 
the subscription is due, a blue renewal blank is enclosed. 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New 
York, under the Act of March 3, 1879. 102 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM , NORT H CAROLIN A 
A School for the Training of Colored Young 
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREADY ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Science* The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
TER M OPENED SEPTEMBER 22, 1919 
For farther information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
The Cheyney Training School for 
Teachers 
CHEYNEY, PENNA. 
A normal school of high grade for 
young colored men and women of good 
abilities, who desire to prepare themselves to be teachers. Courses include 
the regular academic and professional 
subjects, and special departments i n domestic art, domestic science, manual 
training and agriculture. Board and 
tuition $125. Nex t regula r term began 
Thursday, September 18, 1919. Summer 
school for teachers i n active service, 
four weeks beginning July 1. Boar d and 
tuition for the month $20.00. Fo r further particulars and catalog write 
Leslie Pinckney Hill , Principal, Cheyney, Penna. 
188 8 191 9 
St. Paul Normal and 
Industrial School 
LAWRENCEVILLE , VA . 
Thirty - Second Session 
OPENED SEPTEMBE R 1919 
COURSES 
Primary, Grammar School, Normal, Industrial 
Graduates receive State High 
School Certificate which will 
admit to Standard Normal 
Schools and Colleges 
SUMME R SCHOO L FO R TEACHER S 
EXTENSIV E TRAD E COURSE S 
Athletic Training, Football, Baseball, Tennis, Etc. 
FUL L COURS E I N MILITAR Y TRAININ G 
For Catalog and Further Information address 
Rev. James S. Russell, D . D., 
Principal 
LAWRENCEVILLE , VA . 
Mention T h e C risis. TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 103 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located In the City of Atlanta, Qa. 
The courses of study Include High School, normal 
School and Collage, with Manual training and domestic science. Among the teachers are graduated 
of Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth and Wellesley. Fifty 
years of successful work have bees completed. 
Students some from all parti of the south. Graduates are almost universally successful. 
For further Information address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANT A GA. 
Lincoln University Trains Leaders 
Among its graduates in Chicago— 
DR. GEORGE CLEVELAN D HALL , of the 
Provident Hospital, is called the foremost 
citizen of his race. 
COL. FRANKLI N A. DENISON, now Assistant State Attorney General, led his regiment at St. Mihiel and in the Argonne. 
REV . MOSES H . JACKSON, D.D., holds 
the record for continuous pastoral service 
in the city. 
For catalog and information address 
President John B. Rendall, D.D. 
LINCOLN UNIVERSITY 
Cheste r County , Pa . 
1870 CLARK UNIVERSITY 
ATLANTA , GEORGI A 
1919 
Beautiful campus overlooking the city. Comfortable 
buildings with modern conveniences; talented faculty; 
vigorous, religious atmosphere; excellent library and 
laboratories; co-educational; athletics. Admission 
only by application. 
Courses of Study : 
Domestic Science. Public. Speaking. Music; 
Pre- Acad e my. Seventh and Eighth Grades. 
Academy or High School, four years with diploma. 
Pre- Medical, two years above academy. 
Normal, two years above academy with diploma. 
College, four rears with AB degree. 
Fiftieth year opened September 24, 1919. 
Expenses, $15.00 per month will cover all necessary 
expenses. 
HARRY ANDREWS KING, President. 
The Florida Agricultural 
and Mechanical College 
Offers courses to leading certificates, 
diplomas and degrees. 
Nathan B. Young, President 
Tallahassee, Florida 
COMPETENT BOOKKEEPER WANTED 
Young man with special training in bookkeeping. 
Superior equipment rather than experience desired. 
Address: AUGU STU S GRANVILLE DILL 
Business Manage r 
TH E CRISIS 
70 FIFT H AVENU E NEW YORK, N. Y. 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerly Atlanta Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA . 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
An institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly development—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negro 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C. A. , 
athletics, all live features. 
For information, address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE . TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musical and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. For literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE . N . C 
Biddle University. operated under the auspices of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Departments— Hig
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course is the requirement for entrance to the first Tear 
of the High School. 
The School of Arts and Sciences offers two course, 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific, i n the 
scientific. German Is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class Is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first is purely English, 
Greek and Hebrew are taught In the others. 
All students In the High School Dept. are repaired 
to take trades In the Industrial Dept. 
For further Information, address 
President H. L. MeCraray, 
Charlotte. N. C 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga . 
Co-Educational 
The largest institution of learning in the South 
owned and controlled by Negroes. Faculty of specia l 
ists, trained in some of the best universities in the 
North and in the South. Noted for high standard of 
scholarship; industrial emphasis and positive Christian influence. Well equipped dormitories; sane 
athletics under faculty supervision. Expenses reasonable. Location central and healthful. 
Departments: Theology, College Preparatory, Normal, Commercial, Musical, Domestic Science, Nurse 
Training Sewing, Printing and Tailoring. 
First Semester began September 10, 1919, 
For further information address 
W. A . FOUNTAIN , President 
BISHOP J. S. Flipper, Chairman Trustee Board 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 104 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
MANUAL TRAINING & 
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
FO R COLORE D YOUT H 
BORDENTOWN, N. J . 
A high institution for the training of 
colored youth. Excellent equipment, 
thorough instruction, wholesome surroundings. Academic training for all 
students. 
Courses in carpentry, agriculture and 
trades for boys, including auto repairing. 
Courses in domestic science and domestic art for girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly 
equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and 
modernly equipped. 
Terms reasonable. 
Fall term began September 15, 1919. 
For information address 
W. R. VALENTINE, Principal 
Th e Agricultura l 
& Technica l Colleg e 
of Nort h Carolina 
Maintained by the State and Federal 
Government 
Fo r males only. Practical 
and Strong Courses by the 
following Departments: 
Agricultural, Mechanical, 
Academic, Teacher Training, 
and Military. 
Summer School for teachers of both sexes. 
Writ e today for catalog. 
JAS . B. DUDLEY , 
President, 
Greensboro, N . C. 
Wile y Universit y 
Marshall , Texas 
Recognized as a college of first class by 
Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and Oklahoma State Boards of Education. Harvard, Boston University, University of 
Illinois and University of Chicago represented on its faculty. One hundred 
twenty-seven in College Department, session 1919-1020. Several new buildings, 
steam heated and electric lighted. 
M . W. DOGAN , President 
COLEMA N COLLEG E 
GIBSLAND , LA . 
Supported by Baptist State Woman's Home 
Mission Society of Chicago and Boston and 
A. B. H. Society of New York. Students 
from six different states. Graduates exempted on first grade by Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Oklahoma. 
O . L . COLEMAN , President 
ST. MARY' S SCHOO L 
An Episcopal boarding- school for girls, under the 
direction of the sisters of St. Mary. Address: TH E 
SISTER. -IN- CHARGE, 6138 Germantown Avenue, 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Th e CRISI S 
Calenda r 192 0 
C
ONTAINS 12 pages 
of pictures of Negro 
American heroes of 
the Great War, with medals and citations. The 
cover is a reproduction of 
Roscoe C. Jamison's monumental poem "Negro Soldiers." The months and 
days are printed from 
hand-drawn plates made 
by a famous artist for 
special use in this CRISIS 
calendar. The whole calendar is done in brown—• 
beautiful, artistic, and historically valuable. 
PRIC E 50 CENT S EAC H 
Th e CRISI S 
70 FIFT H AVE. , NE W YORK , N . Y . 
Mention Th e Crisis. TH E CRISIS 
Vol. 19-No. 3 JANUARY , 1920 Whole No. 111 
Opinion 
BROTHERS of W.E.B. DuBois , COM E NORT H 
THE migration of Negroes from 
South to North continues and 
ought to continue. The North 
is no paradise—as East St. 
Louis, Washington, Chicago, and 
Omaha prove; but the South is at best 
a system of caste and insult and at 
worst a Hell. With ghastly and persistent regularity, the lynching of 
Negroes in the South continues— 
every year, every month, every day; 
wholesale murders and riots have 
taken place at Norfolk, Longview, 
Arkansas, Knoxville, and 24 other 
places in a single year. The outbreaks in the North have been 
fiercer, but they have quickly been 
curbed; no attempt has been made 
to saddle the whole blame on Negroes ; and the cities where riot
have taken place are today safer and 
better for Negroes than ever before. 
In the South, on the other hand, the 
outbreaks occurring daily but reveal 
the seething cauldron beneath—the 
unbending determination of th e 
whites to subject and rule the blacks, 
to yield no single inch of their determination to keep Negroes as near 
slavery as possible. 
There are, to be sure, Voices in the 
South—wise Voices and troubled 
Consciences; souls that see the utter 
futility and impossibility of the 
southern program of race relations in 
work and travel and human intercourse. But these voices are impotent. Behold, Brough of Arkansas. 
He was an original leader of the most 
promising recent group which sought 
Sense and Justice in the race problem—"The University Commission on 
Southern Race Questions." He said, 
as chairman: 
"A s a n America n citizen the Negr o is 
entitled to life , liberty , and the pursuit of 
happiness, and the equal protection of our 
laws for the safeguardin g of these inalien ­
able rights. . . . None but the most prejudiced Negro-hater, who oftentimes goes to 
the extreme of denyin g tha t any black ma n 
can have a white soul, would controvert the 
proposition tha t i n the administratio n of 
quasi-public utilitie s and courts of justice 
the Negr o is entitled to the fair and equal 
protection of the law. . . . The meanest 
Negr o on a southern plantation is entitled 
to the same consideration i n the administratio n of justic e as the proudest scion of a 
cultured cavalier. " 
Ye t when he ran for Governor of 
Arkansas, he vehemently denied and 
explained away his liberal Negro 
sentiments,—and when the "uprising" occurred in Phillips County, he 
let the slave barons make their own 
investigation, murder the innocent, 
and railroad ignorant, honest laborers to imprisonment and death in 
droves; contrast this with the actions 
of Governor Lowden of Illinois and 
Mayor Smith of Omaha! 
On the other hand, we win through 
the ballot. We can vote in the North. 
We can hold office in the North. As 
workers in northern establishments, 
we are getting good wages, decent 
treatment, healthful homes an d 
schools for our children. Can we 
hesitate? COM E NORTH ! Not in a 
rush—not as aimless wanderers, but 
after quiet investigation and careful 
location. The demand for Negro labor is endless. Immigration is still 
cut off and a despicable and indefensible drive against all foreigners 
is shutting the gates of opportunity 
to the outcasts and victims of Europe. 
Ver y good. We will make America 
pay for her Injustice to us and to the 
poor foreigner by pouring into the 
open doors of mine and factory in increasing numbers. 
Troubles will ensue with white 
unions and householders, but remem105 106 TH E CRISIS 
ber that the chief source of these 
troubles is rooted in the South; a million Southerners live in the North. 
These are the ones who by open and 
secret propaganda fomented trouble 
in these northern centers and are still 
at it. They have tried desperately to 
make trouble in Indianapolis, Cleveland, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, Bal
timore, and New York City. 
This is a danger, but we have 
learned how to meet it by unwavering 
self-defense and by the ballot. 
Meantime, if the South really wants 
the Negro and wants him at his best, 
it can have him permanently, on these 
terms and no others: 
1. The right to vote. 
2. The abolition of lynching. 
3. Justice in the courts. 
4. The abolition of "Jim-Crow" 
cars. 
5. A complete system of education, 
free and compulsory. 
"SE X EQUALITY " 
THE Department of Justice has 
discovered a new crime,— 
"Sex Equality." This is not, 
as one might presume, equality of men and women, but it is the 
impudence of a man of Negro descent 
asserting his right to marry any human being who wants to marry him. 
With bated breath, Mr. Palmer (who 
has no power to prevent or punish 
lynching and who permits peonage to 
flourish untouched in Arkansas) tells 
an astonished Senate of this new sign 
of "Red" propaganda among blacks. 
Nonsense! Mr. Palmer is mistaken 
in assuming that it took a world war 
to make the Negro conscious of such 
an elementary right. No Negro with 
any sense has ever denied his right 
to marry another human being, for 
the simple reason that such denial 
would be frank admission of his own 
inferiority. For a man to stand up 
and say: I am not physically or 
morally or mentally fit to marry this 
woman, who wishes to marry me, 
would be a horrible admission. No 
healthy, decent man,—white, black, 
red, or blue—could for a moment admit so monstrous a fact. 
He could, naturally, say: I do not 
WAN T to marry this woman of another race, and this is what 999 black 
men out of every thousand DO say. 
Or a woman may say: I do not want 
to marry this black man, or this red 
man, or this white man,—this she has 
the absolute and unquestionable right 
to say. But the impudent and vicious 
demand that all colored folk shall 
write themselves down as brutes by a 
general assertion of their unfitness to 
marry other decent folk is a nightmare born only in the haunted brain 
of the bourbon South and transmitted 
by some astonishing power to the lips 
of the Attorney General of the United 
States. 
"OUR"SOUT H 
ONE of the surprising selfdeceptions of the whit e 
Southerners is illustrated by 
this story of the war: Because of 
population, a government shipbuilding yard was brought to Wilmington, 
N. C., during the late war. The city 
congratulated itself, but balked finally 
at providing Negro workingmen with 
adequate housing. At a public meeting they lauded the whites and their 
enterprise to the skies, but complained 
to the government agents of the "burden" of the Negro—the black half of 
their population, said one pompous 
orator, was a "liability and not an 
asset." 
"Well," replied an unimaginative 
northern Colonel, who wanted ships 
built instead of talk, "if it wasn't for 
this liability, you wouldn't have gotten this ship-yard!" 
The fundamental error of the white 
South thus shown is seen in the assumption that AL L property is 
WHITE property; that they benevolently "give" Negroes work; that they 
let them walk THEIR streets and 
"pay for" their schools. 
In economic thought the South is 
100 years behind the civilized world. 
In what civilized land today can a 
ruling aristocracy deny a mass of 
eight million laborers an absolute 
right to education, to public institutions, and even to a voice in the use OPINION 107 
and distribution of "private" property? 
RAC E PRID E 
OUR friends are hard—very 
hard—to please. Only yesterday they were preaching 
"Race Pride." "Go to!" they 
said, and be PROUD of your race. If 
we hesitated or sought to explain— 
"Away," they yelled; "Ashamed-ofYourself and Want-to-be-White!" Of 
course, the Amazing Major is still at 
it, but do you notice that others say 
less,—because they see that bullheaded worship of any "race," as 
such, may lead and does lead to curious complications? 
For instance: Today Negroes, Indians, Chinese, and other groups
gaining new faith in themselves; they 
are beginning to "like" themselves; 
they are discovering that the current 
theories and stories of "backward" 
peoples are largely lies and assumptions ; that human genius and possibility are not limited by color, race, or 
blood. What is this new self-consciousness leading to ? Inevitably and 
directly to distrust and hatred of 
whites; to demands for self-government, separation, driving out of foreigners,—"Asia for the Asiatics," 
"Africa for the Africans," and "Negro officers for Negro troops!" 
No sooner do.whites see this unawaited development than they point 
out in dismay the inevitable consequences: "You lose our tutelage," 
"You spurn our knowledge," "You 
need our wealth and technique." They 
point out how fine is the world role of 
Elder Brother. 
Very well. Some of the darker 
brethren are convinced. They draw 
near in friendship; they seek to enter 
schools and churches; they would 
mingle in industry,—when lo! "Get 
out," yells the White World—"You're 
not our brothers and never will be"— 
"Go away, herd by yourselves"— 
"Eternal Segregation in the Lord!" 
Can you wonder, Sirs, that we are 
a bit puzzled by all this and that we 
are asking gently, but more and more 
insistently: Choose one or the other 
horn of the dilemma: 
1. Leave the black and yellow world 
alone. Get out of Asia, Africa, and 
the Isles. Give us our states and 
towns and sections and let us rule 
them undisturbed. Absolutely segregate the races and sections of the 
world. 
Or— 
2. Let the world meet as men with 
men. Give utter Justice to all. Exte
men according to their individual 
desert. Let it be possible for whites 
to rise to the highest positions in 
China and Uganda and blacks to the 
highest honors in England and Texas. 
Here is the choice. Which will you 
have, my masters ? 
ENGLAN D 
I WAS reared in an atmosphere 
of admiration—almost of veneration—for England. The 
New England of my birth and 
day was English in its soul: its speech 
was more English than American; its 
history was an extension of English 
history; its law was English tradition ; its town government was of 
English ancestry. Our reverence for 
England was increased rather than 
diminished by distance and lack of 
actual contact and also, I regret to 
remember, by the then current dislike 
of the Irish. 
Since those days I have visited Engl
many Englishmen. With all the 
world, I have admired the Englishman of birth and breeding and felt 
the strange might and attraction of 
the Empire on which the sun never 
sets. 
But—and that "hut" did not come 
from the coldness of the English manner, for I had been prepared for that 
by our own New England unemotional 
standards—but I remember once in 
Glasgow, seeing a young, beautiful 
woman lying in the gutter and a policeman kicking her. For a moment, 
I felt like murder. She was just a 
drunken prostitute, but— 
Of course, Glasgow is not England 
and the East End is not London; but 
from that day a certain doubt of Ev-108 TH E CRISIS 
land found a place in my consciousness. Then I was in Paris at the time 
of the Peace Conference. There was 
no doubt but what England was getting more out of the Peace than anyone else and the reason was clear: 
She had better trained statesmen and 
they knew what they wanted and got 
it. But there was in their methods a 
sort of calm, grim power that I 
feared. 
I have always looked on England as 
the best administrator of colored peoples and laid her success to her system of Justice. But here, again, I am 
beginning to waver. I have talked to 
Indians, to Egyptians, to West and 
South Africans, and they have left a 
great, dull doubt in my mind—a feeling of world apprehension. 
Finally, there comes to me from 
English sources this terrible tale of 
theft, murder, and outrage done by 
Englishmen to Negroes, unrebuked by 
English government and unprotested 
for a generation. 
English missionaries long ago entered the land of the Matabele and 
Mashona peoples, in the Zambese 
basin. An English company in 1889 
was allowed to enter, on the express 
condition that it regard native law 
and land rights. Yet today 800,000 
Negroes of this country, now called 
Rhodesia, have absolutely no title to 
90 million acres of their own land! 
As Englishmen themselves write: 
"The land rights of the natives have 
been appropriated simply by fraud 
and theft—that is the beginning and 
end of the whole sordid story." 
If we turn from Africa to Asia, 
what do we see? The World Tomorrow tells us: 
"Indi a contains some 300,000,000 people. 
The average per capit a income is $10 pe r 
annum. On the basis of prices at the end 
of 1916, ric e sufficient fo r one mea l a day 
would cost $10.95 pe r annum. Taxe s on 
the basis of the new budget average about 
$1.40 per capita . Is it any wonde r tha t 
large sections of the population are livin g 
under famin e conditions, tha t between 5,-
000,000 and 7,000,000 of these undernourished people died of influenza, and tha t 
75,000,000 are receivin g barely one square 
mea l i n two days ? This starvin g people 
contributes to Imperia l Britai n in drai n of 
one sort or another for the benefits of administratio n an d interest on capita l a n 
amount estimated at from $100,000,000 to 
$200,000,000. He r new budge t calls fo r the 
expenditur e of mor e tha n $200,000,000 on 
the military—abou t 48 pe r cent, of the 
tota l budget." 
Need we add Ireland, Egypt, West 
Africa, and the West Indies to this 
tale? No. 
England has sinned against dependent and backward people to an unbelievable extent. Tory England 
sinned, Liberal England sinned, and 
Labor England may easily continue 
the story. 
There are but two paths out: Irela
independent, self-governing states. 
Home rule must be granted to the 
West Indians and civilized West 
Africa. The natives of South Africa 
must be delivered from the Union of 
South Africa. Either this, or the 
world must gird itself anew to meet 
a tyranny which looms as portentous 
as the God-defying dreams of Germany 
er bitterness, because it involves the 
up-striving and embittered darker 
races of the whole earth. 
TH E AMERICA N LEGION , AGAI N 
The American Legion is a national organization destined 
to be one of the most powerful 
instruments of public opinion 
and action in the United States. It 
is absolutely necessary that Negro 
soldiers join it and maintain their 
membership and sit in its councils. 
This is now possible in threefourths of the forty-five states of the 
Union. In a few states, notably South 
Carolina, Alabama, and Virginia, effort is still being made to exclude Negr
constitution of the League and in the 
long run it cannot stand. 
Yet some shortsighted Negroes are 
inclined to give up joining the Ameri
convention did not compel the bourbon 
South to accept Negro legionaries. 
The convention ought to have done 
this. It was a burning shame that it 
did not; but since it did not, it is our 
duty to COMPEL the next convention OPINIO N 109 
to do so. We must not give up. We 
cannot give up. Shall we give up our 
right to vote in New York and Massachusetts because it is denied in Texas 
and Louisiana? No. Fight harder. 
Agitate, protest—join the American 
Legion and never give it one hour's 
peace until every black soldier is a 
member. 
TH E MACO N TELEGRAPH 
The Macon, Georgia, Daily Telegraph, a widely-read 
white publication, has often 
done TH E CRISI S the honor of 
quoting and criticizing its words. 
Some of these remarks we have from 
time to time reprinted, but they have 
hardly seemed to call for an answer. 
Usually they answered themselves. 
Last September, however, the Telegraph published a leading editoria
column and a half long, which illustrates so well the deliberate misunderstanding of the aspirations of the 
Negro by the White South that it deserves a reply. 
The Telegraph asserts in brief, 
first, that TH E CRISI S is responsible 
for the present racial unrest in the 
South and that if "a really serious 
race clash" should break out there 
that "the blood will be on its head." 
Secondly, that "Du Bois hates white 
men because they are white and he is 
black" and that our fight against "segregation, Jim-Crowism, and division 
of the races" proves this. Thirdly, 
that the South wants the Negro to 
practice economy, thrift, and the 
steady acquisition of property and 
"will do everything to help and further that development," while TH E 
CRISI S wants "social equality." 
Fourthly, that TH E CRISI S deliberately plays up "the one-tenth of one per 
cent, of trouble" in the South and 
"ignores the ninety-nine and ninetenths of continued and growing organization on a better basis for both 
races." Fifthly, that Negro schools 
in the South are supported by white 
men's taxes, while TH E CRISI S is complaining because the schools are not 
mixed. Sixthly, that "the black man 
lived for uncounted centuries in Africa 
much as improved the make-up of an 
arrow, coined a new word, or crept 
an inch nearer to a spiritual religion." And, finally, that Dr. Moton 
should start a new magazine at Tuskege
the Negroes about how well things are 
going on or can be made to go between 
the races." 
We quote this extraordinary indictment at length because while the editor of the Telegraph cannot possibly 
believe it true, thousands of his white 
readers do; and millions of other 
white Southerners hold similar beliefs. 
Now, therefore, to our answers. 
First, TH E CRISI S is not responsible 
for the present unrest among Negr
franchisement, lynching, "Jim-Crow" 
cars, and wide-spread and continuous 
injustice of southern whites toward 
blacks. TH E CRISI S is responsible for 
spreading the knowledge of this crime 
and injustice and urging Negroes and 
whites to protest against it. Secondly, 
opposition to segregation in homes, 
travel, and work does not show that 
Negroes are ashamed of their color 
and race. It merely shows that they 
have sense enough to know that if 
their homes are confined to the Negro 
quarter, they will get no sewerage or 
police protection, no paving or lights, 
and that white prostitutes will be 
openly housed next to their schools 
and churches, as was the case in Maco
paying first-class fares for third-class 
railway accommodations, and that 
starvation wages result from a color 
line in work and ability. Thirdly, 
there is no doubt but that large numbers of white Southerners see a solution of the race problem in the upbuilding of a thrifty., contented, homeowning peasantry. But they are not 110 TH E CRISIS 
willing to pay the price, and that 
price is Law and Order, Justice in 
the courts, decent schools, and mutual 
self-respect; instead of this, the South 
over large areas and in numberless 
cases caters to the mob, has a double 
standard of justice, provides wretched schools or none at all, and drives 
out self-respecting and law-abiding 
Negroes, who will not cheerfully submit to insult. Fourthly, TH E CRISI S 
does not consciously exaggerate southern conditions. The editor has lived 
fifteen years in the South, has visited 
every Southern State, and has made 
painstaking studies into social conditions. It is true, and it ought to be 
true, that if among ten men, a murder occurs, those who would better 
human life say more about the one 
dead man than about the nine living. 
This because the murder rate of one 
in ten is too high for a civilized community. So, too, when TH E CRISI S 
attacks lynching, it does not forget 
that of the 1,200,00 0 Negroes in 
Georgia, in 1918 , only nineteen were 
lynched. But TH E CRISI S remembers 
that a single human being illegally 
done to death by a mob in any state 
is an indictment of government so 
severe as to call for protest and agitation. It is perfectly true that most 
white Southerners are not lynchers, 
but it is just as true that most of 
them will not consent to the one step 
which will stop lynching—punishment of lynchers. So, too, while 
peace and prosperity rule wide regions of the South and kindly and 
helpful race relations exist, yet it is 
also true that the amount of racial 
friction and unrest, the human hatred 
and insult, the poverty, the fighting, 
murder and maiming, the crime, sorrow, and despair, reach a height 
which makes the problem of race relations in the South the most portentous social problem in the United 
States. Fifthly, It is untrue that Negro schools are supported by white 
taxes in the South. This is a blatant 
falsehood which has been disproven 
again and again. Charles L. Coon, 
a southern white school superintendent, found in 1909 , that Negroes in 
eleven Southern States, forming over 
40 % of the school population, got less 
than 15% of the school fund, and in 
the state of Georgia he proves that 
$647,58 2 of the school fund of 190 7 
was due Negroes as their share of direct and indirect taxes, while only 
$506,17 0 was spent on their schools, 
and he concludes that the southern 
white man cannot maintain that he is 
supporting Negro schools. Sixthly, 
as to Africa and the Negro, we appeal 
from the Anthropology of Macon to 
that of Dr. Franz Boas, a professor 
of Anthropology in Columbia Univer
"An unbiased estimate of the anthropological evidence so far brought 
forward does not permit us to countenance the belief in a racial inferiority which would unfit an individual 
of the Negro race to take his part in 
modern civilization. We do not know 
of any demand made on the human 
body or mind in modern life that anatomical or ethnological evidence would 
prove to be beyond the powers of the 
Negro." 
Boaz adds: "It seems likely that at 
a time when the European was still 
satisfied with rude stone tools, the 
African had invented or adopted the 
art of smelting iron." 
A volume in the Home University 
Library says: "That Negro peoples 
were the beginners of civilization 
along the Ganges, the Euphrates, and 
the Nile, seems proven. Early Babylon was 
"The Assyrians show a distinct 
Negroid strain, and early Egypt was 
predominately Negro." 
Finally, we would welcome a 
monthly edited by R. R. Moton on the 
lines suggested by the Telegraph. But 
we opine that it would omit the semiannual report of lynchings, which 
Tuskegee sends out to the world. TH E RAVIN E A T WILBER FORCE TH E SUCCESS OF NEGRO MIGRATION 
WALTE R F . WHIT E 
SELDO M has there been, a more interesting change of attitude tha n tha t of the 
South wit h regar d to the migrator y movement of Negroe s durin g the past four 
years. Whe n the wa r caused an appreciable decrease i n the numbe r of Europea n 
immigrants and created an industria l void, 
an economic opportunity i n northern industria l centers wa s offered to the southern 
colored ma n fo r the first time. Th e departur e of a small numbe r of Negroes caused 
some southern newspapers to utte r paeans 
of praise, whethe r sincere or not. The y 
felt tha t the old doctrine of settling race 
relations by deporting Negroe s to Africa , 
long since abandoned b y sensible persons, 
migh t be of value stil l and that the journey Nort h was but one step towards rid ­
din g Americ a of the "vicious, indolent, and 
crimina l blacks. " 
A second stage occurred when the employer of the South found tha t he was un ­
able to employ as man y Negr o laborers as 
formerly , and whe n his wif e discovered, 
much to he r horror, that she no longer 
could secure house servants wit h the ease of 
forme r years. Abou t this time southern 
papers began carryin g pitifu l and heartrendin g tales of deluded southern Negroes 
starvin g and freezing i n the Nort h and editorials appeared, gloatingl y based on such 
stories, repeating the moth eaten story of 
the South being the Negro's best and only 
friend. 
Whe n ','iis propaganda failed to check the 
increasing exodus, southern employers became franti c and began a persecution of the 
few labor agents workin g i n the South, wh o 
were "foolin g our Negroes to their doom 
by urgin g them to leave. " No t realizin g 
that the movement was a leaderless one and 
that it was the natura l result of the economic law of supply and demand, affecting 
the labor worl d i n the North , they failed utterly to appreciate that the economic pul l 
from the North , added to the oppressive 
push from the South, was takin g the Negr o 
away. 
A welcome aid to their theories, or lack 
of them, was the race riots of Washington , 
Chicago, and Omaha . Playe d up by the 
southern press, these riots wer e used to 
urg e Negroe s to retur n southwar d and to 
keep those wh o yet remaine d i n the South. 
News articles appeared i n profusion, headed : "NEGROE S ANXIOU S T O RETUR N 
SOUTH, " "T O GIV E LOUISIAN A 
BLACK S I N CHICAG O CHANC E T O 
RETURN, " "CHICAG O NEGROE S ASK , 
HOME S I N SOUT H AGAIN, " and a few 
wit h captions such as "CAROLIN A 
WANT S BLACKS , LES S 'EQUALITY ' 
DREAMS, " "NEGR O LABO R WANTED, " 
and "MAGNOLI A STAT E INVITE S 
WANDERIN G NEGROE S HOME. " 
Commissions wer e sent from Southern 
States—Mississippi , Louisiana , and others 
—to furnis h railroa d far e to those Negroe s 
who had found norther n opportunit y an il ­
lusive mirage . To their surprise , they 
found tha t instead of wantin g to return , 
Negroe s wer e wel l content, earnin g good 
wages, comfortably housed i n man y cities, 
and savin g money. Whe n reminded of 
race riots i n the North , their answe r wa s 
simila r to tha t of a Chicag o colored man , 
wh o replied, "I f I've got to be killed , I 
would rathe r be kille d b y m y friends. " Th e 
universalit y of this feeling is evidenced b y 
an inquir y made by the Chicag o Branc h of 
the Nationa l League on Urba n Conditions 
Amon g Negroes into the motives actuatin g 
all Negroes who left tha t cit y on railroad s 
durin g the week of the rio t i n Jul y an d 
August . Durin g tha t week 261 Negroe s 
came to Chicag o and 219 left. O f the latte r 
numbe r only 14 left the cit y on account of 
the rio t and not one wa s goin g South, but 
to other points i n the North . Eighty-thre e 
of the 219 wer e goin g South, bu t i n every 
case they wer e either returnin g from summe r vacations, visiting , or goin g on business. 
So muc h has been said and wit h so littl e 
foundation i n fact about the Negr o migran t 
tha t an inquir y has been made b y the Nat
Colored People into his progress i n certain 
industria l centers of the North . These in ­
clude Chicago, Pittsburgh , Detroit, Cleve -
112 TH E SUCCES S OF NEGRO MIGRATION 113 
land , the Atlanti c Coast shipbuildin g 
plants, the steel and manufacturin g sections of Pennsylvania , Ohio, and adjoining 
states. 
I n Chicago 40,000 colored men and 12,000 
women have been added to the industria l 
population since the migratio n began. Ac ­
cordin g to T. Arnol d Hil l of the Chicago 
Urba n League , the stockyards employ 8,000 
of these; the Cor n Products Refining Company has increased its force of colored employees i n one yea r from 30 to 800; the International Harveste r Compan y employs 
500; and the Pullma n Ca r Shops, 400. The 
Industria l Departmen t of the Urba n League 
places about 1,000 a month. Man y of the 
industria l plants endeavor to maintai n a 
ratio of one Negr o to every three white 
workmen , although the population ratio i n 
Chicago is one Negr o to thirt y whites. The 
outlook fo r retention of this labor is excellent, accordin g to al l reports, and no encouragement wa s given to southern labor 
agents i n their efforts to induce Negroes to 
return . Negroe s are rapidl y adjusting 
themselves to the new industria l and social 
environment; they are savin g money, whic h 
is evidenced b y the larg e numbe r of depositors i n the banks located i n the Second and 
Thir d Wards, where most of the colored 
population live ; they are conducting an 
increasin g numbe r of business enterprises, 
and rea l estate dealers ar e reapin g a ric h 
harvest i n sellin g homes to Negroes. I n 
spite of the serious riotin g of Jul y and 
August , there is yet a marke d influx into 
the cit y and jobs are secured wit h littl e 
difficulty fo r all who wan t to work. Em ­
ployers wh o have had no experience before 
wit h Negr o labor are, i n the main , finding 
tha t the old belief about the inefficiency of 
Negr o labor is a myth . The greatest proof 
of this is the eagerness wit h whic h colored 
applicants fo r jobs are received. 
I n Pittsburg h competent observers, who 
are i n close touch wit h labor conditions, 
state tha t full y 12,000 Negroes have been 
placed durin g the past two and a half years. 
One large employe r of labor states that 
Negr o labo r as a whole is fa r superior to 
any type of immigran t labor whic h he has 
used. Throw n into the rigorous industria l 
life , workin g i n mills wit h roarin g machin ­
ery overhead and all around him, the man 
who has been used only to the quiet lif e of 
the rura l South finds it difficult at first to 
adjust himself to the new order of things. 
' Ye t the testimony is almost unanimous that 
after a period of adjustment, the vast 
majorit y soon shake off habits of tardiness, 
of indolence, of unreliability , and of carousing at night, and are rapidl y absorbed 
into the industria l life. It is evident i n 
Pittsburg h that prohibition has had a beneficial effect, for there is less disorder and 
savings bank deposits are growin g larger. 
Al l signs indicate a brigh t outlook for the 
retention of those who have already come 
and many more who are plannin g to come 
North . 
Fiv e thousand migrants have been placed 
i n Cleveland. Recently a questionnaire 
was sent to 150 industria l plants, askin g 
for specific informatio n on the question of 
the efficiency of migran t labor. Practicall y 
all of the questionnaires were answered 
and only a few expressed any dissatisfaction. In the main , the answers were highl y 
laudatory, and due to rigi d citizenship requirements whic h employers have adopted, 
the outlook is exceptionally good for the 
Negr o i n preference to the immigran t population upon whic h employers have been 
largel y dependent i n the past. 
One Detroit automobile firm employs 
some 1,200 to 1,500 Negroes. Anothe r 
simila r plant employs over 1,100. I n this 
latte r plant a most interesting situation has 
taken place, whic h is a valuable commentar y on the efficiency and adaptabilit y of 
Negr o labor. In one of the departments of 
this establishment prio r to the introduction 
of Negr o labor, 70 white men of various na ­
tionalities were producing an average of 
18 chassis a day. The official records of 
this plant .show that withi n six weeks after 
an all-Negr o force was placed i n this department, 50 men were turnin g out from 
40 to 50 a day—a clear gai n i n efficiency of 
over 300 per cent. Anothe r blow to the exponents of the doctrine of race inferiority ! 
Accordin g to Dr. George E . Haynes, of 
the Department of Labor, 24,647 Negroes 
were employed i n shipbuildin g on the Atlantic 
the wa r ended. O f this numbe r a large 
percentage was employed in those lines of 
employment classed as skilled labor, and 
this numbe r is increasing as the Negr o is 
given the opportunity to prove his worth . 
Al l of the above testimony is but a frag ­
ment of the record being made by the mi-PARAD E O F NEGR O UNIO N ME N A T BALBO A HEIGHTS , CANA L ZON E 
114 TH E MURDER ON NINTH AVENU E 115 
grant. A s lon g as the tide of immigratio n 
is turne d awa y from Americ a rathe r than 
towar d it, he wil l be able to enter into 
norther n industr y i n ever increasin g numbers. Furthe r factors are the efficiency of 
his labor, the attitude of labor unions and 
non-labor unio n groups, and his absorption 
into the industrial, economic, and socia l lif e 
of the North . Th e one question whic h confronts Negr o labor is tha t of his makin g 
good and continuin g to do so. Withou t attemptin g to moralize , i f he does make good 
and i f the migratio n continues to brin g 
mor e colored labor into the North , the difficulties whic h he now confronts i n overcomin g a mythica l and slanderous propa ­
gand a of untruths as to his wort h wil l be 
gradually , but surely, overcome. Ther e is 
grea t opportunity i n the Nort h fo r men and 
women who ar e willin g to wor k and the 
southern employers of labo r ma y as well 
abandon al l hopes they ma y be cherishing 
of inducin g the Negr o to return . Th e 
America n Federatio n of Labo r has, on 
paper at least, abolished the color line. 
This forms an excellent barometer as to 
the futur e of Negr o labor, but that barrin g 
of the color line i n the A . F . of L. , or any 
other organization of labor, wil l only be 
permanent when Negroes make good i n 
large numbers and present their case i n 
strong enough terms to force consideration 
and recognition. 
Accordin g to all visible signs, the Negr o 
migran t has made good, the migratio n is 
stil l going on, and wil l continue to go on 
unti l the industria l needs of the Nort h are 
supplied and the South can lear n to accord 
to the Negr o al l the privilege s he demands. Some ravin g demagogues of tha t 
section ma y declare tha t this wil l never be. 
Their statements do not interest the Negro , 
however, and the time ma y yet come when 
the South wil l awaken from its dream of 
hordes of disillusioned Negroes flocking 
back to their "best friends, " and wil l realize 
the gold mine of Negr o labor whic h it had 
and lost. 
TH E MURDER ON NINTH AVENUE 
A STORY 
DID yo u eve r notice this porte r before? 
No , I suppose not; one does not notice 
porters much . Well , he's reall y a character, 
and ful l of stories. Notic e his thin, 
nervous hands and the droop of his 
eyelids. I alway s sit up late when 
I'm on his car, and when he comes 
to the smokin g room I tackle him. Usuall y 
I expect a story, and it's wort h while . Porters, yo u know, have endless adventures. 
Shal l I tell yo u his latest tale? I had a 
rattlin g detective story wit h me i n the 
smokin g room. 
"Eve r read it? " said I to the porter. 
"No, " said he shortly. 
"Hav e a cigar, " said I. "They'r e al l i n 
bed. " 
H e looked out into the car, then turnin g 
back lighted u p and settled luxuriously . 
"I've ha d m y fill of detective business," 
he said. "O f course, I used to dream of 
being one; but a black ma n couldn't get on 
the force. I tried i t once, however, i n a n 
amateu r way, but"—he puffed— "neve r 
again." 
"Yo u see, I got i n late tha t night:—hotbox, a wreck, bad connections—everything. 
Well , I rushed over from Jersey, jumpe d on 
the Sixt h Avenu e L and uptown we flew. I 
must have gone to sleep, for just as we wer e 
swingin g one of the corners, where the 
Sixt h make s fo r Nint h Avenue , I was suddenly awakened by the jolt and, startin g 
up, found myself starin g into a second-floor 
window. 
"Th e sight tha t me t me made me wild , 
and I let go a yell tha t frightened the 
women and brought the guar d i n from the 
platform. The n I made m y first mistake . 
Instead of tellin g them wha t was the matte r 
and setting the public and the police i n pursuit, I got the detective microbe. Nothin g 
but a brillian t piece of amateur detective 
business would suit me tha t night, an d 
withou t a wor d I rushed to the platform 
and at the next station flew down the steps. 
People thought I had snakes, I guess. O f 
course, as matte r of fact, it was just pure , 
impertinent curiosity on my part—the un ­
governable curiosit y tha t lures the coldest 
of us on whe n the myster y of death faces 
us. 116 TH E CRISIS 
"Wha t I saw i n tha t second-story window 
was this: the white , terror-struck profile of 
a woman ; the angry , ful l face of a blackbearded man , and the swift flash of his 
upraised arm. Tha t was all , but it spelled 
deliberate murder, and awaking , as I had, 
suddenly from dreamless drowsing , I saw it 
wit h startlin g vividness—clear-cut, indelible 
wa s the awfu l picture , and I rushed headlong down the steps and sped madl y back 
the ten blocks I ha d been carrie d by. If I 
had had good sense and not been consumed 
wit h war m curiosity, whic h I mistook for a 
longin g fo r justice—if it had not been fo r 
this, I woul d have hunted up a policeman. 
But , as it was, I carefully avoided the only 
one I saw, havin g a bad case of wha t I ha d 
read of as the amateur detective's contempt 
of official incapacity and red tape. Tha t 
littl e pride came nearl y puttin g me on the 
gallows—but wait : 
" I sped along unti l I came i n sight of 
the house, whic h I recognized easily, and 
then easing down to a careless walk , began 
to pla n my course of action. A s I expected, 
the windows above were now dark, but just 
as I was nearly opposite the stairwa y entrance, whic h I judged led up to the win ­
dow I had seen, the door opened and a 
bearded ma n stepped out. I n a flash I 
turned towar d him and I thought he hesitated a second. 
" 'I beg your pardon,' said I, 'but have 
yo u a match? ' 
"H e handed me one silently, and as I 
lighted my ciga r I made sure to ligh t his 
face. The n I nearl y dropped the cigar, for 
it was undoubtedly the face whic h I had 
seen a few moments since, wit h murde r 
writte n on every line. 
" I sauntered on madly, tryin g to evolve 
a furthe r course of action. If I went upstairs to find the victim, the murdere r would 
escape. I must, then, by all means shadow 
him. Now , shadowing i n books is a pastime, 
but on Nint h Avenue , at 1 A . M. , it's rathe r 
ticklis h business. I let my man start ahead 
and then I moved on behind. H e apparently 
paid no attention at all , stood on the corner 
as i f lookin g for a car, and then hearin g 
the thunde r of the elevated, changed his 
min d and dashed up the stairs. I dashed, 
too, and just made the train—an d we two 
were the only passengers i n the car. I 
felt that he was watchin g me, but I paid no 
attention to him and was congratulatin g 
myself on my braver y when he fooled me 
into my second mistake b y the simplest of 
expedients: A s we neared Sixty-sixt h 
Street he carelessly arose and passed me as 
i f to leave the car. Just as the trai n 
slowed up I arose, too, wit h wha t I thought 
was admirabl y assumed carelessness, and 
made as i f to leave. I was righ t behind him. 
" 'Oh , this is not Seventy-second,' he said 
to the guard , and turned suddenly back. 
"Now , I couldn't tur n righ t back, too— 
tha t wa s a bit too obvious—and before I 
could gathe r up my wits I was on the platform, and my quarr y glided off. I started 
slowly down the stairs, and then, seeing a 
passing surface car, I leapt down and 
caught it. A t tha t time of nigh t the surface cars make good time , and I had a 
haz y hope tha t we migh t reach Seventysecond Street somewhere nea r the same 
time as the elevated. But , pshaw! the elevated outdistanced us. I stood watchin g on 
the back platform and at last swun g off 
a t Seventieth Street, determined to catch 
a ca r back an d search fo r the victim, whe n 
righ t around behind the ca r shot a taxicab . 
I jumpe d out of the wa y as i t slowed up 
fo r the ca r to pass, and, glancin g up—wha t 
do you think ? Ther e sat m y man . Evidently 
second Stree t and wa s now speeding home. 
Di d he see me? I didn't kno'w. I thought 
not, and withou t furthe r thought I just 
fell gently on the runnin g board of tha t 
machine and la y tight. It wa s a fool thin g 
to do. M y Lord , how tha t bloke shot the 
tax i over the ground. Bumpety-bump , 
whish , grr! M y eyes and mouth wer e ful l 
of dirt, m y hands were numb, my clothes 
ruined, and m y body almost a pulp . I was 
scared stiff. One tur n to the righ t instead 
of three to the left and I'd have been a 
corpse on the curb. W e shot throug h the 
par k at Sixty-sixt h Street, and just as I 
wa s givin g up, unabl e to stand it longer, 
the tax i suddenly slowed down and I heard 
the drive r ask: 
" 'Sixty-five , East Sixtieth , di d yo u say, 
sir? ' 
'"No ; Seventy-five.' 
" I waited fo r no more, but rolled into 
the gutte r and la y panting . B y and by 
my dazed achin g gave wa y to a feeling of 
triumph . I had m y man's address—Seventy-five—but Seventy-fiv
and limpe d along painfully—Sixty-seven— 
Sixty-nine—oh , East Sixtiet h Street. I 
straightened up i n triumph—the n I paused. 
Suppose he wa s foolin g me and knew I wa s TH E MURDER ON NINTH AVENU E 117 
there? I hit on a sudden pretext. I ran 
to Numbe r Seventy-five. A sleepy hallboy 
sat i n the big apartment house entrance. 
" 'Say,' said I, 'did a gentleman with a 
black beard—' Then I looked up and saw 
the gentleman wit h the black beard emergin g from the elevator wit h a traveling bag 
and his eyes fixed curiously on me. I fled. 
"Dow n the street I ra n to Madison Ave ­
nue. N o car, but here came a solitary hansom, jogging along. 
" 'Two dollars to the corner of Nint h 
Avenue and Fifty-third!' I cried. 
" 'Right-o,' said cabby, wakin g up, and 
away we went. 
" I leaned back and thought it all over. 
I had certainly made some mistakes, but on 
the whole I had done well. I had traced 
my man to a place where he was known 
and could be identified. O f course, he could 
run away, but he'd have to run fast and 
fa r to escape modern methods. Yes, that 
was all right. Now, as to the victim. Then 
I get cold feet. Suppose there was no vic ­
tim? Suppose he did not strike her, after 
all ? Suppose it was only pantomime—acting—or even a dream of mine? Bu t no, it 
was too vivid , too real, and I shuddered as 
I realized again the hatred and terror of 
those two pale faces. 
"Tha t cab horse was fearfully slow. I 
grew fidgety, and my aching body cried for 
rest and sleep. 'Wher e was Black-beard 
going?' I asked myself cautiously. 'To boat 
or train—' I started— 'back to the victim, 
to lay i n wait for me?' I could summon the 
police. I got to the corner at last, dismissed the cabman, and peered about. No t 
a policeman i n sight. The house was still 
dark. I tried the front door. It was unlocked. I looked again up and down the 
street. N o one i n sight. 
"M y insatiable curiosity got the better of 
me. Carefully I removed my shoes and 
crept up the stairs. Silently I slipped up, 
step after step. Hark ! Wha t was that? 
I stopped and listened wit h every nerve 
a-tingle. A terror crept through me. Death 
was above me and perhaps murde r below. 
I had ru n voluntaril y into a trap. Stil l I 
dare not retreat—I might meet the police. 
I must go on and discover the crime. I 
crept onward. The stairs creaked horribly, 
and I thought I sensed something like a 
low groan. I cursed myself for my damned 
curiosity. Wh y had I not gone home about 
my business? Wha t were this city's brawls 
to me? Perhaps I had been dreaming and 
was now guilty of burglary. Woul d this 
staircase never end? Its creaking sounded 
to my strainin g ears like shrieks i n the 
darkness, and I was ready almost to scream 
wit h terror. Suddenly my hand came flat 
down; there were no more stairs. I groped 
cautiously. Yes, I was i n a dark hall. I 
stopped and calculated. The room I wanted 
should be here. I felt and groped. There 
was a door. Terro r gripped me again and 
I felt my heart pounding. I dared not enter 
that mysterious door; I dared not stay 
where I was; I dared not go down stairs. 
A moment I stood i n a cold tremble and then 
I deliberately turned the door knob. The 
door yielded. I entered. 
"Ou t of the window before me loomed the 
dark mass of the elevated as it curved 
about the corner; beyond, the electric lights 
blinked dimly against the darkened houses 
and empty street. There was the window 
through which I had glanced, and here, directly at my feet, lay a dark, huddled heap. 
I bent forward. M y hand touched a 
human form and something wet and sticky. 
" I started to light a match, and then my 
heart froze and stopped. A bright gleam of 
light shot past me from behind and il ­
lumined the white face of the stricken 
woman. Fo r a moment I could neither 
stir nor utter a sound. 
" 'Well , my man, wha t are you doing 
here?' 
" I turned and looked into the faces of 
two policemen. I sighed helplessly. I saw 
my finish—amateur detective, indeed! Here, 
i n sheer wooden-headed perversity, I had 
put myself i n a position which meant the 
gallows. No use explaining. Here I was, 
a black man, found i n a house at dead 
of night, wit h bloody hands, leaning over 
a dead white woman—shoes off, dirt y and 
disreputable i n looks—O, Lord ! It was 
all up wit h me. I might just as well say 
'guilty'—my story would be lost breath. 
One thin g alone was lacking, and that was 
an actual eye witness to the deed. I knew 
that was coming—I felt it i n my bones— 
and sure enough, just as the bracelets 
snapped on my wrists and the policeman 
lighted the gas, the door opened and i n 
came Black-beard wit h his suit-case. 
"H e looked me over calmly. 
" 'Yes, that's the man I saw enter here 
an hour ago, just before I heard the woman 
scream.' 118 TH E CRISIS 
"I looked at him i n undisguised admira ­
tion. It wa s magnificent lying . The idea 
of my playin g amateur detective wit h such 
a maste r of deviltry ! Amateu r detective! 
Why , I wasn't even an amateur jackass— 
hark ! Agai n I thought I sensed a groan. 
I looked down. One of the policemen wa s 
bending over the woman—a dainty, beautiful , childlike thing , lyin g pitifull y i n he r 
own blood. A s the officer leaned down a 
sudden tremor ra n through her frame . I 
turned my eyes suddenly on Black-beard . 
His magnificent control was gone—his face 
was whit e wit h horror. I nudged the policeman who held me. The woman suddenly 
struggled up on one arm. He r eyes wandered blankl y around the group unti l they 
caught his an d held them i n piteous entreaty. 
" 'Don't—don't kil l me—Henry, ' she 
gasped. 'Why—did—you—strike—ah, ' and 
the rigo r of death caught and held he r 
soul. " 
The porte r puffed his ciga r reflectively. 
"Well, " said I. 
"0 , Black-bear d trie d to escape and then 
flopped and confessed, and tha t cleared me. 
Bu t say—no more amateur detective fo r 
mine. " 
WHERE ELIZA 
CROSSED TH E 
IC E 
FELI X J . KOC H 
OH, YES , of course there is controversy 
as to the exactness of it. Some people 
would have you believe tha t when Mrs. 
Stowe wrote "Uncl e Tom's Cabin " and described the flight of Eliz a across the ice 
she had i n min d the almost miraculous 
crossing of one Margare t Garner, a fugitive 
slave, wit h her child , from cake to cake 
of ice, where Mil l Creek empties into the 
Ohio, at Cincinnati . Bu t other versions— 
and doubtless they are the correct ones— 
relate that Eliz a crossed the ice at Ripley , 
a slumberin g rive r town some miles upstream from the Queen City—an d inasmuch 
as Riple y is filled wit h interesting sites 
connected wit h the escape of fugitive slaves, 
the people there la y claim, as well, to possessing the rea l site of the crossing. 
Thank s to this, i n connection wit h a great 
"Homecomers' Day, " at Ripley , a forme r 
son of the town, now a citizen of Cleveland, 
CROSSING TODAY AT RIPLEY . OHIO 
has had marke d wit h most attractive tablets al l sites connected wit h the story. 
Yo u who would begin you r tour of these 
places start, of course, at the river. Rather, 
you make you r start at the rise of the 
bluff, where the long descent begins to the 
stream and wher e an immaculatel y whit e 
monument is set to the famous old abolitionists of the town. Befor e yo u lies the murk y 
river—muc h lik e an y other large America n 
stream, and hintin g littl e of the time whe n 
it was the borde r between slave-state and 
free, and the crossing of it meant freedom ! 
To black, as wel l as white , it's so simple, 
so easy—today—this crossing ! A ferry ­
boat rides a t anchor and at stated intervals 
bears you across for a pittance . Yo u tr y 
almost vainly , therefore, to fanc y wha t a 
tri p i t was i n the older days. 
Behin d you, as you turn , the littl e lanes WHER E ELIZ A CROSSE D TH E ICE 
of Riple y lie; behind these there is a ridge 
of hills—the banks of the prehistori c Ohio. 
Crownin g this crest and visible, by day, 
from afar, because of the flag and staff 
set up recently to mar k it, and, by night, 
because of a lantern hoisted on that same 
flagpole, is the portico of a n old homestead, 
the home of the abolitionist Ranki n and his 
sons, who had helped so many black folk 
to freedom. 
The sunshine floods the quiet stream as 
you recall the tale. Unconsciously, almost, 
you reach fo r your copy of the book and 
then read afresh the old story: 
"I n consequence of all the various delays, 
it was about three-quarters of a n hour after 
Eliz a had lai d her chil d to sleep i n the 
villag e taver n that the part y came ridin g 
into the same place. Eliz a was standing 
at the window. . . . She drew back 
suddenly; the whole trai n swept by the 
window, round to the front door. 
" A thousand lives seemed to be concentrated i n tha t one moment to Eliza . He r 
room opened by a side door to the river. 
She caught he r chil d and spran g down the 
steps towar d it. The trade r caught a ful l 
glimps e of her, just as she wa s disappearing 
down the bank, and, throwin g himself from 
his horse and callin g loudly on Sam and 
Andy , he was after he r like a hound after 
a deer. 
"I n that dizz y moment her feet, to her, 
scarce seemed to touch the ground, and a 
moment brought her to the water's edge. 
Righ t on behind they came, and, served wit h 
strength such as God gives only to the 
desperate, wit h 
one wil d cr y 
and flying leap 
she vaulte d 
sheer over the 
turbi d current 
by th e shore 
and on to the 
raft of ice beyond. It was a 
desperate leap, 
impossible t o 
anythin g bu t 
madness an d 
despair, an d 
Haley , Sam and 
And y instinc ­
tivel y cried out 
an d lifted up 
their hands as 
she did it. 
"Th e huge, green fragment of ice on 
which she alighted pitched and creaked as 
her weight came on it—but she stayed there 
not a moment. Wit h wil d cries and desperate energy she leaped to another and 
stil l another cake—stumbling, leaping, slipping , springin g upwar d again. He r shoes 
are gone, her stockings cut from her feet— 
whil e blood marke d every step; but she saw 
nothing, felt nothing, till , dimly , as i n a 
dream, she saw the Ohio side and a ma n 
helping her up the bank. " 
Ranki n was wont to help the slaves to 
his home, on the heights aforesaid; more 
often, though,-th e runawa y slaves were 
forced to guide themselves to this by a 
huge beacon ligh t whic h he posted here 
every evening, close to the site of the present lamp on the pole. 
If the trai l were anythin g like it is now 
i n those days you wonde r how any one 
weighted down wit h excitement, could 
"make it"—fo r notably i n the hot summers 
it is all that a ma n can do to get to the 
top. Pro m street to street the wa y leads, at 
base; then there comes the footpath proper; 
huge, shoe-wrecking boulders set i n the 
weeds beneath thorny, straggl y acacia trees. 
There's a picturesque Negr o town at one 
point on the route ; then, this passed, you 
win d along to the Hundre d Steps, as they're 
called. Afte r the steps there's another long 
climb, where you find the trai l fo r yourself; and then, up at the summit, at last, 
the great old homestead—a prosaic, onestory brick, wit h roof sloping to the rear 
and the front 
facade broken, 
alternately, by 
window , 
door, window, 
door — awaits 
you. A crumblin g old portico 
is at mid-front, 
and it is delightfu l to look 
down on the 
rive r from out 
the mornin g -
glor y vine s 
'round its posts. 
So quiet, so 
peaceful th e 
place, one can 
scarce believe 
TH E MONUMENT AT TH E WHAR F TO TH E 
ABOLITIONISTS 120 TH E CRISI S 
there were times when armed men 
came here to sack it, an d tha t even 
the mother of the house wa s forced to take 
arms to defend he r home from attack. 
I n the days when Harrie t Beecher resided nea r Cincinnati , however, those events 
were almost commonplaces. Lan e Seminary, where both he r fathe r and husband 
taught, would have been sacked by another 
mob had not the mu d prevented a grea t 
horde of pro-slavery partisans from reachin g the place a t a time whe n the students 
were suspected of harborin g fugitive s and 
aidin g them to freedom. 
Some few miles inlan d from the Ohio, at 
Washington , Kentucky,—the n the county 
seat—there stil l stands the court house at 
whic h Miss Beecher, as she then was, witnessed the grea t slave sale which , to suit 
the purpose of he r story, she places a t Ne w 
Orleans. Roun d about, too, are the old 
plantations wher e she actuall y saw the 
Negroe s a t their work , and there is one 
far m to whic h she wa s a frequent visito r 
and upon whic h some of the old Negr o 
homes survive ; and this, i t is presumed, wa s 
he r origina l fo r "Shelby's"—th e first home 
of Uncl e Tom. 
Latterly , people ar e comin g to forget, 
more and more, the rigors of the irre ­
pressible conflict tha t brough t on the grea t 
Civi l War , but "Uncl e Tom's Cabin, " both 
as book and as play , remains a perennia l 
favorite , recallin g to min d man y phases of 
the old days, but most particularl y these 
crossings by fugitiv e slaves on the ice. 
TH E OPTIMIST 
E THY L L EWI S 
OPPRESSED ? Ah , well, the devil, yo u 
say! 
Well—weepin g can only last for a day ; 
The blackest cloud is all brigh t inside— 
What's i n wit h the flood goes out wit h the 
tide. 
Scorned and laughed at ? Tha t matters 
not— 
He who laughs last has the best of the lot; 
The first shall be last and the last shall 
be first— 
H e who gives drink , tomorrow may thirst. 
You'r e suffering now, dar k clouds enshroud— 
Bu t yours is the suffering of whic h one 
is proud ; 
Fo r out of the hell and the har d of it all , 
Salvatio n wil l come, as the ligh t came to 
Saul. 
The wa r has been killin g your men, you 
say; 
Despair has been eating you r heart away— 
It would be all righ t i f yo u didn't know 
Tha t the country you love despised you so. 
Neve r mind , children , be patient awhile , 
An d carr y you r load wit h a nod and a 
smile ; 
Fo r out of the hell and the har d of it all , 
Time is sure to brin g sweetest honey—not 
gall . 
Out of the hell and the har d of it all , 
A brigh t sta r shall rise tha t never shall 
fall ; 
A God-fearin g race—proud, noble and true, 
Givin g good for the evil whic h they alway s 
knew, 
Befor e whom al l nations shall come and 
bow down 
An d place at its feet the world's sceptre 
and crown. 
The scorners wil l then know "Wha t fools 
mortals be! " 
An d the laughers can no more find heart 
for their glee. 
So dr y you r wet pillow and lift you r bowed 
head, 
An d show to the worl d tha t hope is not 
dead! 
Be patient! Wait ! See wha t yet ma y 
befall, 
Out of the hell and the har d of i t all . RECEPTIO N T O MRS , A . W . HUNTON , GIVE N B Y TH E LADIE S O F BROOKLYN , O N HE R RETUR N FRO M TH E WESTER N FRON T 
121 TH E CATHOLIC CHURCH AND TH E 
NEGRO PRIEST 
DEA R SIR : 
FOR some time I've desired to publish an 
articl e i n TH E CRISIS , or rathe r make 
known to you r society the deplorable discriminatio n of the Catholi c Churc h towar d 
Negroes. Afte r two years of deliberation, 
I've concluded to writ e to you. This long 
deliberation is due to the fac t tha t I've 
trie d to make the prope r use of common 
sense, self-control, and cool-headedness, 
withou t whic h i t is difficult to express oneself or calculate reasonably on such a subject. 
I've alway s lived my lif e in Orthodox 
Roma n Catholi c fashion, cherishin g and believin g everythin g Catholic ; consequently, a 
few years ago I desired to live an Apostoli c 
life , i n the capacity of priesthood. I made 
known my desires to my Reverend Rector,-
F . J. McSha w of St. Nichola s Churc h i n 
Atlanti c City , N . J. , who said he had already discovered such a disposition i n me. 
Immediately he applied to the Hol y Ghost 
Fathers at Cornwells, Pa. , who are missionaries to Negroe s of the Norther n Unite d 
States and Africa , also to the Josephite 
Fathers of Baltimore , Md. ; and missionarie s 
to Negroes of the Southern Unite d States. 
A t tha t time both societies accepted the application , but the Fathers at Cornwells had 
no room i n their dormitory. Th e Josephites 
accepted under condition tha t I give myself 
up to their requirement. Th e Hol y Ghost 
Fathers had decided not to accept colored 
men into their Order, and the Josephite 
Fathers said they required $250 per year, 
although they were educating whit e boys 
free. I was not able to pa y $250 per year, 
but a youn g whit e man , a Catholic , offered 
to make up the amount each yea r for me. 
However, the Reverend Superio r Justi n McCarthy refused me admission. 
I wrot e and plead to the Cardinals and 
Arch-Bishops, and practicall y every Religious Orde r i n the Unite d States, withou t 
receiving any consideration. 
Reverend T. J. Park , Rector of the Cath ­
olic Churc h "Ou r Lad y of the Blessed Sacrament," at Broa d Street and Fairmoun t 
Avenue , this city, [Philadelphia ] a church 
for colored people, wa s my rector and a 
priest of the Hol y Ghost Society ; so I went 
to hi m and insisted tha t his society should 
give me some consideration i n attainin g 
wha t I believed to be my vocation. H e sent 
me to the Cathedra l to consult the Archbishop, w
Fathers of the Negr o missions. " 
Fathe r Par k then went to Cornwells to 
consult wit h the Provincia l of his society, 
the Reverend J . Griffin, and returning , he 
said : " I am goin g to give i t to you as it 
wa s given to me by the Provincial : 'We 
have no colored students and are not goin g 
to take any. Almight y God does not wan t 
a colored ma n for a priest. H e is absolutely 
unfit morally , physically , and effectively; 
prejudice, sentiment, and authorit y are 
against it, and one wit h a sound min d ought 
to know tha t God does not wan t him. Colored peo
people can't use them.' This is the decision 
of the Unite d Catholi c Councils and i f you 
do not accept it, you are vain. " 
I said, "Father, wha t of Fathe r Burges, 
a colored ma n i n you r society? " 
H e said, "Fathe r Burge s has neve r been 
wha t a priest should be. A colored ma n has 
not been successful as a priest anywher e i n 
the world , not even i n Africa. " 
Wit h this our conversation ended, as did 
also my eighth yea r of disappointment. I 
am not alone, fo r I know good youn g men of 
noble characte r i n Ne w York , Philadelphia , 
Baltimore , and Washington , who ardently 
desired and begged to be priests—and noble 
priests they woul d have made,—but because 
their faces wer e black, they are today, even 
as I,—despondent victims of Catholi c preju ­
dice. Ther e is not a n Orde r of priests or 
Brothers i n the Unite d States today tha t 
wil l accept a colored man's application . It 
is inconceivable that a Christia n denomina ­
tion woul d go to such extent to retar d a 
race's progress. 
Th e clergy is entirely to blame , because 
the lait y willingl y submits and patientl y 
performs any injunctions conferred on them 
by the clergy. Man y whit e Catholic s are 
astonished to hear of such discriminatio n 
among religious Orders; but these facts are 
not hidden from such as Monsignor J. Burke 
122 TH E OUTE R POCKE T 123 
in New York City, His Eminence James 
Cardina l Gibbons, the Archbishops, His Excellency Joh n Bonzano, the Apostoli c Delegate i n Was
and Cardinals leave it to the priests i n 
charge of Negroes. 
His Excellenc y Joh n Bonzan o i n a reply 
to me declared it wa s beyond the scope of his 
providence and power. In this manner, 
from every Catholi c source, we are confronted wit h such depravity,—tha t culture 
an d refinement are impossible. Ther e are 
man y dishonorable circumstances I could 
mention to prove tha t my vision is not obstructed by inaccuracy, prejudice, or malconclusion." 
Since we are not allowed i n any capacity 
to pursue a religious vocation, colored youn g 
men and women are not admitted to Catholi c 
hig h schools and colleges, notwithstandin g 
the fac t tha t they are dissuaded attending 
those under Protestant influence. This accounts fo r the grea t percentage of ignorance 
among colored Catholics. 
Havin g been fo r years an active member 
of both the Hol y Name and St. Vincen t De 
Paul's Societies, I am able to express every 
one of the deplorable conditions tha t confront our Catholi c colored people, makin g us 
the most backward , the most depraved sect 
of America n Negroes. W e are governed by 
the most prejudiced men on this continent, 
who impose their conditions upon us and 
tell us it is God's will . 
Yours truly , 
(Signed) GEORG E JOSEP H MACWILLIAM , 
Philadelphia , Pa . 
The Oute r Pocke t 
THE different papers of the South speak 
of some of our leadin g citizens spreadin g discontent amongst the Negroes i n the 
South. If they woul d look at it i n the 
righ t way , they woul d see tha t they themselves are the true cause of all racia l discord, both i n the South and i n the North . 
Bu t they are too mean and cowardl y to 
acknowledge it. If they could stop lynchin g 
long enough and consider the impression 
they make on the minds of others, I think 
they would be able to realize how small 
they look i n the eyes of the honest and lawabidin g citizens of the world . 
E . B . HALL , Metuchen, N . J . 
Please read James 3: 1-6. To thin k that 
a ma n should spend his time i n stirrin g up 
strif e and hatred is awful. I refer to articles i n TH E CRISIS , whic h I veril y believe 
have been the cause of man y riots and 
lynchings. .. . 
Those words of a "chil d of twelve years, " 
("I hate the whit e ma n as muc h as he does 
me and probably more" ) sent a pan g to my 
heart. No t tha t the whit e people care for 
the hatred, but to thin k the chil d should be 
taught contrar y to God's word , whic h says: 
"Lov e you r enemies." O f course the chil d 
is not to blame, but others are. . . . 
I know there are man y devils among the 
whit e race as well as the black race. Bu t 
that is no reason wh y the Negr o should be 
taught to "hate " the whole whit e race. God 
is love. Ther e is no hatred i n Heaven. 
1'here are millions of white people 
there. . . . 
If you who are ful l of hatred fo r the 
whit e people should get to Heaven , (which 
is impossible without repentance) how 
could you be happy? 
N . E . M . AYERS , Parnell , Ky . 
I am a poor student. I have worked my 
wa y through school as fa r as I have gone. 
I am twenty-three years old. I want to 
finish m y school work, but I am not going 
to tr y to finish it here because a colored 
man, regardless of how good he is,—it does 
not matter—he is not safe anywhere , not 
even i n jail , court house, or i n his home. 
To get shot down or lynched or burned is 
a common thin g down here. An d the question of "law"—I would like to spend just a n 
hour wher e la w and order abide. I haven't 
been able to see but one law in the South, 
and that is there is no chance fo r a man i f 
his face is dark. Seemingly, law is the least 
thin g thought of. The color of the ski n decides everything when it comes to law. I TH E ST . PAUL , MINN. , FOLK-SON G COTERIE . MRS . NELLI E E . FRANCIS , LEADER . 
124 TH E OUTER POCKE T 125 
feel as though I am enslaved, but by reading 
of you r writing s I have been able to keep 
a spar k of hope i n my breast, and now I am 
tryin g to- save enough money to come to 
tha t lovely state of yours, where men are 
protected by the la w and wher e I am expecting to wor k and finish my training . 
I f yo u should see fit to put anythin g tha t 
I have said i n you r magazine , do not use 
m y name unti l I get up there. 
, Memphis, Tenn . 
I f I wer e asked wha t is the most influentia l mandate i n social, political, and religious lif e i n the Unite d States; the one exalted above the Decalogue, and above 
Christ's summar y of the la w and the prophets; the one obeyed withou t question, and 
whic h rarel y suffers a n infraction ; the one 
tha t bring s bishops and saloon-keepers, lofty 
judges and besotted criminals side by side,— 
I should answer, it is tha t mandat e whic h 
reads: Tho u shalt never fai l to observe the 
distinction between whit e people and colored 
people, either b y confounding their persons 
or b y equalizin g their rights. 
T. G . STEWART , Wilberforce , Ohio. 
I have just received the September number of TH E CRISI S and i n notin g its contents I find you r ver y clear and concise 
statement of the cost of producin g this 
splendid magazine , also its enlargement and 
the increased subscription price . Indeed, I 
thin k yo u need not ask tha t you r 105,000 
buyers should not dwindle , because I believe tha t you r buyers are the thinkin g and 
the most progressive i n the race. I pledge 
myself to continue readin g you r magazine 
whateve r it costs. 
JAME S A . JENKINS , Columbus, Ohio. 
I cannot understand how the colored ma n 
has borne, withou t redress, so man y wrongs. 
Onl y today we lear n tha t al l but the ver y 
old colored people have been drive n out of a 
Kentuck y town as the result of the shooting 
of a whit e man . Al l who could not buy tickets were forced to walk . 
I don't see how much more can be borne. 
I have grow n tire d of the leniency given 
rotten politician s and legislators, wh o continu e to say wha t they please. Mor e and 
more, I am convinced tha t a n unpleasant 
consequence fo r these and others of lik e 
breed is the onl y medicine tha t wil l begin 
to wor k a cure fo r some of our nationa l and 
state ailments. Desperate people ma y help 
the State to begin to see some of its duties. 
Durin g the summe r I met i n Chicag o a 
group of Korea n leaders, who had met i n a 
very effective wa y their tryin g problems, 
and I gained some excellent ideas fo r our 
own. They made me wis h I were a man— 
and a colored man . 
I have not received my copy of TH E CRISI S 
fo r this month. Is i t because my subscription has expired? I think when last I paid, 
it was for two years i n advance. I get 
nervous when it is behind, and alway s devour it immediately when it arrives. 
MA E OWINGS , Atlanta , Ga . 
I am ver y sorr y the Negr o does not figure 
more prominentl y i n our literature ; that he 
would be popular, ma y be seen by the 
tremendous hold on the publi c of "Uncl e 
Tom, " "Eliza, " and "Uncl e Remus. " Ther e 
should be a magazine , a fiction magazine, 
wit h the principl e characters i n every story, 
—Negroes,—or at least half-breeds. 
Throug h fiction the wise and talented Negr o 
has the most powerfu l weapon fo r propa ­
ganda. I hope you wil l not thin k me presumptuous, but really, I should lik e to see 
you urge the necessity fo r a Negr o concerthall , and magazine, (for fiction) and a Negro ne
JEA N O'BRIEN , Ne w Yor k City . 
It is a grea t pit y that I was not able 
to get to Paris, i n February . It is all owin g 
to the backwardness of our race—a backwardness that is intensified by our triba l 
and clannish differences. However, I take 
this opportunity to thank you i n the name 
of our people fo r the wide ground covered 
and the success up to date. I feel certain 
that much more would have been effected 
had you any informatio n about the semislavery i n South Africa . 
SO L T. PLAATJE , 
Kimberley , South Africa . 
A s a rule, I read TH E CRISI S from cover 
to cover, and occasionally I dra w the attention of our people to some of the strikin g articles tha t appea r i n its pages. 
TH E CRISI S is doing a grea t wor k fo r our 
race, and every sensible Ethiopia n must 
acknowledge that. 
I enclose £1 i n Britis h coin herewith to 
renew m y subscription fo r as long a period 
as i t wil l cover. 
Honorable CASEL Y HAYFORD , 
Sekondi, Gold Coast, Africa . Men of the Month. 
IN the passing of Horac e Bumstea d the 
Negr o race loses, not simpl y a friend, 
but one who wa s willin g to fight and suffer 
for it. H e was born i n Boston, i n 1841, 
and graduated at Yal e durin g the Civi l 
War . H e went immediately to the front, 
leading colored troops at Petersbur g and 
Richmond . Returnin g after the war, he 
took theology at Andover, studied i n Europe, and marrie d his constant, unfailin g 
companion, Ann a M . Hoit . Afte r a short 
pastorate, he went to his lif e wor k at Atlanta University , where he served as professor and president fo r thirty-two years. 
H e stood unswervingl y for the equality of 
men. Students and teachers, black and 
white , ate together i n the Universit y dining -
room. He refused to let Wal l Street bribe 
him into cheapening the college course. H e 
refused to dismiss Dr . DuBois at the demand of the norther n copperheads because 
of his outspoken defense of the Negro. H e 
begged up and down the country to keep the 
institutio n goin g and never fo r a moment 
doubted the ultimat e triump h of right, even 
when insulted and ridiculed. The Genera l 
Educatio n Boar d and other great foundations did not lik e and woul d not help Horac e 
Bumstead, and to this day, hate Atlant a 
University . It was a fine life ; it was a 
beautiful life ; it was a life no Negr o ma y 
ever forget. 
* * * 
THERE are i n the Unite d States over 
sixt y towns and communities settled 
almost exclusively by Negroes and governed 
by them. Amon g the best known are 
Allensworth , Cal. ; Brooklyn , 111.; Buxton , 
Iowa ; Moun d Bayou , Miss. ; Boley, Okla. , 
and Hobson City , Ala . This last village 
is nea r Anniston , and had i n 1910, 344 in ­
habitants. Its present Mayo r is a youn g 
man of twenty-two, J . D . Kirksey . Mayo r 
Kirkse y has some trouble wit h the whiske y 
dealers and gamblers from the neighborin g 
city, but on the whole the town is peaceful 
and prosperous. Recently he received some 
blackhand letters, but he merely purchased 
a pistol. "It's a littl e difficult," he writes, 
"to handl e some cases, but I never give 
them up. " 
WILE Y HIND S was bor n of slave parents i n Arkansas, eighty-thre e years 
ago; his fathe r bought him from his owner 
for $300. Sixt y years ago, wit h seventyfive cents i n his pockets, he went to wor k 
as a far m labore r i n Tular e County , Cal . 
H e worke d fo r wages unti l he wa s twentynine years of age, and then began stock 
raising . Thre e years late r he purchased 
eighty acres of land, upon whic h he built a 
home; then he married , and eventually be 
came the fathe r of ten children . Whe n 
Wile y Hind s died recently, he owned 4,000 
acres of land, includin g a prune ranc h 
wort h $1,000 per acre, frui t orchards, cattle and hog ranches, and cit y propert y i n 
Oaklan d and Berkeley , Cal. , valued a t $200 
per acre. Mr . Hind s retire d from business 
five years ago, leavin g his estate i n charge 
of his oldest son, Thomas. 
* * * 
JOSEP H S. COTTER , JR. , lik e Lycidas, 
** is dead ere his prime . H e wa s bor n 
twenty-three years ago and educated at 
the Centra l Hig h School i n Louisville , Ky. , 
where his fathe r is a teacher, and at Fis k 
University . A t seventeen he ha d to give 
up his studies because of poor health. H e 
had but six littl e years to do his lif e work , 
and he spent those on a bed of pain . Ye t 
i n this time he wrote : "Ou t of the Shadows," 
lyrics; "Th e Whit e Folks' Nigger, " a book 
of one-act plays, and "Th e Ban d of Gideon " 
a volume to whic h Cal e Youn g Ric e write s 
the introduction. Soothly he write s his own 
sad, brave benediction: 
'Thoug h bends my body towar d the yawn ­
in g sod, 
I can endure the pain , the sorrows rife , 
Tha t hold me fast beneath their chastening 
rod, 
If from this turmoi l and this endless 
strife, 
Comes there a ligh t to lead ma n neare r 
God, 
An d guide his footsteps towar d t'..o 
Large r Life. " 
* * * 
CHARLES H. SCOTT, who has the 
distinction of being the only living colored 
railwa y passenger baggagemaster, cele126 MAYOR J. D. KIRKSE Y TH E LAT E WILE Y HINDS TH E LAT E 
JOSEPH S. COTTER, JR. 
TH E LAT E DR. HORACE BUMSTEAD 
CHARLES H . SCOTT DE. C. N. GARLAND TH E LAT E A. C. GRIGGS 
127 128 TH E CRISIS 
brated on Februar y 21, 1919, fifty years' 
employment i n the Cincinnati , Hamilto n and 
Dayto n Railwa y Company, Without a repriman d or a demerit or without havin g missed 
a single run . This record is unequalled by 
any employee, whit e or colored, i n the service. The followin g is his official record : 
2— 22—'69. Passenger train porter, Toledo division. 
3— 22—'70. Passenger brakesman, Toledo division; 
promoted. 
8— 2—'74. Freight brakesman, Toledo division; 
transferred. 
9—20—'74. Freight conductor, Toledo division; promoted. 
10— IS—'74. Switchman, Toledo division; transferred. 
11— 2—'74. Night yard master, Lima , Toledo division; promoted. 
2— 1—^'75. Freight brakesman, Toledo division; 
transferred. 
1—• —'78. Trai n baggageman, Toledo division; 
transferred. 
Note—6—26—'15: Clear Record to Date. 
Mr . Scott lives i n Lima , Ohio ; he wa s 
born Marc h 22, 1852, i n Dayton . H e is 
Past Gran d Chancellor of the Knights of 
Pythia s and a member of the Odd Fellows. 
He had two sons, one of whom lost his lif e 
i n a munitions plant, at Chester, Pa. , last 
year. 
* * * 
THE late A . C. Grigg s was born i n 
Farmville , Va. , January , 1856, and 
was self-educated. A t the age of twentythree he married ; one yea r late r he opened 
a grocery business and became Interna l 
Revenue Collector; at the age of twentyeight he wa s a membe r of the Hous e of 
Delegates, and three years late r he wa s 
elected member of the Senate of Virginia . 
Whil e senator he fathered the bil l tha t 
brought the whit e female norma l school to 
his home town. H e was the fathe r of five 
children—a mai l carrier, a minister, a 
teacher, a student an d a soldier—Sergean t 
Burnet t Griggs, of the 350th Fiel d Artillery , 
A . E . F . 
* * * 
THE Tremon t Trust Compan y at Boston, Mass
whit e men who sense meri t beyond the 
color line. The y have not only elected 
Dr . Cornelius N . Garlan d as a membe r of 
the board of directors, but have also employed Mar y M . Gibson, a colored graduat e 
of Radcliffe College, as clerk and teller, 
and Albert Washingto n and Willia m Law ­
rence, both Negroes, as check tellers. 
Dr. Garlan d studied a t Livingston e Col
went to Englan d fo r a post graduat e course 
i n a Londo n hospital; two years later, i n 
Boston, Mass., he began the practic e of his 
profession, and i n 1908 he purchased a 
dwellin g whic h he converted into a smal l 
hospital. The institutio n is chartered by 
the State and includes a nurse trainin g 
school. 
ORIFLAMME 
JESSI E FAUSE T 
" I can remember when I was a little, young girl, 
how my old mammy would sit out of doors in the 
evenings and look up at the stars and groan, and I 
would say. 'Mammy, what makes you groan so?' 
An d she would say, 'I am groaning to think of my 
poor children; they do not know where I be and I 
don't know where they be. I look up at the stars 
and they look up at the stars!' "—Sojourner Truth. 
IJ THIN K I see her sittin g bowed and black, 
Stricke n and seared wit h slavery's 
morta l scars, 
Reft of he r children, lonely, anguished, yet 
Stil l lookin g at the stars. 
Symboli c mother, we th y myria d sons, 
Poundin g our stubborn hearts on Free ­
dom's bars, 
Clutchin g our birthright, fight wit h faces 
set, 
Stil l visionin g the stars! Nationa l Associatio n - fo r the 
Advancemen t of Colored-People . 
AFTERMAT H A T WASHINGTO N 
AN D CHICAG O 
HONES T attempts are being made to 
discover the facts i n the cases of the 
offenders arrested durin g the Chicago and 
Washingto n riots and to mete out justic e 
to them. Ful l credit is due to the branches 
of the Nationa l Associatio n for the Advancement of Colored People i n both of 
these cities fo r their vigorous efforts to see 
tha t fair pla y be given to the riot defendants. 
Th e Nationa l Office i n co-operation wit h 
the Chicago Branc h offered counsel and 
lega l assistance to al l the rio t defendants 
who so desired. The Honorabl e S. S. Gregory, forme r President of the America n Ba r 
Association , forme r Senator Jame s J. Barbour, and members of the Cook Count y Ba 
Association , who compose the counsel, have 
alread y trie d some of the cases, whic h resulted i n complete acquittal. Mr . MacNeal , 
the Executiv e Secretary of the Chicago 
Branch , stated on Novembe r 5 tha t i n the 
cases of thirt y of the colored people indicted 
fo r arson, manslaughter, rioting , and the 
like , there had been four convictions only ; 
i n the cases of two of these convictions appeals ha d been made ; the other two were 
sentenced to two months in the county jail, 
sentenced to two months in the country jail, 
when the circumstance s of the cases are 
considered. 
Th e report of the Coroner's Jur y of 
Chicag o on the race riots is a document 
worth y of notice because of its fair attitude. First of all , it states tha t i n spite 
of the exaggerated rumors circulated durin g the riots, there were thirty-eight people 
killed , of whom twenty-three wer e colored 
and fifteen white . The Coroner's Jur y in ­
vestigated every death,—visiting hospitals, 
undertakin g establishments, and the scenes; 
of the rioting , receivin g statements from 
relatives and friends of all the victims. 
A s a result of their investigations, they 
recommended tha t twenty men be held to the 
Gran d Jur y fo r murde r or manslaughte r 
and tha t a whit e soldier be held to court 
martia l for the murde r of a whit e man . In 
eighteen cases they recommended tha t the 
unknown rioters be apprehended and punished, whil e i n seven cases the verdic t was 
justifiable homicide. Althoug h there were 
eight more deaths among Negroes than 
among whites, recommendations were made 
that sixteen colored people and eight white 
people be held for murde r and manslaughter. This was due to the fact tha t i n the 
cases of colored people killed , there wa s 
difficulty i n finding the identity of the men 
composing the mobs whic h murdered them, 
and often the jur y wa s forced to recommend 
that these unknown men be found and prosecuted. The police wer e responsible fo r this 
state of affairs, fo r whil e they arrested colored rioters wit h grea t enthusiasm, they 
failed to arrest whit e rioters. 
Durin g the riot three colored men were 
returnin g from wor k on a car. A whit e 
mob stopped the car, boarded it, and attacked the three men. In defending himself, 
one of the colored men stabbed the leader of 
the mob. The police arrested him for the 
murder, threw him into a cell, and left him 
there fo r a week, withou t medica l attention. The Coroner's Jur y stated tha t the 
conduct of the police i n this case of justifiable homicide was a travesty on justice. 
The y pointedly remarked that "none of the 
whit e rioters who made the dastardl y attack had been arrested! " I n the case of 
another colored ma n arrested fo r the death 
of a whit e man, the jur y not only recommended that he be discharged, but that the 
whit e members of the mob who first attacked him be apprehended and prosecuted. 
These were two instances of injustice whic h 
the report disclosed. 
The jur y concluded from the investiga ­
tions that neither politics nor the importa -
•tion of Southern labor were importan t factors as causes of .the riots. Ther e wa s some 
friction , however, since the housin g arrange ­
ments for this influx of labor were inadequate; the congestion of traffic whic h 
.caused whit e and colored people to be 
herded together i n the street cars also 
caused irritation . The jur y believed that 
129 130 TH E CRISIS 
the mai n factor i n the riots wa s the hoodlum element and the crimina l class of both 
races whic h took advantage of the situation 
for the loosing of natura l vicious tendencies. It recommended tha t the Police Department be improved and augmented, and 
stated tha t the failur e of the Polic e Department to arrest impartiall y at the time of 
riotin g was a mistake and ha d a tendency 
to furthe r incit e the colored population. 
I n suggesting precautions whic h the cit y 
of Chicago should observe fo r futur e protection, i t maintaine d tha t above all , the 
stric t enforcement of the law by public 
officials, fair and impartial , woul d do more 
than an y other agency to restore the good 
name of Chicago and prevent riotin g from 
agai n disturbin g the peace of the city. The 
report and recommendations of this jur y 
clearl y stated that they did not attempt i n 
any wa y to cover the conditions and circumstances productive of the riots, nor to solve 
the race problem. 
In the Washingto n riots we have the report of Mr . Jame s Cobb, Chairma n of the 
Lega l Committe e of the Distric t of Columbia Branch , who tells of conditions i n the 
courts of Washingto n after the riots, and 
the effect of the promp t intervention of the 
branch. 
The mornin g after the riots, Mr . Cobb, 
together wit h two of his assistants, Messrs. 
Houston and Hughes, went to the Police 
Court. Ther e they found that forty-six 
colored men and six whit e men had been 
arrested for carryin g concealed weapons. 
The disparit y i n the numbe r of persons of 
the two races arrested was at once called 
to the attention of the Commissioners and 
the Chie f of Police. It was noted, too, by 
the Committe e tha t the Police Judge, who 
was sittin g i n the Unite d States Branc h of 
the Police Court whic h had jurisdictio n i n 
these cases was imposin g the maximum sentence, whic h is 365 days i n jai l and a $500 
fine, or an additiona l 365 days in jai l if the 
fine could not be paid. The Unite d States 
Attorne y on that day was requirin g a 
$2,000 bond i n all cases of pistol "toting. " 
Th e Lega l Committe e of the Branc h requested an audience wit h the judge. The y 
pointed out to him that whil e the men on 
whom the weapons were found were technicall y guilt y of carryin g concealed weapons, 
the greate r portion of them had done so i n 
self-defense. Fro m tha t standpoint, therefore, they should be judged. I n other words, 
the ma n who had a pistol for his protection 
was ver y different from the ma n who wa s a 
professiona l pistol "toter, " lookin g fo r trouble. Th e judge seemed to appreciate the 
argument and the next day ordered a thorough investigation into e.".ch case. 
A s a result, nineteen of those forty-si x 
men have been put on absolute probation 
and the maximu m penalt y imposed i n but 
one case. 
The Southerne r argues tha t the Negr o 
is better off i n his old southern home than 
i n the foreign North , fo r whil e the South 
ma y lync h an occasional Negro , the Nort h 
has terribl e race riots i n whic h numbers of 
Negroes are killed . However, one importan t 
fact the Southerner overlooks, tha t the 
Negr o takes an active part i n the riots of 
the North , defending himself and his home 
as determinedly as any other man . Moreover, 
whic h arises after these conflicts to condemn 
injustice ; i n the South, i f there is opinion 
i n favo r of impartia l justic e and the basic 
rights of all men, i t is rarel y heard. 
TH E CALDWEL L CAS E 
AT this writin g we have not learned wha t 
the result wil l be of the action take n 
by the Unite d States Court i n the case of 
Sergeant Edga r Caldwell , who wa s condemned to die on December 5 by the Alabama 
ceedings were being taken durin g the last 
week of November, to secure his remova l 
from the jurisdictio n of the State of Alabam
The local Unite d States Attorne y was in ­
structed from Washingto n to represent the 
authorities and argue the government's 
case fo r remova l from State to Federa l authority, but Caldwell's attorneys moved i n 
the matter. This case is one of the most 
notable cases involvin g the lega l rights of a 
colored man, wit h whic h we are familiar. 
If the local Federa l Court rules against 
removin g Caldwel l from the State's jurisdiction, the case wil l undoubtedly go to the 
Unite d States Supreme Court and wil l probably be argued b y the Solicito r Genera l of 
the Unite d States. 
This case is also remarkabl e fo r the 
wholehearted and able defense of Caldwell's 
rights b y the whit e Alabam a lawyers Sena-N . A . A . C . P . 131 
tor Charle s D . Klin e and B . M . Allen , who 
have contested every point i n his behalf, 
an d fo r the grea t importanc e of the lega l 
issues involved, as well as for the strenuous 
efforts made to save Caldwell's life . Tha t 
Caldwel l wa s not executed months ago is 
due to the efforts of the Anniston-Hobso n 
Cit y Branch , whic h has raised more than 
$1,000 fo r the defense and i n whic h the 
Rev. R. R. William s has been especially active. The branc h has been assisted by some 
of the Alabam a branches, by the Nationa l 
Office, the Lega l Committe e of the Distric t 
of Columbi a Branch , and Mr . Emmet t J . 
Scott, as wil l be mentioned i n more detail . 
Caldwell , a colored soldier wit h a good 
record of several years' service i n the Unite d 
States Army , and at the time a sergeant i n 
a company a t Camp McClellan , was ridin g 
on a street ca r i n Anniston , Alabama , on 
the afternoon of December 15, 1918. Upo n 
being charged b y the conductor wit h not 
havin g pai d his fare , he insisted tha t he had 
paid , but wa s ordered to get off the car, 
whic h he refused to do unless his far e was 
returned. The conductor then attempted to 
put hi m off; he resisted and i n the altercation whic h followed, i n whic h the motorman 
also participated , Caldwel l wa s struck twice 
i n the face and then kicked off the car. 
Whe n Caldwel l landed on the ground, as the 
account goes, he wa s face up to the advancin g motorma n who started to kic k him 
agai n i n the stomach. The n Caldwell drew 
his pistol and shot from his hip i n quick action, killin g the conductor who was just over 
him and woundin g the motorman i n the 
neck. 
I n press dispatches Caldwel l was said to 
have attempted to "occupy the section reserved fo r whit e passengers." This allega ­
tio n wa s evidently a false one. 
Afte r a man-hunt, indulged i n by several 
posses, he wa s captured by an unarmed 
militar y policeman and hurrie d to the stockade at Camp McClellan . H e was then 
turned over to the civi l authorities, who held 
the preliminar y proceedings December 18, 
1918, i n the Calhou n Circui t Court. These 
proceedings were rushed through i n record 
breakin g time,—ninety minutes,—and Caldwell wa s indicted for murde r i n t
gree. H e wa s forced to tria l about twenty 
days from the date of the homicide, whil e 
the newspape r accounts of the affair so 
aroused the race prejudice of the whit e people of the county tha t they were talkin g of 
lynchin g him. It was generally stated that 
a Yanke e Negr o soldier had come down 
South to start trouble. 
Th e Nationa l Office was appealed to and 
it advised the branch to secure a good lawyer, one upon whom they could depend to 
defend Sergeant Caldwel l earnestly and i n 
good faith . The Alabam a branches were 
requested to co-operate. 
Durin g the tria l every lega l effort was 
made to secure for him a verdic t according 
to the evidence, but the excitement was too 
hig h and the jur y full y under the influence 
of the race prejudice so greatly aroused at 
the time. Caldwell was convicted of murder i n the first degree and sentenced to be 
hanged. His case was appealed to the Alabama Sup
judgment of the Circui t Court. The n the 
attorneys filed an application fo r a rehearin g before the Supreme Court of Alabama , 
and the order fo r execution was withdrawn . 
A t this point the Federa l authorities were 
appealed to on the ground that Sergeant 
Caldwell was at the time of his offense a 
soldier i n the Arm y and, therefore, not 
amenable to State Courts, but subject to 
tria l by the Arm y for any alleged offense. 
President Wilso n was appealed to, wit h the 
result that the Attorne y Genera l of the 
Unite d States was asked to make an investigation of the case. Those interested i n 
Sergeant Caldwell— Senator Kline , Attorneys Cobb 
Mr . Scott—held man y interviews wit h members of the Department of Justice, the Wa r 
Department, Secretary Baker, and Secre
Throug h different stages the case proceeded. One objection raised by the authorities was that since Caldwel l wa s now a discharged soldier, militar y authorities would 
have no jurisdictio n to tr y him if he should 
be taken from the State. Mr . Cobb replied 
that it was better for the perpetuity of the 
government that Caldwell go free than fo r 
him to be executed upon a sentence without 
legal standing, since this would be nothin g 
short of lynching . 
Mr . Tumult y came to the conclusion that 
lif e was too precious to depend upon a technicalit y and expedited consideration of the 
matte r along lines tha t worked for Federa l 
intervention. A t length, after the Attorne y Pythia n Temple, Louisville , Ky. ; Cost $150,000 
Wage Earners' Savings Bank, Savannah, Ga. 
Howard Theatre. 
SI X NOTABL E NEGRO 
Colored Y. M. C. A., New Yo
132 Washington, D, C. 
Negro BUILDING S 
YORK City; Cost $358,000 
Provident Hospital, Baltimore, Mil. 
Pythian Temple. New Orleans, La, 
133 134 TH E CRISIS 
Genera l ha d consulted wit h the Secretary of 
War, the Departmen t of Justic e decided to 
intervene and instructed the Unite d States 
Attorne y at Birmingham , Alabama , to cooperate wit h Caldwell's lawyers after the 
latte r had applied fo r a wri t of habeas 
corpus. Th e Federa l judge refused to issue 
a wri t of habeas corpus but di d issue a certificate of reasonable doubt whic h entitles 
Caldwell , who was sentenced to be hanged i n 
December, to an appeal. I n the meantime, 
the Court ordered a stay of execution and 
Caldwel l has been removed to Birmingha m 
for safekeeping. 
Ou r readers wil l appreciate wha t has been 
done to save Caldwel l and to secure fo r him 
a new tria l i n whic h prejudice wil l not pla y 
so large a part. Muc h wil l be accomplished 
if a fair and impartia l tria l is at last secured fo r Sergeant Caldwell. 
DISCRIMINATION AN D TH E COUR T 
RECENTL Y colored employees of the 
Librar y of Congress have been segregated i n the employees' lunch room and the 
colored public has been refused service at 
the restaurant whic h is ru n i n connection 
wit h the Congressiona l Library . This discriminatio n has been maintaine d i n spite of 
the protests of the Distric t of Columbi a 
Branc h of the Nationa l Associatio n for the 
Advancemen t of Colored People. Whe n the 
new Court Hous e was established by the 
Distric t of Columbia , Mr . Neva l H . Thomas, 
a member of the Boar d of Directors of the 
Association , wrot e to Chie f Justic e Walte r 
I. McCoy , askin g him whethe r or not the 
colored public would be served i n the restaurant. Afte r several days, Mr . Thoma s 
received an answer whic h stated that "the 
Court had not made any rulin g on the matter." Mr . Thoma s then requested tha t the 
Court make a rulin g to the effect tha t colored people woul d be protected fro m discriminatio n at the hands of civi l authoritie s 
and privat e citizens i n the capital. 
Soon afte r this correspondence, Mr . Thomas presented himself at the restauran t i n the 
Court Hous e and wa s told tha t the Court 
ha d ordered tha t no persons of color were 
to be served there ; tha t it wa s a privat e 
restaurant i n a publi c buildin g fo r a privat e 
association of whit e lawyers; an d tha t the 
Court of Justic e was goin g to establish a 
restaurant "for colored people some day. 
This refusa l of service to colored people 
meant a grea t hardshi p to both colored 
lawyers and colored litigants, fo r whil e durin g the recess whit e people migh t go to the 
lunch room and get back to the Court on 
time, colored people migh t easily be made 
late fo r the afternoon session. 
A t the request of Mr . Thomas, a letter of 
protest wa s sent the Chie f Justic e by the 
Nationa l Office, as well as by other organizations. I n the meantime , Mr . Thoma s addressed another appeal to the Chie f Justice , 
describing his experience i n the lunch room. 
Amon g reasons fo r protest, he said : "A s 
to the restauran t belonging to the whit e Ba r 
Association, to whic h colored practitioners 
cannot belong, I wil l say tha t yo u woul d not 
make colored people, as taxpayers, furnis h 
a buildin g fo r whit e privat e organizations 
If so, I should lik e to make applicatio n for 
rooms and restaurants fo r several organizations of fine civi c wort h to whic h I have 
the honor to belong. I know yo u believe tha t 
all of the citizenr y have equal claim upon 
al l public institutions. " 
In answe r to this appea l a lette r wa s received from Justic e McCoy , whic h said : 
"Th e person who runs the restauran t i n the 
Court Hous e of the Distric t of Columbi a has 
been notified by the Court tha t al l persons 
have the righ t of equal service therein. " 
CALLING DREAMS 
GEORGI A DOUGLA S JOHNSO N 
THE righ t to make my dreams come true, 
-*- I ask, nay, I demand of life , 
No r shall fate's deadly contraband 
Impede my steps, nor countermand ; 
Too long my heart against the ground 
Ha s beat the dusty years around, 
An d now at length I rise ! I wake ! 
An d stride into the mornin g break ! —International. 
A NATIV E OF FUMBAN , GERMA N EAST AFRICA, WEARING TH E ANCIENT HEADDRESS 
135 The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
MY EA R is pained, 
M y soul is sick wit h every day's 
report 
O f wron g and outrage, wit h whic h eart h is 
filled. 
Ther e is no flesh i n man's obdurate heart. 
It does not feel for man : the natura l bond 
O f brotherhood is severed as the flax 
Tha t falls asunder at the touch of Are . 
H e finds his fellow guilt y of a ski n 
No t colored like his own : and havin g power 
To enforce the wrong , fo r such a worth y 
cause 
Dooms and devotes him as his lawfu l prey. 
****** * 
Thu s ma n devotes his brother, and destroys: 
'Tis huma n nature's broadest, foulest blot. 
—Cowper. 
* * * 
W e have received "Th e Blac k American, " 
by Mrs. Florenc e Moss Blackwell , and The 
Master Musician, a much needed magazine 
published by colored editors, fo r colored 
lovers of music . 
* * * 
The Ne w Yor k firm of publishers —Harcourt, Brac e and Howe , of whose Boar d 
Directors Majo r J. E . Spingar n is a member, announces the publication i n the nea r 
futur e of three books dealing wit h the race 
question. The announcement reads: 
"Th e first of these, 'Darkwater, ' by Dr . 
W . E . B . DuBois, wil l appear i n January . 
It wil l be a volume of essays and sketches, 
lik e 'The Souls of Blac k Folk, ' but maturer, 
richer, wit h a deeper race passion, and wit h 
a finer imaginativ e gift. Whethe r you like 
Dr . DuBois or not, whethe r you agree wit h 
him or not, you have got to admit that he 
is the greatest ma n of Africa n blood i n 
the worl d today, and tha t the world-wide 
audience whic h he wil l wi n for a book lik e 
this wil l result i n incalculabl e benefit to 
the race. 
"Th e second book, 'Th e Shadow,' by Mar y 
Whit e Ovington , Chairma n of the N . A . A . 
C. P., is a novel of extraordinar y interest. 
It, also, wil l appear i n January . It deals 
wit h a southern whit e girl , of aristocrati c 
family , who has been left as an infan t on 
the doorstep of a Negr o cabin, grows up 
i n this environment, believing herself colored, and then at the age of twenty-one 
learns of her rea l parentage, and goes out 
to start life anew in the northern white 
world . He r adventures Nort h and South 
hold the attention from the first page to 
the last. This is not a book of propaganda , 
but a story of deep, huma n interest and 
passionate sympathy . 
"Th e thir d book, whic h wil l not be ready 
until next spring , is being prepare d by 
Miss Ovingto n and M . T . Pritchard , head 
of the Everet t School of Boston. It wil l 
be a school reader specially adapted to the 
needs of colored children . Wh y should 
these childre n only study books tha t describe the achievements of the whit e race 
and never mention the noble deeds and 
eloquent words of Negroes ? Th e new 
school reader is an answe r to this question. 
It wil l introduce colored childre n i n the 
elementary schools to the best thoughts and 
the finest deeds of their own race. 
"Thes e three books, as soon as they are 
published, ma y be obtained fro m TH E 
CRISIS , or from any bookseller, or direc t 
from the publishers, Harcourt , Brac e ?nd 
Howe , 1 West Forty-sevent h Street, Ne w 
Yor k City. " 
THE HAND-WRITING INTERPRETED 
NO less a personage tha n Frankli n H . 
Giddings, eminent sociologist and certainl y no holde r of a brie f fo r the Negro , 
points the mora l to be draw n from the recent race riots. H e says i n the Independent : 
The beam must first be cast out of the 
white man's eye. 
An d this is no time to discuss the Negro's 
abilities and promise. Whethe r he can or 
cannot achieve all tha t he is ambitious to 
attai n and to perform is at present a n academic question. The whit e ma n must secure to him equality of opportunit y and of 
rights. Nothin g less wil l appease the black 
man's anger. Nothin g less wil l satisfy hi? 
sense of justice. Nothin g less ca n possibly 
satisfy the whit e man's sense of selfrespect. 
W e have to do wit h a question of civilization, 
work. If the whit e ma n dominates, his 
power lays him under obligation. It is for 
him to keep withi n the law, to obey the rule 
of reason, to redeem his pledges, to set 
example, exercise patience, an d thereby to 
educate i n citizenship. 
Moreover, let us not forget our psychology. 
The Negro responds to manners more 
readil y than to orders. An d this, too, is a 
fact of civilization . 
* * * 
Dr. Stanley Durkee , new president of 
Howar d University , announced i n his rerent inaugura l speech the program of 12,-
000,000 colored people: 
136 TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 137 
The y demand CHRISTIA N EDUCATION, wit h no barriers to the highest 
reaches of cultur e and inspiration . A carefu l study of conditions i n portions of our 
land reveals educational crimes unspeakable. 
The y demand the RIGHT S O F AMERICAN CITIZENSHIP . Mak e the standards as hig h as we should make them, then 
honor wit h the franchise , wit h jur y right, 
with' publi c office, wit h rights on public 
conveyances—in short, wit h ful l America n 
citizenship, al l those, whateve r the race or 
color, wh o shall attai n to the standard set. 
The y demand RESPEC T FO R THEI R 
ACHIEVEMENTS , as we ask respect for 
our own. W e must cease ou r sneering, ou r 
lying , ou r hypocrisy, and we must give to 
them the ful l rights of huma n achievement. 
* * * 
A departin g Germa n visito r takes bitte r 
leave of Americ a throug h the columns of 
the Ne w Yor k Tribune. H e remark s Parthian-wise: 
Last yea r you r country, the so-called 
"lan d of the free and the home of the 
brave, " lynche d sixty-two huma n beings, 
amon g them Prage r and fifty-eight Negroes. 
Some day, and the day is not fa r away , you 
wil l have to account for the wholesale kill ­
ings of you r colored brothers; and I assure 
you at the first opportunity the colored 
South wil l throw off your misrul e an d create 
its own, free, independent government. 
* * * 
Charle s Edwar d Russell flings the challenge i n Reconstruction: 
Th e Negr o did not ru n i n Chicago nor i n 
Washington , and i n my judgment he is not 
going to ru n anywhere . An d the reason 
is tha t he has found himself. H e knows 
now tha t he is a man ; that makes the difference. H e knows tha t he has unde r the 
Constitutio n of the Unite d States certain 
rights declared to be inalienabl e and that 
these rights ar e denied to him. 
H e sees elaborate preparations begun to 
enforce the Eighteent h Amendmen t to the 
Constitution , although tha t amendment is 
but a fanatic's dream, an d he knows tha t 
nobody intends to enforce the Fourteent h 
and Fifteent h Amendments to the same 
Constitution , although these embody his sacred rights. 
H e has looked upon all these things unti l 
the iro n has entered his soul. H e wil l not 
ru n awa y again . H e wil l stand and fight. 
H e has reached tha t point wher e a ma n 
woul d as lie f die as continue to live under 
wha t he deems intolerabl e conditions of in ­
justice, and when any men reach tha t state 
o f mind , i t is bu t wisdom to heed their 
protests. 
Wit h wha t effrontery can we continue to 
urg e peace, order, and the supremacy of 
la w abroad, when at home we trampl e upon 
Constitution, law, and every consideration 
of justic e and civilization , to wrea k our unreasoning hatred upon our own citizens, 
whose only offense is a darke r complexion 
than the rest of us have? 
N o people on earth have ever been able 
to get awa y wit h such hypocrisy, and none 
ever wil l be. 
The terms of the proposition before us 
are as square as a die and as plai n as day. 
Ther e are only two possible solutions of 
the race problem i n America . 
One is to give to the Negr o citizen every 
legal righ t possessed by the white , every 
righ t of franchise, property, and lega l protection, Nort h and South. 
Th e other is to exterminat e him ; to go 
forth upon an erran d of wholesale murde r 
and kil l every man, woman, and child of a 
darke r complexion than an established 
standard. 
Whic h do we want ? 
SABOTAGE! 
THU S do certain southern philanthropists 
wheels of their good works! We have this 
account from the Greensboro Daily Record: 
W e have been called upon to give $2,500 
for the installatio n of a new heatin g plant 
at Bennett College, this city, and of this 
amount we have raised $1,400. 
Greensboro business men have thrown 
aside their duties and have passed the hat, 
so to speak, i n behalf of the Negro . This is 
done, of course, through a spirit of altruism, 
and we expect no reward . Bu t since we 
represent the Chambe r of Commerce as well 
as ourselves i n this drive , we do not feel 
righ t i n askin g whit e citizens of Greensboro 
to give a penny unti l the Negroe s to be 
benefited by the various movements 
launched i n their behalf take a definite 
stand against their racia l brothers i n Boston. 
An d we look fo r a genuine, not a n ostensible, stand. 
The Negr o Agricultura l and Technica l 
College, this city, erected and maintaine d 
by the people, carrie s a prominent advertisement i n TH E CRISIS , a radica l Negr o 
pamphle t published i n Ne w York . An d i f 
the money we give is used to buy advertisin g space i n a Bolshevik publication, I, for 
one, wil l not raise a penny for them. This 
magazine i n its last issue urges armed rebellion against the whit e people. 
* * * 
Accordin g to a Greensboro paper, President Trig g 
"So fa r as the radica l Negr o paper published i n Ne w Yor k is concerned, " he said, 
speaking of one criticism of local Negr o 
collegians patronizin g the paper, " I disapprove of it and regar d its doctrine as 
objectionable, and I do not allow it a t the 
college for circulatio n among the students." 138 TH E CRISIS 
Othe r Negroe s of the better class discussed the matte r of the nationa l agitation 
wit h the paper's representative, and they 
were unanimous i n expressing appreciation 
of the fairness and justic e of their whit e 
neighbors, officially and individually , and 
condemned the agitators. 
Bu t Charle s H . Moore , State Supervisor 
of Colored Rura l Schools of Nort h Carolina, expresses himself thus frank
letter to the Greensboro Independent: 
Speakin g fo r myself, and I believe also 
.or every sensible and thoughtful Negr o 
who lives i n Greensboro, I wis h to say tha t 
I do not condemn the efforts of every 
northern Negr o who is makin g a contention 
for the rights guaranteed them and their 
southern brethren by the Constitution of the 
Unite d States. 
We approve of the action of every Negr o 
i n this country, whether he lives i n the 
North , South, East, or West, who is makin g 
a fight for the Constitutiona l rights of the 
race by every fair and lega l method of 
whic h he can make use. 
An d any Negr o who does not endorse the 
latte r program is not worth y of, and doesn't 
deserve, the few rights and privilege s whic h 
he now enjoys. 
Eve n the whit e man, who is now strivin g to deprive us of our rights, would in ­
wardl y say "amen " to the last assertion. 
* * # 
Mar y Roberts Coolidge of Berkeley, Cal. , 
has her own views on TH E CRISIS . She 
write s to the Editor : 
Just a wor d to thank you for your kin d 
assistance about the books fo r my class. 
Before you r second letter came, I had given 
out for readin g your History , and Booke r 
Washington's "U p from Slavery " (and 
others) ; Kell y Miller's two books; the 
"Souls of Blac k Folk, " and Baker's "Colo r 
Line. " I had not seen Brawley's "History, " 
but have sent fo r it and shall use it on you r 
suggestion. 
O f course, the class is required to read 
TH E CRISIS , and we have been usin g my 
copy; but I am sending fo r another copy for 
the library . 
VAIN BABBLINGS 
IF it were not tha t there are stil l people 
foolish enough to be affected by this 
sort of talk, these two comments would not 
be wort h mentioning. A Mrs. Mil n is quoted thus i n the Londo n Sunday Evening 
Telegram: 
Unde r the best conditions the America n 
darkie s are trul y lovable and splendidly 
loyal. Unde r the wron g conditions, they 
are beasts and a menace. In the South, before the Civi l War, the "Blac k and White " 
conditions were at their best. Today, i n 
Chicago, they are at their worst. Keep the 
black i n his place, and he is healthy, happy , 
and loyal. Le t him put himself, or let circumstances pu t him, i n a false position, and 
he becomes impossible—inflates, is discontented, unruly , and an infection. H e is al l 
heart and stomach. Brai n and conscience 
are rudimentar y i n the typica l black. Except 
often come wit h it; he has littl e character. 
He sings and he cooks almost to perfection, 
and he" serves as wel l as he sings. Bu t he 
is no more fit to have a vote or to control 
altogether his own lif e i n the midst of a 
whit e community, tha n m y dog is. An d my 
dog is a splendid fellow, and a gentleman 
every clean hair of him. I respect him, and 
and he knows it. Bu t I shall not consult 
him about my overdrawn bank account, or 
the education of my children. 
An d this from Port Tamp a City , Fla. , 
by one J. H . Jones, whic h wobbles alik e i n 
facts and i n grammar: 
We see and hear so muc h about the Negro
trouble. I think , after al l the tal k tha t 
the Negr o hates to be a Negr o but can't 
help it. H e seems to forge t tha t this b 
a whit e man's country, taken from the Indian
against England , i t came out victorious 
and established the .government unde r 
whic h we have grow n to be a gian t amon g 
nations. Wha t di d the Negr o have to do 
wit h it ? 
I n fifty years, how changed the situation ! 
The Negr o has had the privileg e of an 
education and been helped i n man y way s 
by the whit e race, but now he seems to be 
clamorin g fo r powe r to control things to 
suit his aspirations,—Negr o men wantin g 
whit e wives! Ho w utterl y perverse—contrar y to natur e and a reproach to both 
races, and ought to be prohibited by law. 
NO DISPUTING OF TASTES 
ANDRE E VIOLLI S write s i n the Philadelp
Paris: 
In the Boulevar d Theatre , a t a most pa ­
thetic part of the play, a woman , late for 
the performance , stalked alon g to the stalls. 
M y interest i n the pla y vanished i n a flash. 
M y eyes turne d awa y from the stage and 
remained fascinated—glued upon her. She 
wa s a sight, indeed. Ther e she stood, 
draped i n a heav y fu r cape,—her neck, 
arms and back bare to the waist. A slashed 
panie r bristled round he r waist, i n the guise 
of a loin cloth. Gold circlets hun g from 
he r ears to he r shoulders and heav y gold 
anklets dangled on he r feet. 
Al l this is nothin g unusual, of course. 
W e have seen it often enough. Bu t he r 
blonde hairdress, erected like a suga r loaf, 
strangely pinked out wit h ribbons and 
feathers, formed the weirdest contrast to TH E LOOKING GLASS 139 
a dusky face, wavering; between Africa n 
brown and red Indian . Overcome, I turned 
towar d m y friend. 
"Wha t strange race is that? " I asked. 
"Suc h a skin , wit h fair hair, blue eyes, and 
a dear littl e turned-up nose! Is she a native 
of Africa ? Does she hai l from Honolulu ? 
Wher e can she come from? " 
"An d where do you come from yourself? " 
asked m y friend , compassionately. "Don' t 
you know anythin g about the new fashions? 
Last yea r women used brown powder, to 
look like South Americans. No w they are 
going one better,—after negroid art, fetes, 
and fashions. It is from blackest Congo 
tha t ligh t is comin g to us. " 
"Bu t how do they manage it? " 
"It's very simple . The y soak their faces 
i n iodine and acquire as man y layers as required to suit their fancy. " 
"Bu t it burns, " I gasped. 
"Iodine? Yes, it burns. Some, all too 
zealous and rash , had their skins peel off 
horribly , but afte r some days' retreat, they 
started again . 
" 'Que voulez-vous?' Doesn't the old 
Frenc h proverb say, yo u must suffer to be 
beautiful? " 
I gazed a t the weird , painted idol, and 
whispered doubtfully : "Afte r all , they say 
madness is sometimes sublime. " 
THE PRESS AND THE PUBLIC 
JUS T how largel y the Press, by featurin g 
sensational reports, has been responsible 
for the recent outbreaks of lawlessness is a 
matte r fo r conjecture. Certai n it is, 
though, tha t such papers could not flourish 
were it not fo r a willingness on the part 
of the publi c to stand for a certain amount 
of yellow journalism. Clearly , the public 
taste must be elevated. Th e Lincoln , Neb., 
State Journal says: 
A reputable magazine contained the assertion the other day tha t practicall y every 
race rio t i n Americ a has been preceded i n 
the communit y affected, by conduct on the 
part of one or mor e loca l newspapers calculated to inflame race hatred. The recent horribl e affair i n the nationa l capita l 
wa s preceded by a period of sensational 
newspape r reports of alleged Negr o crimes. 
One of Washington's most prominent newspapers, one representing a grea t property 
interest, has been publicl y named as an in ­
cite r of the mob. The city of Atlant a was 
compelled some years ago to destroy by 
boycott a loca l newspape r whic h made it 
its business to inflame the whit e population 
against Negroes, thus producin g endless 
violence. 
* * * 
Th e articl e continues: 
These evidences of the responsibility of 
newspapers fo r the good order of their 
communitie s must have a sobering effect 
upon us all . Newspapers are under a strong 
temptation to be sensational and mendacious. News i n itself is not often ver y in ­
teresting. The public, a considerable share 
of it, seems to want to be thrilled , rathe r 
than informed. The newspaper wit h a thril l 
to sell is apt to find a large r marke t than 
the newspaper wit h news to sell. This is 
the source of much of the crime committed 
by newspapers against public order. 
* * * 
Willia m Pickens, well-known Negr o ora ­
tor and scholar, shows i n the columns of 
the Buffalo Express how the press builds 
up a sensational report from a very small 
grai n of truth : 
The Associated Press bears a fearfu l responsibility i n these riotous times. Le t us 
notice how it reported that Knoxvill e 
(Tenn.) trouble. If you read "between 
the lines " and di g into the fine print, the 
plai n facts are these: A Negr o wa s i n jai l 
wit h no sort of direc t evidence against him, 
but on suspicion of some possible connection wit h the murde r of a woman , and a 
mob was tryin g to break into jai l and murder this Negro , arrested on merest suspicion. A s i t was a whit e woma n who was 
murdered, it is much more probable that 
some whit e ma n or woman kille d her; but 
this Negr o was arrested, not because he was 
anywher e near the place of the murder, but 
because he wa s i n some other place, distant from the scene of murder, but apparently out of place. The puzzled police 
took hi m i n the hope of solving the murder problem. 
Bu t how does the press report the matter ? See here (in bi g headlines) : "Mo b 
attacks jai l where Negr o is held for murder of whit e woman. " The plai n trut h is 
tha t this Negr o was a suspect and it was 
hoped that he would prove to be at least an 
importan t witness. 
A littl e farthe r down and i n smalle r type 
the press approaches one degree nearer to 
the truth, by saying : "Mo b bent on reachin g _ Mauric e Mayes, a Negro , arrested 
earlie r i n the day i n connection wit h the 
murder. " 
* * * 
A s the articl e approaches the trut h of 
the situation, less and less effort is made to 
catch the reader's attention. Mr . Pickens 
concludes: 
Farthe r down the column stil l and i n still 
less conspicuous print, the press adds more 
light : "Mauric e F . Mayes, a Negro , who 
had been arrested as a suspect i n connection wit h the murder. " 
A t the very bottom the press incidentally 
states tha t Maye s ha d been arrested "fo r 
prowlin g about the house of another whit e 
family. " Her e we get the last of the truth , 
littl e by little , and not one person out of 
50 wil l ever bother to piece it together. This 
ma n Maye s was not even near the place 
where the woman was killed , but wa s near 
the house of "another whit e family, " and 140 TH E CRISIS 
lookin g as i f he ha d no business there. So 
fa r as tha t evidence goes, he ma y be as in ­
nocent of murde r as any ma n who reads 
these lines. 
Bu t the wa y i n whic h the press introduced tha t matte r to the publi c wil l by no 
means tend to impress the facts of the case. 
Those late r fine-print approaches to trut h 
wil l never wip e out the effect of that first 
bi g headline i n the min d of the average 
reader. 
AMERICAN NEGRO MUSICIANS 
ABROAD 
MR. WIL L MARIO N COOK' S Southern 
Syncopated Orchestr a is makin g 
good i n London . C. Dutordoit write s i n the 
Londo n Musical Standard: 
Twic e dail y at the 
Philharmoni c Hal l 
there is musica l 
merrimen t of the 
gayest description, 
fo r there Mr . Wil l 
Mario n Cook and 
the Southern Syncopated Orchestra , 
whic h he directs, 
pla y wit h a swin g 
and verve that no 
audience could resist, musi c whic h is 
rag-time and other 
thing s besides. 
Ther e is no doubt 
that i n their finest 
selections this orchestra is reall y 
great; their performances of th e 
Brahms Hungaria n 
Danc e No . 5 and 
Dvorak's "Humoreske" are simpl y delightful , and another most successfu l piece is Tyer's 
"Cal l o' the Woods. " 
* * * 
Gwlady s T. Jones, 
writin g i n the London Daily Chronicle, 
descries something 
beneath these musicians' cheerful exterior: 
The y are very gay, these musicians of a 
wronged race. Bu t underneath, fo r the discernin g mind , there is sadness and heartbreak, some sublimated melancholy of halfremembered things. 
The y sin g of the heaven whic h consoled 
them i n the days of their bitterness i n the 
materia l terms whic h brought consolation 
and hope to the people wh o were but as 
littl e children. 
"There's a golden har p i n heaven, A h 
know, 
An ' A h don' wan ' to leavah me behind. " 
Ther e is one gem whic h is musi c throug h 
and through . A slim, youn g gir l comes 
forward . "Liste n to the Lambs, " she sings, 
i n a voice whic h rises and rises, an d is 
backed by the softened voices of the choir, 
makin g insistently the same request. 
Suddenly the beautifu l voice stops an d 
floods out again , singin g the words which , 
to Handel's music , have thrille d Wester n 
audiences fo r years. 
Bu t it is to anothe r settin g tha t this 
singe r of a strange fol k sings the word s 
"H e shall feed His flock," whil e the chorus 
behind sin g of the lambs, i n liqui d tones. 
The Syncopated Orchestr a has certainl y 
something to teach musician s of older traditions. It also makes a strange littl e appea l 
by reason of the 
huma n note whic h 
runs throug h its un -
familia r programme . 
War d Mui r observes thoughtfull y 
i n the Londo n Fragments : 
Whe n the members of the Syncopated Orchestr a 
filed on to the Philharmonic stage, I 
realized at once the 
veracit y and pathos 
of the phras e "colored gentlemen
fo r the dar k faces 
behind the footlights 
were not a bit comic , as the "nigge r 
minstrels " to whom 
1 had been take n i n 
m y childhood ha d 
been The y hadn't 
Shoe-Shine complexions or bulbous re d 
lips. O n the contrary , most of them 
struck me as refined, 
intellectual, sensitive an d a littl e sad. 
Somehow, the circumstance tha t severa l of these dark-skinne d entertainers 
wore pince-nez added a touch of queer dig ­
nit y to their aspect. Th e Ethiopia n eyes 
behind those pince-nez looked fort h ove r the 
fashionable audience of European s wit h a 
benignant yet reproachfu l gaze, as thoug h 
to say, "Yo u Londoners are the barbarians, 
not we. Yo u are the heathen, not we. You 
invented that figment, the 'Nigge r Minstrel'; we 
up and apologizing . 
The Syncopateds can do more than- perform miracle s of team-work as an orchestra . The y can sing. And when they sing 
Mr. Will Marion cook and confederate 
at the Philharmonic Hall 
From a London paper. TH E LOOKING GLASS 141 
they ca n pul l at you r heart-strings. Well , 
I don't blush to confess tha t those preposterously naive religious melodies, as old as 
the crime of Africa's slave trade, brought a 
lump to my throat. 
However, the lump-in-the-throa t is not 
one's only physica l sensation at the Philharmonic Hall . Th e entertainment contains 
man y a hearty guffaw and a continuous succession of pleasant chuckles. Bu t i f yo u 
wan t the sort of buffoonery associated wit h 
"nigge r minstrels"—don't go. An d don't go 
i f you dislike being confronted by the trut h 
tha t "colored gentlemen" can be an accurate 
label, especially i n regar d to the noun. 
* * * 
Rolan d W . Hayes, famous Negr o tenor, 
is plannin g a strikin g and origina l project. 
Phili p Hal e i n the Boston Herald, after congratulatin g Mr . Haye s on the qualit y of 
his wor k i n his recent recita l i n Boston, continues : 
Writers about Afro-America n musi c 
have expressed the wis h tha t the musi c of 
the Negr o i n Afric a should be carefully 
studied b y those wel l equipped for the purpose. Travelers, as Burto n and Winwoo d 
Reade, have contributed only notes more or 
less superficial. The forme r maintaine d 
stoutly tha t the Africa n was not creatively 
musical. Reade had muc h to say about the 
passion of the Africa n fo r the drum. 
Mr . Hayes, a singer, known favorabl y by 
his art throughout the country, purposes 
next sprin g to sojourn i n Afric a after visiting , and probably singin g i n certain Euro ­
pean cities. I n Afric a he wil l study the 
unadulterated native music . Havin g obtained this materia l he wil l inquir e into 
possible modifications i n the ante-slavery 
years of this country : whethe r genuine 
Africa n melodies were transplanted ; i f they 
were, how fa r they were changed by the 
musi c then heard in towns, i n churches, and 
comin g from the master's house on the plantation. Ther e wil l remai n fo r him the study 
of the Negr o musi c tha t has developed since 
the Civi l War . 
THE GOVERNORS OF 
MISSISSIPPI 
COLORE D people throughout the countr y migh t be expected to vilif y Theodore G . Bilbo , Governo r of Mississippi , i f i t 
wer e only fo r his recent pronouncement i n 
the Chicag o Herald and Examiner : 
"You r telegram askin g how man y Negroes Mississipp i can absorb, rec
repl y I desire to state tha t we have al l the 
room i n the worl d fo r wha t we know as 
'n-i-g-g-e-r-s,' but none whateve r fo r 'colored ladies and gentlemen.' If these Negroes have been contaminated wit h northern socia l and politica l dreams of equality, 
we cannot use them, nor do we wan t them. 
Th e Negr o who understands his prope r relation to the whit e ma n i n this country wil l 
be gladl y received by the people of Mississippi, 
labor. " 
* * * 
It is stimulatin g to know that the Jackson, 
him. It begins wit h a description of one 
Leo Russell, Democrati c nominee fo r Governor 
"Le e Russell, a common littl e bounder 
and characte r assassin, a perfect prototype 
of the ma n who now holds tha t office, has 
been nominated for Governor of Mississipp i 
by the Democrati c Party. " 
* * * 
The n the News pays its compliments to 
the present incumbent, Mr . Bilbo : 
The election of Lee Russell means Bilb o 
administration , wit h all its rottenness and 
depravity, its filth, dirt, and intrigue , tha t 
has nauseated al l decent people. 
It means a n endorsement of the Mississippi Insan
version of tha t institutio n by Bilb o and his 
cohorts into a common assignation house. 
It means a n endorsement of pillage and 
plunde r at the State Treasury , and the riotous and extravagan t expenditur e of public 
funds. 
* * * 
O n the other hand, a pamphle t issued by 
the friends of Russell runs down the Repub
1900 he "deplored the fact of the existence 
of the mob spirit i n the State" ! The article 
asks: 
Whit e Me n of Mississippi , D o YO U Endorse 
An d Longin o apologizes and calls his forme r attitude a mistake ! Wh o would liv e 
i n Mississipp i unless he ha d to! 
PROTESTS FROM GEORGIA AND 
ARKANSAS 
THE Roma n Catholi c Diocese of Georgi a 
has an honest Bishop , the Rt. Rev. 
Benjami n J. Keiley , who points out i n the 
•Savannah Press wha t the South ma y expect 
unless it stamps out lynching : 
Loo k at the statistics i n our own state. 
Georgi a stands first i n the list of states i n 
the matte r of lynching . Ha s there eve r 
been a man punished i n this state fo r lynch ­
in g a Negro ? 
Lynchin g is murder, nothin g else. 
Besides, is it not the fact tha t fair and 
impartia l justic e is not meted out to whit e 
and colored men alike ? The courts of this 
state either set the example, or follow the 
example set them, and they make a great 
distinction between the whit e and the black 
crimina l brought before them. The latter, 
as a rule, gets the ful l limi t of the law. Do 
you ever hear of a street difficulty i n whic h 142 TH E CRISIS 
a Negr o and a whit e ma n were involved, 
whic h was brought before a judge, i n which , 
no matte r wha t were the rea l facts of the 
case, the Negr o did not get the worst of it ? 
Ar e there not numbers of honest, lawabidin g citizens of Georgia , who know tha t 
I am tellin g God's truth , and who wil l protest against this injustic e to the Negro ? 
Is there not a just and fearless ma n on the 
bench i n this state who wil l have the courage to announce tha t there shall be no 
difference i n his court between the ric h and 
the poor, nor between the whit e ma n and 
the colored man? 
Injustice and disregar d of law and the 
lawfu l conduct of affairs are the sure forerunners of anarch y and the loss of our lib ­
erty, and we are driftin g i n that direction. 
I have plead fo r justic e to the Negr o because it is his due and is right. 
Bot h Divin e and huma n law are flouted 
when such injustice is done. The Negr o 
wil l not stand askin g for justice from 
Georgi a laws, or Georgi a courts. He has 
been patient, and I hope he wil l remain so, 
but he well knows where the remedy lies, 
and he wil l ver y soon be found knockin g at 
the door of the Federa l Congress, askin g 
protection. H e wil l merely ask the pittance 
of the lif e of himself, his wife , and children. An d Congress wil l hea r him. 
If appeals to right, to justice, to Christian morality , do not avai l to put a stop to 
this injustice to the Negro , and protect him 
against the murderous lynchers, then 
Georgi a wil l see Federa l bayonets givin g 
him protection. 
* * * 
The Unite d States must set its own house 
i n order, declares Dr. Joh n Hug h Reynolds 
in the Littl e Rock, Arkansas, Gazette: 
We have a new Negro ; he has come back 
from the wa r changed. H e has been deeply 
moved by the democratic and humanitaria n 
addresses of our President; he has taken 
much credit to himself fo r our victory, and 
he has come back wit h a new sense of his 
importanc e and wit h aspirations, the realization of whic h means to overtur n our tra ­
ditiona l views and modes of life . A cardina l fact is that the Negr o is not willin g to, 
take his old place and status before the war. 
In some cases he has come back wit h ideas 
of social and politica l equality. 
If there is trouble wit h the Negro , the 
whit e people wil l be largel y responsible for 
it. . . . The leading white people should 
ascertain the rea l grievances of the Negro ; 
and then take steps to see that wrongs are 
righted. Simpl e justice must be done to. 
the Negro . Injustice wil l breed trouble. 
THE BOOMERANG 
THE Columbia , S. C , Star maintain s 
that injustice to the Negr o reacts 
inevitabl y to the detriment of the whites: 
Attack s on Negroe s merel y because they 
are Negroes, as' reported from Georgia , excite the indignatio n of al l self-respecting 
white men of the South". Whe n a crime is 
committed by a Negro , and whit e ruffians 
set out to kil l other Negroes, against whose 
innocence is no shadow of evidence, these 
whit e men place themselves on the level of 
the Turk s who massacre Armenians—the y 
are a disgrace to the citizenr y of an y land , 
civilize d or semi-civilized. 
Occasionally a ma n has kille d an innocent 
Negr o and fancied tha t "he got by wit h it " 
—but it is not true. Manslaughte r is not 
necessarily murder, and the laws wisel y 
draw the distinctions; but no morta l ma n 
has ever gained by murder, whethe r his 
victim was the lowl y or the mighty , an d no 
murdere r goes unpunished tha t the country 
of the murdere r does not suffer the penalty 
man y times over. 
Thousands of graves of whit e men slai n 
by whit e me n ar e i n the cemeteries of the 
South because of the toleration and tacit 
encouragement of murde r of Negroes; fo r 
when the whit e jur y neglects to punis h the 
murdere r of a Negr o it fosters murde r as 
a habit. Probabl y never wa s an innocent 
Negr o slaughtered i n the South tha t some 
whit e man, not i n an y wa y connected wit h 
the quarrel, did not bite the dust as a result 
of it, for the simple reason tha t crime is a 
disease tha t draws no color line , and whit e 
men infected wit h it by the killin g of Negroes, 
It is the law of natur e tha t the killin g 
of Negroes does not go unavenged, and 
there is man y a famil y of whit e orphans i n 
the South that owes its sorrowfu l condition to the foll y tha t permits the practice of 
lawlessness against men wit h black skins. 
COALS OF FIRE 
THE Manchester, England , Guardian 
tells of the conclusion of the Cardiff 
riots: 
" I swear, so help me God, our watchword , 
withi n the law to abide." This wa s the 
solemn oath taken by a gatherin g of colored men at Cardiff today. 
Dr. Rufu s E . Fernel , Pontypridd , who presided, announced tha t the meeting wa s representative of "al l the sons of Ham, " there 
being present four types of Negr o races— 
namely, Africans, West Indians, Arabians, 
and Portugues e subjects. Referrin g to the 
riots, the Chairma n said it wa s their dut y 
to remain withi n the law, but if they di d 
not protect their homes after remainin g 
withi n the law they would be cowards, not 
men. (Applause.) A s colored men, they 
had suffered their share of the privation s 
of war, but the recognition of their wor k 
must be brought about i n a quiet and orderly way. A s fo r the soldier wh o ha d 
been killed , an act he characterized as disgraceful, those responsible fo r it must pay. TH E LOOKING GLASS 143 
Those of them who had suffered privations 
withi n the last few days must, suffer i n 
silence, pending the time when they could 
make a lega l appeal. H e asked to suppress 
anythin g whic h might tend to cause any 
friction . 
Th e chairma n was appointed as a delegate to place the colored men's case before 
the Lor d Mayor, and it was also decided 
to publish the amount of damage suffered 
by the colored community durin g the riots. 
In commenting on the conditions prevailin g between blacks and whites i n England , 
the Africa n Telegraph issues wha t seems 
to us a rathe r splendid pronouncement: 
W e are Britis h subjects and the honor 
of Britai n is necessarily dear to us. O n 
any matte r that affects the welfar e of our 
race and our rights as loya l Britis h subjects, we should consider it our privilege 
to speak our min d plainl y to or about the 
Britis h Government. Ba t if a foreigner— 
French , German . Russian , or else—came 
to us and spoke disparagingl y of the Britis h 
Empir e i n genera l 
or of Grea t Britai n 
i n particula r on account of its native 
policy, he would 
soon realize that we 
were not prepared 
to tolerate any foreign interference i n 
the domestic affairs 
of this country. 
An d foreigners 
have been talkin g to 
us about these racia l 
riots i n London , i n 
Cardiff, and i n Liverpool, an d have 
been askin g us wha t 
we thought of them 
and wha t we thought 
of England . W e 
have been makin g 
excuses, sayin g that 
the people who did 
these things were 
not the rea l British , 
but are an uneducated lot, whilst the 
good .sense of the 
country condemns 
their excesses. An d 
Americans, upo n 
whom we came by 
chance, asked us 
whethe r any paper, 
or public man , or association, had taken up the matter. We 
could only think of one person, a magistrate , 
who had declared that the police were to be 
protected i n the execution of their duty. 
Durin g the war, responsible Britis h Ministers said tha t i n the interests of the Natives themselves 
the captured Germa n Colonies should be returned to them, because of the cruelties 
practised by the Germans, because of their 
lack of sympath y wit h black races. We 
have protested—and quite rightly—against 
the retur n of the Colonies to Germany . 
Bu t were we deluded when we protested? 
If German y knows wha t is happenin g i n 
free England , how she must be laughing ! 
Th e members of our race ask only for 
equality of treatment and of opportunity. 
If there is to be a fight, we do not shir k 
it. We do not suppose that any of us 
would object ver y strongly i f the odds were 
even three to one. Bu t when, as happened 
i n Cardiff, the odds are 3,000 to 30, or 100 
to 1, well, we have to ask if this is a sample 
of Britis h pluck, or Britis h justice, of playing the game? 
Pai d agents are doing the wor k of Britain's en
that i f you ill-trea t us i n England , we wil l 
rebel i n the Colonies, and so tie your hands 
an d rui n the Empire. We are 
going to help the 
enemies of Britain. 
So we appeal to the 
noble - hearted men 
an d women who 
love freedom to help 
us fight against 
lynchin g and mob 
rule . We appeal to 
Britis h women not 
to take an y notice 
of the rotten things 
said about us. We 
appeal to Britis h 
men to be fair to us 
and to remember 
that i n every tropica l colony and dependency they find 
work and welcome 
i n our midst. 
NEGRO PRESS 
SPEAKS 
O N FREEDO M O F TH E 
PRES S 
One of Texas' 
richest colored citizens an d largest 
taxpayers said to 
the editor of the 
Houston, Tex., Informer a few 
hence: " I wil l not 
live i n any town where I can not read my 
race newspapers. " This should be the 
viewpoint of every colored American . 
In several Texa s towns, villages, and 
hamlets, the "powers tha t be" have forbidden colored American s to read race 
newspapers. Thin k of such a decree being 
"JONATHAN : It's very simple, Bill; in war-time 
you must rush ahead; now you stay in the rear." 
From Lustige Blaetter, Berlin ; 
also copied in Le Rire, Paris 144 TH E CRISIS 
issued to freemen, whe n they have just 
participate d i n a worl d wa r for the democrac y of other peoples! 0 , doctor, brin g 
the pulmotor! 
Min d you, no decree has been issued forbiddin g the readin g of papers of other 
racia l units, despite their RADICALIS M 
on the race question and their preachin g 
of "FORCE " to the members of said racia l 
groups. 
Th e Informer is NO T A N ADVOCAT E 
O F FORC E NO R VIOLENCE . It has an 
abhorrence fo r the latte r and only relishes 
the forme r i n case of self-defense, fo r "selfpreservation is the first law of nature" ; but 
there is a wa y out of such, and tha t is to 
leave those hell-holes and move to a communit y tha t wil l afford them a large r degree of freedom and liberty. 
Whe n any people are denied the rights 
to read newspapers, hold religious services, meet i n fraterna l sessions, and main ­
tai n other organizations fo r their progress, 
betterment, and advancement, they have 
ceased to be freemen and are slaves. 
* » * 
Th e St. Louis, Mo. , Independent Clarion 
decides: 
Th e Negr o press must take the lead for 
spreading wholesome thought that wil l 
arouse the min d of the nation to a sense 
of deliberation that wil l correct abuses. Ou r 
schools cannot do much wit h the situation. 
Ou r churches wil l not, for they are not 
interested i n the materia l welfar e of a 
people; so it is the Negr o press that must 
take the lead i n bringin g before the worl d 
the things necessary for the enjoyment of 
life . Publi c opinion tha t wil l arouse every 
man and woma n to see properl y the things 
that wil l make the worl d happy is wha t is 
needed to relieve us of this general unrest. 
* * * 
Accordin g to the Texa s Freeman: 
Negr o voters throughout 
O N ORGANIZATIO N Texa s have everythin g to gai n 
and not a single thin g to lose b y 
followin g the lead of the cotton 
jammers and screwmen, the longshoremen, 
and simila r Negr o organizations at Galveston. Al l of these are qualified voters. I n 
a heart-to-heart tal k on Negr o activities— 
politica l activities, particularl y such as nominatin g candidates for city offices, the election of Independent and Fusio n tickets, and 
now and then candidates for Congress, et 
cetera, Mr . Harriso n said : "Colore d voters 
at Galveston are reall y a factor i n all elections, cit y and county, anyhow, as you see 
from the representation we have now i n 
different departments of our city government. W e now have six patrolmen and two 
detectives on the police force. O f course, 
we don't do i t alone, but by co-operating 
wit h other groups i n our cosmopolitan population, our organizations, numberin g from 
300 to 500 members each, combine wit h 
other groups of liberall y disposed whit e 
men, such as the Galvesto n Club , an d together fight fo r tha t whic h is ours i n cit y 
affairs. 
If the Negroe s throughout Texa s wer e 
organized as they are i n labo r unions at 
Galveston, their potency as a politica l factor woul d be recognized and it woul d be 
very easy fo r them to affiliate wit h Democrats 
like the Bailey-Ferguso n and Hobb y Democrats fal l 
and fishes and raise hell generall y on pro ­
hibition. 
* * * 
Th e Savanna h Tribune points a warning : 
It wil l neve r be possible to replace Negr o 
labor and remove it fro m competition i n 
Americ a again . Ther e ca n be no doubt 
about that. Organize d labor turne d to 
organizin g and affiliating Negr o skille d 
trades wit h the America n Federatio n of 
Labor, because of this fact. This grea t 
bod y acted, not out of interest i n Negr o 
workin g men, but i n the hope of removin g 
the Negr o labore r as a competitor wit h 
whit e men i n America n industry . Their 
pla n of organizin g Negr o units wa s apparently fair on its face, but there has never 
been the disposition amon g those al l alon g 
down the line of organized labor to deal 
justl y wit h Negr o labor. Here , we do not 
argue tha t organized effort is wron g an d 
bad fo r the Negro , but rathe r tha t as i t 
is practiced by those who execute the plans 
of organized labor, i t has had the effect of 
tyin g the hands and closin g the doors to 
Negr o labor. 
Negroes must be careful of organization , 
knowin g the bitte r experiences of the past. 
The y must insist on equitable representation i n every divisio n and grade of authority, and a fair execution of the laws governin g them. If not, they ar e lost. 
* * * 
R. V . Selope Thema write s i n the Africa n 
Telegraph: 
"Th e color question, " says 
O N INTER-MARRIAG E Mr . Boyton , "is an Imperia l 
one, and requires thorough in ­
vestigation. " An d I agree wit h 
him, and it is because of its importanc e to 
the Empir e tha t I ventured to writ e about 
this subject. No w is the opportune hou r fo r 
Britis h statesmen to inquir e into the state 
of affairs i n Africa . Thing s are done i n 
tha t unfortunat e Continen t whic h woul d 
shock humanit y i f brought to light, and 
the worst part of it all , they are done i n 
the name of this country. 
Sir, i f anythin g could be said against 
men of m y race, it is tha t they marr y whit e 
girls, and not rui n them, as whit e men do 
our girls. Th e African s wil l certainl y not 
object to the proposals of no association 
between whit e and black, i f by that is 
meant the retur n of the white s from Afric a 
to Europe . The Horizon 
COMPILE D B Y MADELIN E G . ALLISO N . 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
UNITE D WES T AFRICA, " a pamphlet writte n by the Honorabl e 
Casely Hayford , wil l soon be issued from 
the press of C. M . Phillips, London, England. 
C The Chora l Society of First Baptist 
Churc h i n Charleston, W . Va. , under the 
direction of Mar y E . Gardner, has presented a Festiva l of Negr o Music , sung 
by fifty voices, to a n audience of six hun ­
dred people. 
C Haze l Harriso n has given a recita l i n 
Chicago, 111., at Kimbal l Hall . Th e Chicago Daily Tribune says: "Some ten or 
twelve years ago this young pianist came 
forwar d as a child prodigy—yesterday he r 
playin g showed tha t the promise of those 
earlie r years had not failed of fulfillment. 
She wa s heard i n a tryin g program—i n all 
of these, excellent technica l facilit y and 
surety, fine tona l sense, and good musicianship were i n evidence." 
C A t a recita l i n Jorda n Hall , Boston, 
Mass., Irm a Seydel, violinist, presented 
two numbers writte n by Clarenc e Camero n 
White , the colored violinist-composer. The 
Bosto n Post i n speaking of the "Chant " 
and "Dance " states tha t "Bot h these 
pieces displayed a delicate harmoni c sense 
and considerable abilit y i n the technique 
of musica l composition. " 
(I Clarenc e C. Whit e has presented i n Boston, Mass., an unusuall y talented colored 
pupil , Elme r Harrell , i n a violi n recital. 
Mr . Harrel l played numbers by Bach , 
Wieniawski , Hubay , Drdla , Musin , Sara -
sate, Burleigh , Whit e and Coleridge-Taylor; 
he wa s assisted by Ell a Franc e Jones, soprano, and Miss Ev a Dyke s and Mr . Barrow, accompanists. 
C Negroe s i n Chicago, 111., have presented 
"Th e Masqu e of Colored America, " at Orchestra Hall . The masque represented the 
progress of the Negr o since 1619; it was 
directed b y Mrs. Fanni e H . Clin t and 
Jame s A . Mundy , wit h Mar y E . Jones and 
George L . Johnson, soloists, supported by 
a chorus of 300. Amon g boxholders were 
Governo r Lowden , Senator McCormick , and 
Congressman Madden . 
G A branch of the Nationa l Associatio n of 
Colored Musician s has been organized i n 
Indianapolis, Ind. Miss Elle n Thoma s is 
president. 
d Fo r twenty years the Columbi a Glee 
Club i n Boston, Mass., has held weekly 
rehearsals. Its members are colored men, 
rangin g from professionals to laborers. The 
director is Malcolm Lang , organist at 
King's Chapel. 
C Mme . Christin e Langenhan , a Metropolitan Oper 
recita l at Haine s Institute, Augusta , Ga. , 
and Tuskegee Institute, i n Alabama . 
C. I n Ne w Yor k City , seventy colored mu ­
sicians, led by Willia m H . Tyers, a Negro , 
were engaged by the Mayor's Committee to 
pla y at a reception to the Princ e of Wales. 
C Maud e D . Shields, a colored gir l of Ceda r 
Rapids, Iowa , has signed a contract to 
writ e scenarios for the Essana y and Goldwyn f
INDUSTRY 
THE Mutua l Savings Bank , a colored institu
creased its capita l stock from $25,000 to 
$150,000. The business is to be moved to 
a three-story bank building , where improvements wil l include modern fixtures, a stone 
front, and a vault costing $17,000. I n 
March , 1919, this bank declared a dividend 
of 10%. It has resources of $500,000 and 
3,000 depositors. Lev i C. Brow n is president. 
C The Wag e Earners' Ban k i n Savannah , 
Ga. , durin g the twelve months ending September 30
266 and added 4,000 depositors; this is a 
gai n of $74,014 and 1,700 depositors over 
the increase of the preceding twelve months. 
Th e bank has combined assets of $779,285 
and 15,000 depositors, distributed over 
twenty-eight states. Mr . L . E . William s is 
president. 
145 146 TH E CRISIS 
C J. W . Rose, a colored man , has opened 
a hotel fo r Negroe s i n Ne w Yor k City ; it 
covers three buildings i n West 135th Street, 
and has a dining-room wit h seating capacity 
fo r 350 people. 
C The New York Age, one of Ne w Yor k 
City's colored weeklies, is being removed to 
large r quarters, i n Harlem , where a new 
printin g plant, includin g a Webb Perfecting Newspape r Press, wil l be installe
C President Hughe s reported to the convention of the Coopers' Internationa l Union , 
held i n Ne w Yor k City , "W e must bend our 
efforts towar d unionizin g our colored coopers, and stabilize i n a comparative wa y 
their wage scales and workin g conditions. " 
C The Bisho p Bakin g Company, Inc., has 
been organized by Negroe s i n Ne w Yor k 
City , to enter a chai n bakery, restaurant, 
and grocery business. 
C Negroes i n Philadelphia , Pa. , have incorporated the Moder n Realt y and Construc ­
tion Company , whic h is capitalized at $100,-
000. The Directors are Charle s Dunmore , 
Fran k L . Howard , and J. S. Oliver; George 
W . Bel l is president. 
C Th e Wester n Mutua l Fir e Insurance 
Compan y at Sa n Antenia , Texas, has been 
granted a charte r to operate throughout the 
state. This business is controlled and operated by Negroes, wit h A . K . Leonard , 
president. 
(I Negroes i n Ne w Yor k Cit y have held a 
meeting towar d 1;he establishment of a bank, 
in Harlem , at whic h $10,000 was subscribed. 
Augustu s Dunca n presided. 
C Pau l Simmons, a Negro , at Indianapolis, 
Ind., manufacture s printers' and writin g 
ink for the trade ; he has trade wit h large 
white printin g companies. 
G Th e Laborers' Penn y Saving s Ban k and 
Loa n Company, a colored business, at Way -
cross, Ga. , has become the owne r of a half 
of Englis h block, where i t wil l erect a modern bank building ; the property is 55 x 
200 feet, valued at $20,000. Withi n the 
past three months the resources of this bank 
have increased from $37,924 to nearl y $75,-
000. 
(T The Afro-American Company i n Baltimore, Md. , has purchased the three-story 
buildin g whic h this colored weekly has been 
occupying, and i n addition two four-story 
buildings. 
(I Th e Colo r Compan y of Americ a has been 
incorporated i n Ne w Yor k Cit y b y Negroes, 
as a $25,000 business to manufactur e dyes. 
Th e chie f chemist is Harr y Keelan , a Harvard g
a Ne w Yor k firm as Consultin g Chemist, at 
a salar y of $300 pe r month ; associated 
wit h Mr . Keela n is Eugen e L . C. Davidson , 
a graduat e of Harvar d and an ex-Arm y officer of the 367th Infantry . This company is 
producin g colors tha t ar e 99% chemicall y 
pure. 
(I I n Baltimore , Md. , colored lawyers have 
bought a fou r story building , at 14 E . 
Pleasant Street, whic h they have named 
the Banneke r La w Building . 
d I n Houston, Tex., Negroe s have subscribed $11,600 towar d their Twentiet h 
Centur y State Ban k and Trust Company , 
whic h is to be capitalized a t $100,000. Attorney J . V
there were five subscriptions of $500 each; 
1, $300; 10, $200; 45, $100. 
O Th e Wanamake r Store i n Philadelphia , 
Pa. , employs from three to five hundred Negroes, some 
quirin g abilit y and tact. Th e colored unit 
of employees has formed the Robert C. 
Ogden Association . 
C Tw o hundred colored steel workers i n the 
Wisconsi n Steel Mills have given up their 
jobs and 700 additiona l Negroe s have promised simila r action ; they demand equal 
treatment wit h other workers. 
C I n Atlanta , Ga. , colored people have in ­
corporated a stock exchange, includin g a 
brokerage department; i t wil l underwrite , 
promote, organiz e and re-organize, and 
finance corporations. Amon g the officers 
are Harr y H . Pace, W . S. Cannon , W . J. 
Shaw, Dr . J . W . E . Linder, and Weldo n A . 
Beasley, wh o is president. 
C Colored farmers i n Maco n County , Ala. , 
since 1910 have increased their lan d holdings from 61,689 acres to 79,177. Th e ta x 
records of the colored population are as follows: far m lands, $430,528; city realty, 
$163,445; personal property, $140,922—a 
tota l of $734,895. 
G Durin g the past seven months, Negroe s 
i n Ne w Yor k Cit y have purchased rea l 
estate totallin g over $4,000,000. This property is between 127th and 145th Streets. 
TH E WA R 
THE Nort h Side Colored Communit y 
Wa r Workers i n Pittsburgh , Pa. , have 
given a welcome-home celebration fo r 300 TH E HORIZO N 147 
colored soldiers. Senator Morris Enstein 
delivered the principa l address. 
C Mr . R. F . Williams, a Negr o in St. Louis 
Mo. , has been awarded a Re d Cross Service 
Cross; the citation is fo r 800 hours' service. 
C. Th e Croix de Guerre and a citation for 
braver y have been sent by the Frenc h Government to Marcellu s Bailey , a Negr o i n 
Chester, Pa . 
(I Colone l Charle s Young , the retired colored officer, has been selected as Militar y 
Attach e to Liberia , at the request of the 
Africa n Republic . 
GHETTO 
E. L. MEADOR, a workman at Camp 
Pike , Arkansas, has been awarded a 
verdic t of $2,500 damages against the Missouri-Pacific Railroad ; i n ejecting a Negr o 
from a passenger coach reserved fo r whites. 
Meado r wa s badl y cut. 
(I I n Ann e Arunde l County , Md. , the average salar y of 135 whit e teachers i n primar y and gramma r schools is $686, whil e 55 
colored teachers average $306. 
C A t Miami , Fla. , intimidatio n has been offered whit e tourists who hir e colored chauffeurs. The Chambe r of Commerce has condemned this southern attitude. 
C Ther e is a colored gir l at the Calexico 
Hig h School, Imperia l County, Cal. , who 
rank s highest i n educational attainments 
amon g 105 students; these whit e students, 
however, have refused to sit on the same 
platform wit h he r at the comin g commencement. Job Wood , Deput y Superintendent of 
Publi c Instruction, says that "I f there are 
an y exercises, the colored gir l must be on 
the platform, " and, further, tha t the whit e 
girls "should go back into the publi c schools 
and have a rea l trainin g fo r America n citizenship. " 
C A t Vinita , Okla. , different hearses are 
used fo r whit e and colored people. Since 
the hearse fo r Negroe s has wor n out, a 
colored woma n recently had to send to 
Chetopa , Kan. , fo r another hearse. 
CRIM E 
THE Hote l Brotherhood of Philadelphia , 
Pa. , has spent $500 i n rewards and 
detective fees and brought to tria l fo r 
prosecution the Cothrons [white], who hired 
an automobile from Joh n T. Weldo n [colored], whom, i t is alleged, they murdered. 
(I Th e Supreme Court of Ohio has decided 
to review the case of Olive Willey , from 
Sandusk y County, whose husband, Joh n 
Henr y Willey , was lynched i n 1915. She 
is suin g the county fo r $5,000 damages 
under the Anti-Lynchin g Law . 
C Governor Broug h of Arkansa s after conferrin g wit h Dr. E . C. Morris and Bisho p 
Conner, appointed a committee of seven 
white and seven colored men to confer i n 
the interest of the Negroes convicted i n 
the Elain e riots. The committee recommended that the cases be sent to the Supreme 
white and a colored lawye r to take up the 
cases. 
(I Mar y A . Sims, widow of a colored 
preacher, Watso n T. Sims, who was lynched 
at York , Pa. , several years ago, has been 
awarded a verdic t of $2,000 damages, by 
Judge Thoma s S. Sease, against Yor k 
County. This was the thir d tria l of the 
case. Tw o previous verdicts were set aside, 
by Judges Ernest Moor e and R. W . Memminger. 
C. Th e followin g lynchings have taken place 
since our last record: 
Marianna , Ark. , October 20, Alexande r 
Wilson , shot; shooting and killin g of Rut h 
Murrah . 
Moberly , Mo. , Novembe r 16, unknown Ne
fo r a fire had been built i n the public park— 
ha d not the limb of the tree broken and 
these Negroes escaped. 
Madison , Ga., Novembe r 20, Wallac e 
Baynes, shot; murde r of Ka y Ogburn , railroad station agent. 
Lambert, Miss. , Novembe r 21, Robert 
Motley , tenant farmer; dispute over crop 
settlement. R. W . Sivley, white , who went 
to the assistance of the planter, was kille d 
b y the Negro . 
Foxworth , Tex., Novembe r 28, Nevill e 
Foxworth , shot; alleged attempted attack 
upon a whit e girl . 
Chapmanville , W . Va. , December 15, Ear l 
Whitne y and E . D . Whitfield , shot and 
thrown into river; accused of the murde r of 
E . D . Meek, a construction foreman. 
EDUCATIO N 
CENTRA L COLORE D HIG H SCHOO L 
i n Shreveport, La. , has opened for its 
thir d session, wit h ten teachers and Principal 
put upon the State Approve d List . In the 148 TH E CRISIS 
recent State Fair , Centra l took 20 first 
prizes, 17 second, 4 third , and 1 fourth. 
C The State Boar d of Educatio n has approved the 1919-20 budget of $330,162 for 
the Bordentown, N . J. , School. This sum 
includes $160,000 for a buildin g containing 
a dining-room for 500 students, an auditorium seating 600 people, a kitchen, and a 
gymnasium; space wil l thus be released i n 
the Administratio n Buildin g fo r additional 
class-rooms. 
McDonog h No . 35 Evenin g School for 
Negroes i n Ne w Orleans, La. , has 816 students, rangin g from 16-61 years of age; 300 
students are adults of mature ages. 
The Boar d of Education at Cincinnati, 
Ohio, has authorized $720,000 for the construction of the Harrie t Beecher Stowe 
School for Negroes. It wil l be a modern 
school building, wit h thirt y class-rooms. 
C Plans ar e under execution for the buildin g of more than 100 schools for Negroes i n 
Mississipp i durin g the present year. Ten 
buildings, averaging from $15,000 to $25,000 
each, are now under construction. 
W . N . Cummings, a colored student at the 
Universit y of Pennsylvania , was the win ­
nin g runne r i n the Dartmouth-Columbia -
Pennsylvani a cross-country meet i n Ne w 
Yor k City ; he jumped i n the lead just before the thir d mil e mar k was reached and 
held it to the finish; his time was 33:45. 
Cummings' victory helped Pennsylvani a to 
wi n the team honors, on a score of 21 
points. 
C Mine r Norma l School i n Washington , D . 
C , has called to its Department of English , 
J . Francis Gregory, a colored graduate of 
Amherst College and Yal e University , and 
formerl y a teacher i n the Manua l Trainin g 
and Industria l School of Bordentown, N . J. , 
the Hig h School of Baltimore , Md. , and 
Howar d University . Mr . Gregory recently 
completed two years' experience as Fiel d 
Secretary of the Wa r Wor k Council of the 
Y . M . C. A . i n army camps i n the Unite d 
States. 
C The followin g football scores have been 
made : 
Howar d 0 Lincol n 0 
Morehouse 14 Atlant a 6 
Morehouse 1 Tuskegee 0 
Howar d 12 Hampto n 7 
Hampto n 13 Petersburg ... . 13 
C The fiftieth anniversary of Atlant a 
Universit y has been celebrated by a pageant, "Th e Open Door, " writte n by the 
wife of the president, Edwar d T. Ware . 
Charles Anderson, a colored student of 
Geneva College, Beave r Falls, Pa. , has 
been awarded a scholarship whic h wil l last 
as long as he desires to remain at the 
College; his election to membership i n the 
Adelphi c Society marks the first Negro 
member i n thirt y years. 
A tour of schools fo r Negroes i n the 
South is being made by the Genera l Educa ­
tion Board , wit h an idea toward increasin g donations to deserving schools. 
FRATERNITIES 
THE Ne w Masoni c Hal l Corporation i n 
Washington , D . C , of whic h Dr. 
Willia m A . Warfiel d is president, has collected $50,000 for the erection of a Masoni c 
Temple, at Tent h and Yo u Streets, North ­
west. 
Colored Odd Fellows i n Ne w Yor k are 
raisin g a fund of $150,000 fo r the erection 
of a State Headquarters Building , the 
ground fo r which has already been purchased i n West 135th Street. 
Pythian s i n Baltimore , Md. , are plannin g $50,000 improvements i n their Temple ; a n auditorium wit h a seating capacity 
of 1,500, and new lodge rooms are to be 
added. George W . Watt y is head of the 
fraternity i n Maryland . 
A home for disabled members is to be 
established by the Ne w Jersey Knights of 
Pythias, on a 300 acre farm i n Burlingto n 
County. The far m includes ten acres of 
cranberries under cultivation. 
CHURC H 
IN Georgia , the A . M . E . Church , under 
*• Bishop Flipper, has raised $38,000; the 
C. M . E . Church , under Bishops R. S. Wil ­
liams and L . H . Holsey, i n Georgi a and 
South Carolina,, has raised $55,000; the 
Baptists of Georgia , under Dr. Reddick. 
are windin g up a campaign for $50,000. 
The Baptist Templ e i n Ne w Yor k Cit y 
has purchased at $30,000 a plot i n West 
129th Street, 50 x 100 feet, for the erection 
of a new edifice. The Rev. M . B. Hucless 
is pastor. 
First Africa n Baptist Churc h i n Phila ­
delphia, Pa. , has celebrated her 110th anniversary. A committee of 110 persons collected $5,000 i n pledges. The Rev. Willia m TH E HORIZON 149 
A . Harroc i is pastor, and the churc h has a 
membership of 2,000. 
C Mothe r A . M . E . Zio n Churc h i n Ne w 
Yor k Cit y i n he r thirty-sixt h annua l fair 
and mortgage fund rall y raised $10,277. 
Th e pastor is Rev. J . W . Brown . 
C Bethan y Baptist Churc h i n Homewood, 
Pa. , has pai d $29,500 fo r the purchase of 
a stone and brick church buildin g and two 
houses. The propert y is located at the 
corne r of Pennsylvani a and Brushto n Avenues, a fashionable residence district. . The 
pastor of Bethan y is Rev . J . G. St. Clai r 
Drake . 
C. Flee t Street Memoria l A . M . E . Zio n 
Churc h i n Brooklyn , N . Y. , i n a rall y fo r 
$6,000, representing the indebtedness of the 
church, raised $8,570. 
C Dr . E . H . Hunter, pastor of Ol d Emanuel A . M . E . Churc h i n Portsmouth , Va. , 
has been put forwar d by Virginian s and 
Carolinian s fo r elevation to the Bishopri c 
at the genera l convention, whic h wil l meet 
at St. Louis, Mo. , i n May . 
MEETING S 
THE annua l Tuskegee Negr o Conference 
wil l be held at Tuskegee Institute, 
Januar y 21-22. 
C. Th e Associatio n of Colleges fo r Negr o 
Yout h has met at Talladeg a College i n its 
seventh annua l meeting. Amon g the speakers were President McKenzie , of Fisk , and 
Dea n Jones, of Wilberforce . The organiza ­
tio n plans to carr y on a n active campaign 
fo r hig h school education of Negroes i n 
the South. Dea n Brawley , of Morehouse 
College, is president of the Association . 
C. Te n colored churches i n Houston, Tex., 
united fo r a week's Jubile e Exposition . The 
projec t wa s a success and $1,244 was raised. 
C A meetin g concerning mob violence has 
been held a t Tremon t Temple , Boston, Mass. 
Th e Honorabl e Moorfield Storey, Nationa l 
President of the N . A . A . C. P. , presided 
and amon g the speakers were Jame s Weldo n 
Johnson, Brigadier-Genera l Sherburne, and 
Congressman Marti n B . Madden . 
C Fiftee n hundred Negroe s i n a meeting in 
Ne w Yor k Cit y denounced the action of the 
Arkansa s courts i n condemning to death 
eleven colored rioters. The y characterized 
the conviction as a "debasement of the 
America n heritage of Libert y and Constitutional rights, " and demanded tha t the 
President and Congress order an investiga ­
tion. 
POLITICS 
IN Baltimore , Md. , there are 126,188 registe
The figure for Negroes is the largest i n 
twenty years and shows a gai n of 1,001 durin g the recent registration. 
C. Hervytow n War d i n Nicholasville , Ky. , 
has elected its first colored representative, i n 
the person of George Combs as Councilman . 
Mr . Combs wo n by a large majorit y over 
his whit e Democrati c opponent. 
C Th e Coolidge Republica n Clu b of Boston, 
Mass., composed of colored voters, has unanimously adopted a resolution endorsing Gov
nomination as President i n 1920. 
d Louisville , Ky. , last yea r had an increase 
of 2,800 colored voters over the previous 
year's registration ; there are 10,666 colored 
Republicans and 11,800 white. The Republican 
373. 
(IMont e L . Robinson, a colored Republican, 
has been appointed a tip-staff i n the Court 
of Alleghan y County, Pa . Mr . Robinson 
served wit h the Frenc h Foreig n Legio n i n 
Chin a and was decorated fo r meritorious 
service. 
SOCIAL PROGRES S 
SENATO R ARTHU R CAPPER , o f Kansas, 
of the Nationa l Associatio n fo r the Advancement 
C Messrs. Milledg e and Morris Anderson , 
of Bonaventure , Ga. , the only colored exhibitors i n the Livestock Department of the 
Chatham Count y Fair , were awarded four 
blue ribbons, as first priz e winners i n the 
hog exhibit. 
(I Dr. U . G . Vincent, the colored interne at 
Bellevue Hospita l i n Ne w Yor k City , has 
demonstrated a new operation for varicocele 
before the America n College of Surgeons. 
C. A recent discussion of the Chiropea n 
Clu b i n Brooklyn , N . Y. , wa s "Th e Negro. " 
Papers were read on the Negr o i n Musi c 
and Art , Education , Politica l Life , Literature, and 
C Th e Falls Church , Va. , Branc h of the N . 
A . A . C. P. , has been changed to the Fairfa x 
Count y Branch , wit h a membership of 300. 
Mr . J . B . Tinner, o f Falls Church , is president. 150 TH E CRISIS 
(I I n Boston, Mass., Fran k M . Snowden, a 
Negro , is employed i n an Arm y office as 
Chie f Clerk , at a salar y of $2,240 per year. 
C. Arthu r G. Dore , Unite d States Supervisor of Census, announces tha t Negroe s are 
to be Federa l Census takers i n sections 
wher e they form the largest population, wit h 
preference given to those who were i n the 
militar y service. 
G~ Propert y 90 x 170 feet, on West Rittenhouse Street, costing $16,000, has been p
chased for a colored Y . M . C. A . i n German -
town , Pa . 
C Twelv e colored policemen have been added to the Polic e Department at Boston, 
Mass., since the discharge of Unio n policemen. Twent y additiona l Negroes are to be 
added as soon as equipment is ready. 
C A Negro,—Joh n W . Rosemond, has been 
appointed official court stenographer i n the 
Commo n Plea s Court of Alleghan y County, 
Pa . His salar y is $160 per month. 
(I Amon g jurors summoned recently for the 
Federa l Court, Elizabet h City , N . C , were 
two Negroes. —W . A . Littlejoh n and H . J. 
Rousom, of Tyrel l County. 
C A Negr o has fo r the first time appeared 
on the programs of the publi c schools i n the 
State of Washington , i n the person of Mar y 
Ross-Dorsey, who, at the Stadium Hig h 
School, i n Tacoma , gave readings from 
"Macbeth " and "Rosa, " the latte r i n Italia n dialect, and works of Dunbar. 
C Wor d comes from Columbia , S. C , tha t it 
is a common occurrence for a colored ma n to 
bu y a $4,000-$10,000 piece of property, and 
pa y down $1,000-$3,000. 
(I Whit e people at Cordele, Ga. , have agreed 
to pa y fo r materials to rebuild three colored churches destroyed by mobs, whil e the 
Negroe s wil l buil d the churches. 
C A t the Inter-Paris h Fair , Negroe s from 
seven parishes i n Louisian a exhibited 3,000 
pieces of their handiwork , includin g chairs, 
preserved fruits, and silk dresses. 
(I Mr . G. H . Bowen , a colored rea l estate 
dealer i n Savannah , Ga. , has bought propert y on Libert y Street, a select whit e section ; the purchas e price is $30,000. 
C Corneliu s L . Vanderbilt, wit h a part y of 
whit e friends, has visited the colored Lafayette Theatr e i n Ne w Yor k City . 
d Cora l T. Smith , who was dismissed from 
the six months' postgraduate course i n the 
Nurs e Trainin g Departmen t of Bellevue and 
Allie d Hospitals in Ne w Yor k City , because 
"no Negr o nurse s wer e accepted," has been 
reinstated, wit h a concession of $50 a month 
instead of $8, the usua l amoun t pai d student 
nurses. He r suit unde r the Civi l Rights 
La w wa s withdrawn . 
(I Colored men i n the Auburn , N . Y. , State 
Prison , have been granted permissio n to 
celebrate Emancipatio n Day , on the eighth 
of Januar y next. A program, includin g i 
film from the colored Lincol n Motio n Pictu n 
Company , an d a banquet wil l be given. 
(I A t Sa n Francisco , Cal. ; a Negr o —J . C. 
Thomas, has been awarde d $50 damages 
against L . J . Baa r and J . P . Petersen i n 
whose restauran t he wa s refused service. 
C Curtis Ransom, a youn g colored ma n i n 
Detroit, Mich. , is negotiating wit h the English, F
the sale of his patent, a n articl e whic h notes 
the location of a sunken vessel, to a depth 
of ten miles. Mr . Ransom is a staff write r 
fo r the Popular Science Magazine i n Ne w 
Yor k City . 
C Willia m Stevenson, a n overseas Y . M . C. 
A . worker, has been selected to succeed 
Joh n W . Davis as secretary of the Colored 
Branc h of the Y . M . C. A . i n Washington , 
D . C. 
G Colored people have established the Cheshire Cou
ty-two acres of land . Joh n L . Haile , of 
Waterbury , is the founder. Ther e are mor e 
than 200 members, whose residences range 
from Massachusetts to Tennessee. 
(I A colored mechanic, Charle s H . Jackson , 
of Boston, Mass., has invented a new divin g 
suit, throug h whic h a new world's record 
fo r deep sea divin g has been made b y Joh n 
F . Turner, of internationa l fame , who 
reached a depth of 360 feet. Mr . Jackson's 
invention is made of brass instead of rubber, 
and it wil l be used to recover $30,000,000 i n 
gold bullio n sunk by the German s off the 
Iris h Coast. 
C Illinois King's Daughters have fo r the 
first time elected a colored woman , Mrs. Ad a 
S. McKinley , of Chicago , 111., as a delegate 
to the Internationa l Convention, a t St. 
Louis. Mrs. McKinle y has been a membe r 
and active worke r of the organizatio n fo r 
twent y years. 
(I Th e Supreme Court i n Ne w Yor k Cit y 
has handed down a verdic t i n the test case 
brought by Dr . Joh n R. Hillery , a colored 
chiropodist, compellin g the Pedi c Society 
to admit to membership nine colored chi-TH E HORIZON 121 
ropodists who ha d been refused admission. 
A tax cost of $60 was made against the organizatio n for its refusal. The attorney 
fo r the Negroe s wa s Wilfor d H . Smith , a 
colored man . 
C I n launchin g a campaig n fo r a tuberculosis hospita l for Negroes, i n Wak e 
County , N . C , Secretary of the Nav y Josephus Daniels said : "Wheneve r th
been strif e i n other parts of the country, 
and when the loyalt y of some classes has 
hun g i n the balance, we have known tha t 
the Negroe s could be depended on. " 
C I n Cleveland, Ohio, a colored physicia n 
has been appointed to the Visitin g Staff 
of Lakesid e Hospital , i n the person of Dr . 
Charle s H . Garvin , who served as a Captai n 
i n the Medica l Corp s of the 367th Infantry . 
C. Fou r colored newspapers i n Baltimore , 
Md. , The Commonwealth, Daily Herald, 
Maryland Voice, and A fro-American, i n repl y to allegations made concerning Negr o 
agitators, have made a statement to the 
Attorne y Genera l of the Unite d States, 
whic h says i n part : "I n the nation-wide 
j:ound-u p of 'Reds' an d I. W . W . agitators, 
mot a single colored person i n Maryland , 
for, to our knowledge, i n the Unite d States, 
has been arrested ' or imprisoned. . . . 
^Colored people through the colored press, 
however, are demanding, and wil l continue 
to demand, every righ t of America n citizenship unde r the Constitution. " 
NATIONA L URBA N LEAGU E 
IN seeking materia l for futur e social 
workers, Mr . A . L . Jackson, Educational Secretary, has found 450 colored 
students i n norther n universities, wit h the 
field not yet covered. 
C Lieutenan t A . L . Nutt , of the 367th Regiment, A . E . F. , has accepted the position 
of secretary of the Milwauke e Urba n 
League . 
C Matthe w Bullock , an overseas Y . M . C. 
A . worker, has been appointed the first executive of the Bosto n Urba n League , whic h 
is the latest branc h established. 
C The Nationa l Urba n League has supplie d a woma n social worke r fo r the Whit e 
Plains, N . Y. , League , whic h has broadened 
its activitie s to include wor k amon g women 
and girls. 
C Th e Industria l Burea u of the Cleveland 
.Urba n League , durin g 1919 placed 3,897 
persons i n jobs, made openings i n 42 places 
of industr y previously closed to Negroes, 
and served directly 12,864 individuals. 
C Horac e Bridges, leader of the Ethica l 
Cultur e Society i n Chicago, has been elected president of the Chicago Urba n League . 
Th e Chicag o branch has adopted a budget 
of $30,000 fo r 1920. 
(I The Home Economic s Worke r of the 
Pittsburg h Urba n League gave help and 
instruction i n 1,400 homes durin g 1919. The 
Men's Divisio n of the Industria l Burea u of 
the Pittsburg h branc h placed 3,724 men 
durin g the yea r and secured the employment 
of five colored welfar e workers i n industria l 
plants. It was through the excellent wor k 
of one of these men tha t an emergency 
hospital, employin g fourteen colored nurses, 
was established i n one factory durin g the 
influenza epidemic last year; this was the 
direc t cause of the permanent employment 
of two colored nurses by the corporation 
at $1,800 pe r year. 
C A t the race relations meeting, held under 
the auspices of the Kentuck y State Conference 
Kinckl e Jones, Executiv e Secretary of the 
Nationa l Urba n League, was one of the 
speakers. Resolutions callin g fo r justice 
and equality of opportunity along all lines 
were unanimousl y passed by an audience 
of whit e and colored delegates. 
PERSONA L 
A TABLE T to the memory of Rev. Joh n 
Bunya n Reeve has been unveiled at 
Centra l Presbyteria n Church , Philadelphia , 
Pa . This church recently celebrated her 
seventy-fifth anniversary. 
C Professor J. S. Cobb, fo r mor e than 
thirty-eight years principa l of Lincol n 
School, Girardeau , Mo. , is dead. Mayo r 
Haa s attended the funeral. 
C Professor M . D . Cornish , a Negro , who 
has been connected wit h the public schools 
of Camden, N . J.., for more than twentytwo years, has resigned as principa l of 
Whittie r School, i n Camden ; he is now retired on a pension. 
C. Mr . A . I. Johnson, a pioneer colored 
undertake r i n Richmond , Va. , is dead, at the 
age of sixty-seven. Durin g the last two 
years he admitted his two sons into the 
business. 
C Dr. George F . Brag g has celebrated his 
twenty-eighth anniversar y as rector of St. 
Jame s P . E . Church , i n Baltimore , Md . 152 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
DuBois and Dill, Publishers 
2 West 13th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Ar e please d t o announc e tha t th e 
Brownies ' Boo k 
a monthl y magazine , designe d especiall y fo r 
children , i s appearin g wit h th e issu e o f January, 1920 
Content s of th e January Issue 
Cove r Picture , Photograp h b y Battey. 
Frontispiece, The Empress Zaouditou. 
Pumpkin Land, a story by Peggy 
Poe; illustrated by Hilda Wilkinson. 
The Wishing Game, a poem, Annette 
Browne. 
The Origin of White Folks, a poem, 
Annie Virginia Culbertson. 
A Boy Scout Troop of Philadelphia, a 
picture. 
Over the Ocean Wave, a geography 
story; illustrated. 
Whole Duty of Children, a poem; reprinted from Robert Louis Stevenson. 
Some Little Friends of Ours, nine pictures. 
The Judge. 
Waiting for a Howard-Fisk Football 
Game, a picture. 
The Jury. 
Celebrating Baby Week at Tuskegee, 
a picture. 
The Ouija Board, a story, Edna May 
Harrold. 
Playtime: "Hark, Hark, the Dogs 
Do Bark," a nursery rhyme by 
Carriebel B. Cole, with music by 
Farwell. 
Girls' School in Abyssinia; Y . W . C. A . 
Girls in New York City, pictures. 
As the Crow Flies. 
The Grown-ups' Corner. 
Children in the Silent Protest Parade 
in New York City. 
Katy Ferguson, a true story. 
Little People of the Month. 
After School, a poem by Jessie Fauset; 
drawings by Laura Wheeler. 
Gyp, a fairy story, A . T . Kilpatrick. 
The Boy's Answer, A . U . Craig. 
Poems, illustrated: Recruit, Georgia 
Douglas Johnson; The Tale of a 
Kitten, James Weldon Johnson; 
The Happy Quail, William I. Wallace; Singing, from Robert Louis 
Stevenson. 
Price: 15 cents per copy 
One Dollar and a Half per year 
Subscribers Wanted Agents Wanted 
Ho w w e wis h w e coul d sen d free sampl e copies ! 
Bu t w e can't . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 153 
"JUS T TH E PLAC E FO R YOU R GIRL " 
Dayton a Norma l an d Industria l Institut e for Negr o Girls, Daytona , Fla . 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment 
Course! include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational. 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , - - Principal. 
Bell Phone Spruce 1924 30-D.y System Position 
Derrick 
Shorthand School 
Childs Building 
143 5 Chestnu t Stree t 
PHILADELPHIA , PA . 
Onl y Schoo l of its Kin d 
i n Americ a 
NOTE:—Enroll now for Winter term commencing Monday, January 5th, 1920. All 
students enrolling before January will be 
entitled to present rates. 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTE D 
Al l Races 
Prepare in the best school of its land in the State. 
Subjects 
Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, English, Penmanship, Civil Service Training, and SPANISH. 
COMMERCIA L CLAS S 
Lenox Community Center—at 
PUBLI C SCHOO L 89 
Lenox Avenue and 135th St., New York, N. Y. 
Open All Year—Four Evenings Weekly. 
Fitz W. Mottley, President. 
Th e Lincol n Hospita l an d Hom e 
TRAININ G SCHOO L FO R NURSE S 
i n th e cit y o f Ne w Yor k 
offers to young colored women a three 
years' course of instruction in nursing. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. 
Post Graduate Course of six months to 
graduates of accredited schools. 
For information apply to: 
Superintenden t o f Nurse s 
Lincol n Hospita l an d Hom e 
Ne w York , N.Y . 
HALE INFIRMARY AND NURSE TRAINING 
SCHOOL, 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala. 
Offers to High School graduates and young 
women of higher education and good moral 
character, between the ages of IS and 36, a 
three years' course in the profession of nursing. For further information apply to the 
Superintendent enclosing a stamp. 
STAT E UNIVERSITY , Louisville , Ky . 
Founded 1870. 
The only Institution In the State having for Its object 
Collegiate, Ministerial, Medical, and Legal training for Colored citizens In Kentucky. 
Special training In Insurance, Social Service, Nursing and 
Hospital Work. 
Normal, Commercial, Music, Domestic Science, Missionary 
training class. 
Evening classes, correspondence course. Degrees offered. 
President C. H . Parrish 
TEACHER S 
We have had calls for teachers from Alabama, 
Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, 
Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, New York, 
North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, 
Rhode Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West Virginia. 
TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENCY 
1403 New York Avenue Washington, D. C. 
Th e Colore d Teachers ' Burea u 
Will Help You Get a Better Paying Position. 
REGISTER NOW SEASONABLE TEEMS 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 22, Wilberforce, 0. 
TH E STENOGRAPHERS ' INSTITUTE 
1227 S. 17th St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
Shorthand Typewriting 
Bookkeeping 
New Classes organizing Jan. 5, 1920, for Grammar 
School students, High School students and others. 
Matriculate for typewriting at any time—individual attention—a practical and efficient system. Read last month's 
ad in The CrisLs. 
EDWARD T. DUNCAN, Pres. 
WANTE D 
MAN or WOMAN with A-l training in printing, 
capable of supervising a fully equipped school-shop 
and prepared to teach the vocation. 
Write 
WM. W. COOKE, Director of Vocations, 
C. N. & I. DEPT. WILBERFORCE, OHIO 
Badges, Banners, Lodg e Regali a 
Fo r al l Lodg e an d Churc h Societie s 
CENTRA L REGALI A CO . 
JOS . L . JONES , Proa. 
N . E. Car. 8th and Plum Sts., Cincinnati, Ohio 
Telelphone, Baying 7796 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Publi c Mortgages 
6 Nort h 42n d Street, Philadelphia , Pa . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 154 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
In 190 3 Dr . W . E . B. DuBois published the SOUL S O F BLACK , 
FOLK , which has been called "one of the noteworthy books, not 
merely of the year, but of the epoch." It is still in print and in its 11th 
edition. 
In January, 1920, 
Messrs. Harcourt, Brace 
and Howe will publish 
another volume of essays 
and sketches by Dr. DuBois entitled 
DARKWATER 
of which they say: 
"It wil l be a volume of essays, and sketches, like 'The Souls of 
Blac k Folk, ' but maturer, richer, wit h a deeper race passion, and wit h 
a finer imaginative gift. Whethe r yo u like Dr. DuBois or not, 
whether yo u agree wit h hi m or not, yo u have got to admit that he is 
the greatest ma n of Africa n bloo d i n the worl d today, and that the 
world-wide audience whic h he wil l wi n for a boo k like this wil l result 
in incalculable benefit to the race." 
This volume of 276 pages sweeps the whole horizon of social problems—Colonization, the Future of Africa, Work and Wealth, Government and Suffrage, Socialism, Menial Service, Women and Children, 
Education, Beauty and Death. Its chapters are interspersed with poetry 
and fiction. 
Price $2.00 Postage Extra 
TH E CRISI S 
70 FIFT H AVENU E NE W YORK , N . Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 155 
Scott's official History of the American Negro in the 
GREA T WA R 
Bishop Hartsell of the Methodist Episcopal Church writes as follows: 
" I have read your history of The American Negro in the Wa r and want to congratulate you on having issued so quickly a volume of so much value. The official records will 
have a very wide circulation and be assured a permanent place among the masses. The 
candid and fair spirit which characterizes all your public utterances is manifest." 
A Prou d Chapte r 
i n th e Histor y o f 
th e Negr o Rac e 
The official and authentic 
history of the true part 
played by the Negro i n the 
great Worl d War, written 
by a man whose valuable 
experience, intimate connection with every phase of 
the direction of the great 
struggle, makes it possible 
to publish the true facts. 
A great historical volume 
that should be in every 
Negro home. Gives inside 
facts and accurate and official data and pictures 
which will appear in no 
other book. Ever y chapter 
is full of the very information which you have been 
anxiously waiting to know. 
This Grea t Boo k tells 
all about the Negr o Everywhere in the Worl d Wa r 
— Ho w H e Di d Hi s Duty , 
in every capacity — from 
right up i n the front line 
trenches and o n the battlefields— clear bac k to 
the wor k of keepin g the 
home fires burning ; on the 
farms; i n the mills and 
munitio n plants; on the 
railroads and steamships; 
in shipyards and factories. 
Me n and wome n wit h the 
Re d Cross, the Y . M . C. 
A. , the Y . W . C. A. , the 
Wa r Cam p Communit y 
Service, the Libert y Loa n 
Drives, etc. 
Scott's Official Histor y 
was writte n for the Negr o 
by the Negr o that the 
wonderfu l record of darin g deeds, gallant bravery 
and undyin g heroism of 
our black troops migh t 
neve r perish. A great tribute to the patriotism of 
the Negr o Race. 
Written by 
Emmett J . Scott, A .M. , 
LLD. , Special Assistant to 
Secretary of War, Newton 
D. Baker. 
Assiste d b y the following notable individuals: 
Dr . Carter G. Woodson, 
Directo r of Research, Th e 
Associatio n for the Study 
of Negr o Lif e & History , 
Inc. Ralph W . Tyler, Accredited Re
the Committe e o n Publi c 
Information, wh o accompanied the colore d troops 
to wa r fronts in France . 
William _ Anthony Aery , 
Publicatio n Secretary , 
Hampto n Norma l and Agricultural Insti
and Industria l Institute. 
Mrs. Alice Dunbar Nelson (
Laurenc e Dunbar) leader 
in the mobilizatio n of colored wome n of the country for wa r wor k under 
the auspices of the Wo ­
men's Committee , Coun ­
cil of Nationa l Defense. 
Miss Ev a G. Bowles, Executive Se
charge of the colored 
wor k of the Youn g Women's Chr
son, Historia n wh o accompanied the famous 92d Division, 
Over 600 large pages 
(equal to 800 ordinary 
pages). 
Profusel y illustrated 
with nearly 160 official 
French and American 
Negro War Photographs, 
showing all sides of War 
Activities and Negro soldier Life, from the Call 
to the Colors on Through 
the Training Camps . 
Then to th e Battl e 
Fronts and hack to the 
Happy Home Coming. 
Emmett J . Scott, 
A.M. , L.L.D. 
Agents Wanted 
Make $8.00 to $20.00 per 
day — right now — selling 
Scott's Official History — 
best book, biggest seller, 
quickest money-maker for 
live agents. Ne w from 
cove r to cover. Be first in 
you r territory and get the 
orders. W e pay yo u high ­
est commissions. 
FREE Writ e toda y 
for free outfit, 
includin g agents' sample 
book and full instructions. 
Send 25 cents to prepay 
postage. 
Copy mailed to any address 
upon receipt of $2.90 for 
cloth binding or $3.75 
for Morocco binding 
TH E NEGR O HISTORICA L PUBLISHIN G COMPAN Y 
P. O. Dra« r I WASHINGTON, D. C . "U " St. Station 
Mention THE , CRISIS, 156 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
The Future Is Bright! 
Despit e th e grea t unres t 
brough t abou t b y lac k o f em ­
ploymen t fo r th e laborers, for ­
merl y employe d i n th e grea t 
emergenc y plants establishe d 
durin g th e war , an d th e thou ­
sand s o f returne d soldiers: Ye t 
th e Souther n Ai d Societ y o f 
Va. , Inc. , ha s done , durin g 
1919, a large r business tha n i n 
an y othe r yea r sinc e its organi ­
zation—nearl y 2 7 year s ago . 
Th e Societ y ha s rendere d t o 
its members , throug h its high ­
l y esteeme d officer s an d em ­
ployees, a bette r servic e tha n 
heretofore . W e hav e pai d mor e 
claims—an d pai d the m prompt ­
ly—tha n an y yea r before . Bu t 
—best o f all—w e hav e lai d a 
broade r foundatio n fo r a great ­
e r servic e an d business i n th e 
comin g years. 
Fo r th e consisten t suppor t an d confidenc e o f ou r mem ­
ber s an d th e publi c w e exten d ou r gratefu l thank s an d pledg e 
the m a superio r servic e i n th e Ne w an d al l othe r years. 
Remember—Th e Souther n Ai d Societ y o f Va. , Inc. , ha s 
no t increase d its rates. It stil l issue s th e Superio r Policy — 
Payin g Sickness an d Acciden t claim s al l throug h lif e an d a n 
undiminishe d Deat h Clai m afte r death . 
A fe w opening s fo r wel l traine d youn g men , as agents, 
bookkeeper s an d stenographers . 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VA., Inc. 
Home Office: 52 7 N . SECON D ST. , RICHMOND , VA . 
A. D. PRICE , Pres. B. L . JORDAN , Sec. W . A . JORDAN , Asst. Sec. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 157 
YESTERDA Y 
Just a few weeks ago—in October , to be exact—the SUPREM E 
LIF E AN D CASUALT Y COMPAN Y was organized. 
Th e first $200,000.00 Insurance Compan y promoted b y our people, 
it marked a new epoch in financial history. 
Chartered and licensed for the sale of its securities by the State of 
Ohio—th e real centre of our industrial population—it blazed new trails 
and opened virgin fields for racial cooperation and commercia l expansion. 
Organizin g its ow n agencies for the nation-wide sale of its capital 
stock it left the beaten paths of corporate promotion and quickly 
established itself in the heart of the investing public, resulting in unstinted praise and stock subscriptions. 
TODA Y 
Toda y subscriptions are coming from every section of the country : 
from a musi c firm in Ne w Yor k City— a social worke r in Virginia—a n 
insurance official i n Nort h Carolina—a ministe r in Florida—a business 
ma n of Mississippi—a teacher in Missouri—a politician of Illinois—a 
business woma n of Arkansas—a n insurance president in Kentucky . 
An d in large number s subscriptions have come fro m bankers, business 
men. professional me n and workin g men of Georgia , Ohio , and Ten ­
nessee, the home of the promoter s and guarantors of Supreme Lif e and 
Casualt y Company . 
TOMORRO W 
Plans are being perfected for the completion of this corporation. 
Ou r actuary—one of the most eminent in America—is producing exclusively for us the Supreme Policy , covering every phase of life, health 
and accident insurance in general and emphasizing in particular 
CASUALT Y INSURANC E and GROU P INSURANCE . This period 
of Reconstruction calls for bigger and better things and Supreme Lif e 
plans for Supreme achievements. A limited numbe r of shares is available at $200 per share, in cash or terms. Us e this coupon. 
Address communication to the Home Office of the 
SUPREM E LIFE AN D CASUALT Y CO . 
COLUMBUS , OHIO 
SUPREM E LIF E AN D CASUALT Y CO. , Columbus, Ohio . 
I desire to purchase * shares of stock and enclose $— 
as first payment. 
Signed 
Address 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 158 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TW O GREA T BOOK S for $2.50 
NO LIBRAR Y COMPLET E WITHOU T THE M 
(1) The History of the Negro Race and Negro Soldiers in the 
Spanish-American War, Dating Back to Egypt and the 
Fharoas—400 pages, 50 illustrations. (Retails alone for 
$1.25.) Was adopted as a textbook by North Carolina 
State Board of Education. 
(2) The Pictorial History of the Negro in the Great World 
War, giving a brilliant historical sketch, a description of 
battle scenes by Colonel Haywood, of the Fighting Fifteenth New York, Capt. Marshall, Sergeant Steptoe, Ralph 
Tyler and others, with 150 excellent pictures of officers 
and men and war views. (Sells alone for $2.00.) 
Just Think, only $2.50 for these two great books. 
Agents wanted everywhere, large commissions paid 
ADDRESS: E. A. JOHNSON, 17 West 132nd Street, New York, N.Y . 
Atlanta University 
Studie s o f th e Negr o Problem s 
20 Monograph ! Sol d Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E 
ATLANT A UNIVERSITY :: ATLANTA , GA . 
BOOK S - BOOKS 
Rare Books and Pamphlets a Specialty. 
Send price for any book you want. We will deliver 
post-paid to any part of the United States. 
YOUNG'S BOOK EXCHANG E 
(The Mecca of Negro History and Literature) 
135 "West 135th Street New York, N. Y. 
A MONEY GETTER because it is A CROWD GETTER. 
Churches and Clubs looking for a play that will afford an 
evening of Side-Splitting Fun, should have 
The Slabtown Convention 
An entertainment in one act; full of wit 
and good humor. Scores of churches have cleared from 
One to Two Hundred Dollars In One Night. PRICE, 50c. 
MISS NANNIE H. BURROUGHS, Author 
Lincoln Htlchts Washington. D. C 
RELIABILITY . 
A New York City Negro news column for one dollar 
weekly! 
As recognized agents for over five hundred colored and 
white publications on the continent why not let us act for 
you, whether newspaper man or advertiser? 
NEWSPAPER SERVICE BUREAU 
Fifteen telephones 309 Broadway, New York, N. Y. 
Harold E. Rimmelkjaer Leon E. Mertins 
George R. Jordan, Mgrs. 
AR E YO U A PRUDE ? 
If so, don't read LOCOMA—America's only highclass MAGAZIN E exclusively devoted to all phases 
of such 
PERSONAL SUBJECTS 
as Marriage, Divorce, Eugenics, Birth Control, 
Love, Courtship, Sex Morality, etc, For Adults, 
and by the best of writers. Yo u will profit by reading LOCOMA . Year, $1.50; copy, 15c. SPECIA L 
TRIAL . 6 MONTHS , 50c. 
218, C. & M. BLDG., FARMTNGTON, MICH. 
Would you like to know why the Negro and Caucasian 
are mixing in spite of prejudice ? Then, read 
" As Nature Leada," by J. A. Rogers, author of " From 
Superman to Man." Undoubtedly the moat fearless analysis 
of the Negro-Caucasian situation by any author. The writer 
penetrates to the very heart of the subject and In a style 
bubbling with vigor he puts in the clearest language thoughts 
of your innermost consciousness. Arguments supported by the 
world's greatest scientists and philosophers. Easily read. 
A book you will read and re-read and give to your friends. 
Price. $1.25: by mail, $1.35. Agents wanted. 
Dept. A, Haye* Book Storo. 8640 Stat* Street, Chicago, 111. 
WANTE D 
Carriage and automobile trimmer. Steady employment at good wages for first-class man. None 
other need apply. 
The C. R. Patterson Sons Co. 
GREENFIELD , OHIO 
Health? Take Turkis h Bat h at 
.Home—Onl y 2 Cent s 
Physicians are abandoning drugs for this new 
treatment. If your mind or body is tired. or you 
have rheumatism, blood, stomach, liver, kidney 
and skin troubles,open your pores, and feel the 
rapid change in your condition, at cost of 2c a 
bath. Th e Robinson Bath Cabine t is the only 
scientifically constructed bath cabinet ever 
made for the home. Great 52 Boo k Sent FRE E 
.-"TbePhiloeophyofHealthandBeauty.,'Writo 
today. Agents wanted. ROBINSON MFG . 
CO. . 103 7 N . Twelfth St. . TOLEDO . OHIO 
Tel. 3437 Fort Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELLO R -AT-LA W 
84 School Street Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
Telephones: 
Central 266 
Main 220 
HARR Y E . DAVI S 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
202-208 Engineers Building Cleveland, Ohio 
Patents secure d o n eas y term s 
Write (or particulars. 
JOS. H . STEWART , Attorney-at-Law, I 
494 Louisiana Ave., N. W., Washington, D. CAgent s Mak e 
Sellin g this Wonderfu l 
Coa l Saver 
A simple device that fits any Stove or 
Furnace pipe. Absolutely controls consumption of fuel and regulates heat. Gives 
from 1-4 to 1-3 more heat from the same quantity of fuel regardless of type of Stove or furnace 
used. Easy to attach. 
Th e Arnol d Dampe r 
Entirely automatic---requires no attention after fire is started. Insures 
greatest comfort by keeping rnoras at even temperature; no over heating, under-heating, nor wasted fuel. Holds lire at fullest efficiency. 
Save s Cos t o n Firs t To n m c 
A proven success; thousands in use. Price £2.60 stove size: so.00 
furnace size. Sold direct ODly through authorized agents, bend 
today giving size of pipe. Exelusivo territory to Agents. 
Wonderful opportunity. Groenbeck. S. D. . earpB J15 -
per day. Everybody wants the Damper. Write Ior_ 
L
 proposition. 
ROBINSON MFG . COMPAN Y 
121 Factories Bid nTOLEDO , OHIO 
15 Per 
Day 
Mention TIIF . CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 159 
FLORENC E COLE-TALBER T 
Soprano 
" She has one of the beat voices that God h u given hex 
race."—Los Angeles Times. 
" Special praise must be given Mrs. Florence Tulbert 
who beside her natural girt has already reached a high plane 
of professional accuracy."—Herman Devriee In Chicago American. 
Engagements accepted for Concerts, Recitals, Oratorio 
Mrs. Talbert will make her first tour of the southern states 
beginning September first at Arkansas. Write for date now. 
659 Twenty-eighth Street. Detroit Mloh. 
Cleota J. Collins 
Lyri c Sopran o 
Recitals, including compositions by Negro composers, 
and short, snappy lectures 
on Negro music. Your community and young people 
will be musically inspired. 
156 Hamilton Avenue 
COLUMBUS . OHIO 
Clarence Cameron White 
VIOLINIS T 
"Critics are one in their 
high estimate of the splendid 
attainments of Clarenc e 
Cameron White and his Con* 
cert appearance in your city 
means the musical event of 
the season." For terms and dates address 
616 COLUMBUS AVENUE BOSTON, MASS. 
WILLIA M H . RICHARDSON , - Baritone 
"One of the agreeable features of his singing was his 
distinct enunciation." Philip Hale in The Boston Herald. 
ADDRESS: 
170 WALNUT AVENUE ROXBURY, MASS. 
E. ALDAM A JACKSO N 
Graduate of Institute of Musical Art 
Organist-Director of Music of St. Marks M. E. 
Church; Concert Accompanist; Piano, Voice, 
Theory, Instruction, Conducting, Coaching. 
Harmony taught from beginning to completion. Private or correspondence. 
Geothius system. 
Studio: 185 "W. 135th St., New York, N. Y. 
Telephone Morning^ide 1708. 
PHONOGRAP H RECORD S of Our 
Foremos t Negr o Artist s 
Now Ready and on Sale 
No. 
No. 
1, "GO DOWN MOSES " Baritone Solo, 
composed and sung by HARR Y T. BURLEIGH. 
2, "VILLANELLE, " Soprano Solo, sung 
by FLORENC E COLE-TALBERT, 
No. 3, "CRADLE SONG," Violin Solo, composed and played by CLARENC E CAMERON WHITE. 
Price $1.25 each, and 25c extra for mailing, 
packing and insurance. 
Broome Special Phonograph Records 
23 Clayton Ave., Medford, Mass. 
Send name and address for illustrated catalog. 
INVINCIBLE CONCERT CO. 
Hig h Clas s Entertainer s 
Churches Schools Lodges Y. M . C. A.'S 
For dates and terms write: 
1910 E. 24th Street, Kansas City, Mo . 
BUSTS O F 
Booker T . Washington. 
Fred Douglass,Paul , 
Lawrenc e Dunbar , 
Bishop Richard Allen. 
51-50 each. The 4 basis lor $5.00 
Agents wanted. Send at ooce. 
The Isaac Hathaway Art 
Company 
718 S. HICKORY STREET 
PINE BLUFF , ARK . 
COLORED DOLLS 
Berry' s Famou s 
Unbreakabl e Brow n 
Ski n Doll s 
Send for Catalog 
Berr y & Ros s Mfg . Co. , Inc . 
Factory, 36-38 West 135th St. 
New York, N . Y . 
4,000 Agents Wanted 
to sell Forte's Magic Corn Liniment. Gives relief 
in ten minutes. A trial will convince you in ten 
minutes. Price 25c, by mail, 30c. Rates to agents, 15c. 
FORT E & CO . 
150 Dixwell Ave. New Haven, Conn. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 160 TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 
Mme. C. J. Walker's 
PREPARATION S 
for the HAI R 
Worth more 
The than it Costs culmination of the genius 
of Mme C. J . Walker is her wonderful 
Hair Grower and in itself is a wonderful 
creation for dandruff and falling hair. In fact, 
it invigorates dry and lifeless hair, stimulates 
circulation, thereby causing a new growth. 
Mme C.J. Walker's 
Preparations 
are all now packed in SQUARE YELLOW BOXES 
with Mme. C. J. Walker's Seal and Signature 
on each outside package, which is YOUR GUARANTEE 
Tetter Salcc One 
of the best 
known cures for 
dandruff, tetter 
and eczema 
makes a friend 
once used if 
afflicted with 
this skin disuse. 
Scientific, 
Thorough, and 
Practical. 
LL Mme. C J. WALKER'S 
Inventions are reliable because they restore and beautify the 
hair without injury to the 
scalp and are used and 
endorsed by thousands of 
Hair Dressers, Scalp Specialists, throughout the 
country, known as the 
Walker Hair Dressers, 
having a diploma from 
the Lelia College of Hair 
Culture which signifies 
Mme. C J . .Walker's 
system. 
Egjj|HERE is nothing 
Hif imaginary about the 
World-Wide Fame of 
Mme. C. J . Walker's 
Ultra-Quality Preparations. None genuine 
without Mme. C J . Walker's seal and signature. 
W e have ' gone to a sjreat 
deal of expense to put these 
preparations up in new yellow 
cardboard boxes, sealed wiih 
the Walke r trademar k as a 
guarantee that you are getting 
the genuine Mme . C J . Walke r 
Preparations which ar e "worth 
mor e than Ihey cost. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 
Vegetable Shampoo. A 
splendid food and thorough cleanser for the scalp 
and hair. Has a healing effect' 
on a sore scalp, in fact is 
excellent for removing 
dandruffLelia College and 
Walker Hair Parlor 
110 W. 136th St. New York 
For Mail Orders and Information Address 
Mme. C. J. Walker MTg Co., 
Main Office, 640 N." West Street, Indianapolis, Ind. 
Tcrrple Grower Recommended 
i highly (torn those wtio have used il 
' far growing hair on (lie temples or 
bald Spots. Endorsed by thousand! 
ol hair dresiers throughout US.A. 
Cfottoi* Only to be used in dreeing 
the I lair and it will nuke short harsh, 
kirk, hah- behave and slay In plate if 
used as directed al the same time imparls 
a beaali'ul gloss lo the hair TH E CRISI S ADVERTISE R 16 1 
LEAR N 
Indol 
Trade Mark 
System of Hair Culture 
by Correspondence Course 
A system for the training of colored women 
of all ages to become expert hairdressers 
and make MONEY. Please your friends by 
using a wonderful system and by becoming 
OUR AGEN T in your TOWN. 
Complete outfit and lessons sent you to start 
—Diplomas given—Investigate by writing us 
for literature and reasonable terms. 
Send $1.10 for Course 
of Treatment in Hair 
Dressing and Beauty 
Culture 
Special Combination Offer on all INDOL 
Toilet Preparations. Six cents in stamps 
will bring you liberal samples of our Hair 
Grower. 
Write Us for Agency 
Indo Laboratories Corporation 
Dept. C-2 
2257 SEVENT H AVENU E 
Ne w York , N . Y . 
FREE 
FASHIO N BOO K 
MAILED 
UPO N REQUES T 
Rea l Huma n Hai r 
All our wigs are 
hand made and 
strictly to order, 
from maker to 
wearer. 
WIGS, Transformations, switches, and Braids and 
all other articles of 
hair goods. 
No. 604—Price $10.50 
We carry the largest selection of Hair Dressers' Tools. 
The celebrated Mme. Baum's Preparations 
which makes the ikia velvetlike, the hair 
silkllke. 
Mme. Baum's Mail Order House 
P. O. BOX 145, 
Penn. Terminal Station, New York, N. Y. 
When writing, mention this paper. 
Earn 35 to 100 WEEKLY 
AL L O R SPAR E TIM E 
Guaranteed 
For Ten Year 
You—yourself—can positively make S35 to $100 a week. I 
want men. hustling, energetic* ambitious fellows, anxious to 
make money, who are willing to work with me. Not for me, but 
with me. Axe you that kind? I want you to advertise, eell and 
appoint local agents for the biggest, most sensational seller in 
60 years— the ROBINSON FOLDING BATH TUB. Demon-
•tratlDff Tub Furnished. Here's an absolutely new invention 
—nothing like it. Makes instant appeal. Sells easily. gives 
every home a modern, up-to-date bathroom in any part of the 
house. No plumbing, no waterworks needed. Folds in Bmall 
roll,handy as umbrella. Self-emptying, positively nnleakable. 
Absolutely guaranteed for 10 years. Remember, fully 70 per 
cent of homes have no bath rooms. 
Sensationa l Sale s Successe s 
Two sales a day means (300a month. Breeze, of Idaho, made 
$400 profit in 30 days. Be v. Otto Sohulze, Mo., got $1600 to date. 
Burkholder, Mont,, orders $1072 in 17 days. Hamlinton, of 
Wyo., made $60 first two days. Hundreds like that. Pleasant, 
permanent, fascinating work. Write a post card. Let me 
write yon a long letter. No experience needed, no capital. 
Your credit is good if yon mean business. But you must be 
ambitious, yon mnst want to make money. That's all. Write 
a postcard now. * I want to pay you $35 to $100 every week,' 
H- 5* Robinson, Pres. The Robinson Cabinet Mfg. Co. 
S122 Factories Buildind Toledo, Ohio 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 162 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
YO U MUST AC T QUICKL Y 
IF YOU WANT TO SECURE 
IDEAL BUILDING LOTS Sized 30 x 144 Feet, 
with FRUIT TREE S PLANTE D ON THEM , in 
Beautifu l ORCHARDVILL E 
FOR 
ONL Y $4 9 50 ON VER Y 
EASY TERM S 
People from all over the country are securing 
these lots and the DEMAN D FO R THE M IS 
INCREASIN G B Y LEAP S AN D BOUNDS ! 
This is the most unusual and attractive lot offer 
ever made and it is meeting with GREA T SUCCESS . If YO U want to take advantage of it you 
must AC T QUICKLY . 
Orchardville is located in a HIG H GRAD E 
FRUI T GROWIN G REGIO N and is to be developed into a BEAUTIFU L FRUI T CITY . 
Each lot will have FIV E FRUI T TREE S and 
ON E SHAD E TRE E planted on it. and we will 
develop and take care of the property for FOU R 
YEAR S WITHOU T EXTR A COST . When the 
fruit trees come into commercial bearing they 
should earn you EXCELLEN T YEARL Y RE ­
TURN S O N YOU R INVESTMEN T WITHOU T 
AN Y EFFOR T O N YOU R PART . 
The lots are sized 30 x 144 feet and have plenty 
of room for a house, garden, chicken yard, shed, 
etc., besides the room taken up by the fruit trees 
that we will plant on them. EAC H LO T IS 
GUARANTEE D T O B E HIG H AN D DR Y 
UNDE R A MONEY-BAC K GUARANTEE , and 
TH E CONTRAC T YO U GE T GIVE S YO U TH E 
PROTECTIO N YO U WANT . 
The price of the lots is only $49.50 each, and 
the terms are only $3.00 a month. Smaller terms 
when more than one of these lots are purchased. 
N O INTEREST . 
REMEMBE R THA T THER E AR E NO T 
ENOUG H LOT S T O SUPPL Y TH E DEMAN D 
FO R THEM . ONL Y THOS E WH O AC T 
PROMPTL Y WIL L B E ABL E T O GE T ANY . 
Send for our pamphlet and booklet and get all 
the particulars of this offer. Simply write your 
name and address on the coupon attached below 
and mail it to us RIGH T AWAY . The pamphlet 
and booklet will be sent to you by return mail 
without any obligation to you. 
Address 
TH E SWAN - ARENSON REALT Y & DEVELOPMEN T CO . 
19 SOUT H L A SALL E STREE T CHICAG O IL L 
WRITE PLAINLY 
TH E SWAN-ARENSON REALT Y & DEVELOPMEN T CO. 
Chicago, 111. 
Date 19 
Gentlemen :— 
I am interested in your Orchardville lot offer and would be glad to secure a copy of 
your circular and booklet without any obligation to me. 
Name 
Address 
Town State 
C. 1-20. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 163 
Your Gold Tooth Polished 
Your White Teeth Bleached 
By Using Dr. WELTERS ' Antiseptic 
—TOOTH POWDER— 
Absolutely Free From Grit & Acid 
And Prevents Decay 
Ask your druggist. If he hasn't got it, ask him to 
order it for you. Send 27 Cents in Stamps 
for a full size package. 
Th e E . A . Welters ' Toot h Powde r Co. , Inc . 
410 BROA D ST. JACKSONVILLE , FLA . 
Agents and Distributors Wanted 
The Largest and Only Tooth Powder Manufacturing Corporation Owned and 
Controlled by Negroes in the United States 
No! an Ordinary Dentifrice tut a Scientific Preparation Specially Prepared for Polishing "GOLD" 
in the Mouth, "BLEACHING' the Teeth and Preventing Decay. 
ABC 
Employment 
Agency 
WOMEN, MEN , BOYS, GIRLS 
JOBS-GOO D JOB S 
ARE WAITING FOR YOU 
Phones: 
Drexel 98, 194, 1281 
4702 S. State St. 
Open 
Evenings 
Chicago, 111. 
THE WHITELAW HOTEL 
JOH N W . LEWIS . PRES . 
13th and Tea Streets, N.W. 
Washington, D. C. 
Appointments Unexcelled 
Rates $1.00 and Up per Day. 
WM . D.NIXON, Manager. 
SPECIAL 
The CRISIS one year .. . $1.50 
The BROWNIES' BOO K one year - 1.50 
One year's subscription to each if ordered 
together - - - - $2.50 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
Beautiful Idlewild 
The most wonderfully Ideal spot where young and 
old cast aside for the time all the cares and worries 
of their strenuous, nerve-racking routine UTSS and 
romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the 
full nature in all her wondrous glory. The waters of 
the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly 
teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
Do you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting? 
Do you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries T 
Do you want a place to go where you can build up 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency T 
Do you enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, 
progressive people of the day—people who do things! 
Do you believe In progress and do you want to j 
have a part In one of the most progressive move- / 
omnia of the time? Surely I 
Then you will be Interested In, and want to 
own a lot of your own In Beautiful Idlewild, . 
Michigan. If you act at once you can se- * 
cure a beautiful lot for only $80.to each; / 
$8.00 cash; SI.09 per week. When your ' 
payments are completed the lot will be 
transferred to you by an absolute 
warranty deed with abstract showing clear title. 
Good live energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 
1110 Hartford Bldg 
So. Dearborn St. 
Chicago, LH. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 164 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
TWO GREAT NEGRO BOOKS 
Emmett J . Scott's 
War History 
( A Few Interesting Chapters.) 
Colored Officers and How They Were Trained. 
Treatment of Negro Soldiers in Camp. 
The Negro Combat Division. 
Negro Soldiers Overseas. 
Negro Heroes of the War. 
Negro Soldier as a Fighter. 
The Spirit of the Negro at the Front, 
Negro Music That Stirred France. 
When the Boys Came Home. 
German Propaganda Among the Negroes. 
What the Negro Got Out of the War. 
The 38 chapters are interesting and instructive. There are 600 pages, size 7x 9 inches; 
price $2.90. 
Emmett J . Scott, Author 
AGENTS 
MAKING 
$60.00 
Per Week 
We Want 
You 
To Act In 
Your 
County 
744 Pages—100 Pages of Negro Soldiers. 50 Pages of 
other appropriate and interesting pictures. 
TH E KELL Y MILLE R HISTORY 
OF TH E WORL D WA R 
is all that the title can possibly mean. The 
author takes up the Great Conflict, following 
it step by step through the thirty excellent 
chapters, including the Terms of Peace. 
The Negro's War for Democratization—He 
braces Himself and Claims to be the Champion 
of Democracy—Enters the Arena of Combat! 
The German Indigent—The South Sensitive— 
The North Quizzical—The Whole World Hesitant. 
The Negro Turns the Tide at Chateau 
Thierry—He Helps Hurl Back the Hordes of 
the Hun—Wins His Place and Eight to a 
Voice in the Affairs of Mankind against Prejudice, Ridicule, Race Hatred and almost Insurmountable Obstacles! 
The book is bound' in durable cloth, with 
substantial head band, price $2.50. In Full 
Kerotol Morocco, $3.25. Copy mailed to any 
address upon receipt of the price. Satisfaction guaranteed or money refunded. 
Prof. Kelly Miller, Author 
Ask For 
Catalog 
of 
160 Books 
It Is FREE 
Dear Reader—We have sold more of these great hooks than have been sold by all other 
publishers and jobbers. If you wish to sell hooks, send 15 cents in stamps for one prospectus, or send 30 cents and we will mail both of them. Millions of these books are being sold, 
BIG MONEY is being made by our SALES PEOPLE. Will you join us in the distribution 
of good helpful race books? 
AUSTIN JENKINS CO. 523 9th St., Washington, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . State St. StyLes 
TAILORE D - T O - MEASUR E 
At Agent' s Inside Wholesale Price s 
New Fad and Winter Sample Book Now Ready 
Bigger Samples 
Mor e Fabric s 
Additional Styles 
SENT FREE 
With Inside Wholesale Prices to Agents 
Styles and Samples to please every taste, 
to look well on every age and build. 
Greate r cas h pro f its t o agent s 
Even if you don't want to be our Agent in your spare 
time, be sure to get our new FREE offer and learn how 
we save you one-half on your own clothes. 
TAILORING AGENTS—Be sure to write and 
get our new deal with Bigger Profits, 
Better Attention and Prompt Shipments. 
KNICKERBOCKE R TAILORIN G CO . 
DePt 290, Chicago, IL L 
AMAZIN G 
CAS H PROFITS 
are being made in 
the delightful -
AGENC Y 
TAILORIN G 
BUSINESS 
Why Don't YO U 
Get Into the same? 
YOU BET I W an t T ha t 
Ne w S ample B oo k 
please send it to me FREE 
and PREPAID. Here is m y address 
Name 
R.F. D Box Postoffice 
Street & N o State 
Fill in name and address plainly—and mail AT ONCE 
If you can't be our Agent in spare time, please hand this to some ambitious fellow 
Knickerbocker Tailoring Co., Dept. 290, Chicago, 111. TH E WORLD' S FINES T PREPARATION S FO R HAI R AN D SKIN . 
FO R SAL E A T AL L DRU G STORE S AN D BEAUT Y SHOP S 
FREE-NIL E QUEE N BEAUT Y BOOK-FREE . WRIT E FO R A COP Y TO-DA Y 
Kashmir Chemical Co. 
Dept. K 312 So. Clarlt. St Chicago, ILL. 
NILE QUEEN 
Manufactured by 
CHEMICAL CO. CHICAGO 
for hair and Skin 