TEACHERS ' NUMBE R 
TH E CRISIS 
A RECOR D OF TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Volume Two JUNE . 1911 Number Two 
ONE DOLLAR A YEAR TE N CENTS A COPY 
HARRIE T BEECHER STOW Ε CENTENAR Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION for the 
ADVANCEMEN T of COLORE D PEOPL E 
OBJECT.—Th e National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People 
is an organization composed of men and 
women of all races and classes who believe that the present widespread increase 
of prejudice against colored races and 
particularly the denial of rights and 
opportunities to ten million Americans of 
Negro descent is not only unjust and a 
menace to our free institutions, but also 
is a direct hindrance to World Peace 
and the realization of Human Brotherhood. 
METHODS.—Th e encouragement of 
education and efforts for social uplift; the 
dissemination of literature; the holding of 
mass meetings; the maintenance of a lecture bureau; the encouragement of vigilance committees; the investigation of complaints; the maintenance of a Bureau of 
Information; the publication of TH E 
CRISIS ; the collection of facts and publication of the truth. 
ORGANIZATION.—Al l interested 
persons are urged to join our organization 
—associate membership costs $ 1, and 
contributing and sustaining members pay 
from $2 to $25 a year. 
FUNDS.—W e need $10,000 a year 
for running expenses of this work and particularly urge the necessity of gifts to help 
on our objects. 
OFFICERS.—Th e officers of the 
organization are: 
National President — Mr. Moorfield 
Storey, Boston, Mass. 
Chairman of the Executive Committee— 
Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard, New 
York. 
Treasurer—Mr. Walter E . Sachs, New 
York. 
Director of Publicity and Research—Dr. 
W . E . B. DuBois, New York. 
Executive Secretary—Miss Mary W . 
Ovington, New York. 
COMMITTEE.—Ou r work is carried on under the auspices of the following General Committee, in addition to the 
officers named: 
"Mis s Gertrud e Barnum , Ne w York . 
# Rev . W . H Brooks, Ne w York . 
Prof . Joh n Dewey , Ne w York . 
Mis s Mau d R . IngersoII, Ne w York . 
Mrs . Florenc e Kelley , Ne w York . 
"Mr . Pau l Kennaday , Ne w York . 
•Mrs . F . R . Keyser , Ne w York . 
Dr . Chas. Lenz , Ne w York . 
Mr . Jaco b W . Mack , Ne w York . 
"Mrs . M . D . MacLean , Ne w York . 
Rev . Horac e G . Miller , Ne w York . 
Mrs . Ma x Morgenthau , Jr. , Ne w York . 
Mr . Jame s F . Morton , Jr. , Ne w York . 
Mr . Henr y Moskowitz , Ne w York . 
Mis s Leonor a O'Reilly , Ne w York . 
"Rev . A . Clayto n Powell , Ne w York . 
"Mr . Charle s Edwar d Russell , Ne w York . 
Mr . Jaco b H . Schiff, Ne w York . 
Prof . E . R . A . Seligman , Ne w York . 
"Rev . Josep h Silverman , Ne w York . 
Mrs . Ann a Garli n Spencer, Ne w York . 
Mrs . Henr y Villard , Ne w York . 
Mis s Lillia n D . Wald , Ne w York . 
"Willia m Englis h Walling , Ne w York . 
'Bisho p Alexande r Walters, Ne w York . 
Dr . Stephe n S. Wise , Ne w York . 
"Rev . Joh n Hayne s Holmes, Brooklyn , N . Y . 
Mis s M . R. Lyons , Brooklyn , N . Y . 
"Mis s M . W . Ovington , Brooklyn , N . Y . 
"Dr . O . M . Waller , Brooklyn , N . Y . 
Mrs . M . H . Talbert , Buffalo , N . Y . 
Hon . Thos. M . Osborne , Auburn , N . Y . 
"Mr . W . L . Bulkley , Ridgefiel d Park , N . J 
Mr . Georg e W . Crawford , Ne w Haven , Conn . 
Mis s Mari a Baldwin , Boston , Mass. 
Mr . Francis J . Garrison , Boston , Mass. 
Mr . Archibal d H . Grimke , Boston , Mass. 
"Mr . Alber t E . Pillsbury , Boston , Mass. 
Mr . Wm . Munro e Trotter , Boston , Mass. 
Dr . Horac e Bumstead , Brookline , Mass. 
Mis s Elizabet h C . Carter, Ne w Bedford , Mass. 
Prest . Chas. T . Thwing , Cleveland , O . 
Mr . Chas. W . Chesnutt , Cleveland , O . 
Pres t H . C . King , Oberlin , O . 
Prest . W . S. Scarborough , Wilberforcc , O . 
•Mis s Jan e Addams, Chicago , Ill. 
•Mrs . Id a B . Well s Barnett , Chicago , ILL. 
•Dr . C . E . Bentley , Chicago , Ill. 
Mis s Sophronisb a Breckenridge , Chicago , Ill. 
Mr . Clarenc e Darrow , Chicago , Ill. 
•Mrs . Celi a Parke r Woolley , Chicago , Ill. 
•Dr . N . F . Mossell , Philadelphia , Pa . 
"Dr . Wm . A . Sinclair , Philadelphia , Pa . 
Mis s Susa n Wharton , Philadelphia , Pa . 
Mr . R . R. Wright , Jr. , Philadelphia , Pa . 
Mr . W . Justi n Carter , Harrisburg , Pa . 
Rev . Harve y Johnson , D.D. , Baltimore , Md . 
Hon . Wm . S. Bennett , Washington , D . C 
Mr . L . M . Hershaw , Washington , D . C . 
Prof . Kell y Miller , Washington , D . C . 
Prof . L . B. Moore . Washington , D . C . 
Justic e W . P . Stafford , Washington , D . C . 
•Mrs . Mar y Churc h Terrell , Washington , D . C 
"Rev . J . Milto n Waldron , Washington , D . C . 
Prest . Joh n Hope , Atlanta , Ga . 
Mr . Lesli e P . Hill , Manassas, Va . 
" Executiv e Committee . 
OFFICES: 
Suite 311, 20 Vese y Street, Ne w York . TH E CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
Publishe d by the Nationa l Associatio n for the Advancemen t of Colore d People , at 
20 Vese y Street, Ne w Yor k City . 
OSWAL D GARRISO N V1LLAR D 
J . MA X BARBE R 
CHARLE S EDWAR D RUSSEL L 
W . S. BRAITHWAIT E 
KELL Y MILLE R 
W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS . Editor 
M . D . MACLEAN , Managing Editor 
FRAN K M . TURNER , Circulation Manager 
ALBO N L . HOLSEY . Advertising Manager 
Contributing 
Editors 
CONTENTS FOR JUNE, 1911 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 49 
ME N O F TH E MONTH : 
Col . T. W . Higginso n 54 
Edwar d D . Green 54 
Mr . and Mrs. G . E . Wibecan , Sr 55 
OPINIO N - 56 
N . A . A . C. P 60 
Th e Lakewoo d Case. 
Th e Delawar e Case. 
Th e Kentuck y Lynching . t 
EDITORIA L 62 
TH E FREEDMEN' S FRIENDS : Some Founders of Negr o Educatio n 66 
HARRIE T BEECHE R STOWE : Portrait b y Richmon d 68 
HARRIE T BEECHE R STOWE' S PERSONA L KNOWLEDG E O F TH E 
NEGR O CHARACTER . B y Charle s Edwar d Stowe 69 
VACATIO N OPPORTUNITIES . B y G. S. Dickerma n 71 
COLORE D HIG H SCHOOL S 73 
TH E BURDE N 76 
TH E BLAC K SOLDIER : A Lette r from Gen. G. M . Dodg e 77 
WOMEN' S CLUBS : Carin g for the Children . By A . W . Hunto n 78 
A COLLEG E GIRL' S CREDO . B y Miria m E . Oatman 79 
TALK S ABOU T WOMEN . B y Mrs. Joh n E . Milhollan d 80 
WHA T T O REA D 81 
Agents wanted who can furnish reliable references. 
Entered as second-class matter i n the post office at New Yor k City. 
Th e Jul y numbe r of TH E CRISI S wil l b e a vacatio n number . It wil l contai n a n articl e o n 
Colore d Athlete s b y Edwi n B . Henderson , of Washington . D . C., illustrate d b y photograph s of man y 
celebrate d men . Ther e wil l als o be a n analysis of the segregatio n situatio n i n the cit y o f Baltimore . 
This is to certify that I print twelve thousand 
copies of the June Crisis, 1911. 
EGBER T N . WOOD , Printer , 
202 East 99th St. 
Sworn to before me this 17th day of May , 
1911. 
P. J . BURKE , 
Notary Public , N . T . C. 48 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
Marshall's Hotel 127-129 West 53d Street 
Telephones 4693-4694 Columbus 
SPECIAL FEATUR E BEGINNING FEBRUAR Y 1 
Breakfast, 7:30 to 12:30, 30c. Luncheon, 12:30 to 3 p. m., 30c. 
Regular Dinner, 6 to 8, 35 c. 
Special Course Dinner Every Sunday and Holidays, 50c. 
Service and Food Unsurpassed Anywhere Good Music—Vocal and Instrumental 
Shell Fish a Specialty Restaurant Open Al l Night 
J. L . MARSHALL , Proprietor 
Thi s Is 
TH E CRISIS 
Correct in Type, 
Proofreading and 
Style. I print it. 
Why? 
As k Edito r 
W . E . B. Du Bois 
by permissio n 
Fe w peopl e se e yo u 
Many people see your letters 
Use Good Stationery 
Not the cheapest; but the 
best for the money charged 
" -• SPECIALT Y = 
Wedding Invitations printed 
or engraved — correct style 
WRIT E O R PHON E T O 
ROBER T N. WOOD, Printe r 
202 East 99th Street 
'Phone Lenox 6667 
New York City 
'Phone 2877 Lenox 
White Rose Working Girls' Home 
217 EAS T 86T H STREE T 
Bet. Second and Thir d Avenues 
Pleasant temporary lodgings for working girls, 
with privileges, at reasonable rates. Th e Home 
solicits orders for working dresses, aprons, etc. 
Address: 
MBS . FRANCE S R. KEYSER , Supt. 
N . Washington 
Proprieto r 
Mrs. J . N . Washington 
Manage r 
Hotel Washington 
3252 WABAS H AVENU E 
CHICAG O 
First-class Servic e for First-class Peopl e 
Rates: 75c , $1.00 and $2.00 Pe r Da y 
Telephone Aldine 516 
Mention The Crisis 1 V — ^ 
Along the Color Line 
POLITICAL . 
Th e Republican candidate for Mayo r 
of Baltimor e has been defeated largely, 
it is said, through the reluctance of the 
colored men to vote for him. His record 
on the Negr o question is not good. 
Th e claim is made that Carte r H . Harrison, Democrat, owes his election as 
Mayo r of Chicago to the colored voters. 
This is the fifth time Mr . Harriso n has 
served as Mayor. Durin g his previous 
terms he appointed mor e colored men to 
office than any mayor had done before, 
advancing them, especially in the police 
force, to positions of responsibility. Th e 
elder Harrison , when he administered 
the city government, organized the first 
colored fire company, and employed 
Negroes regularly on the police force. 
Th e family has deserved so well of the 
race that many Negr o voters seized the 
opportunity to show their gratitude and 
it is said that the small majority by 
whic h Mr . Harriso n was elected was 
made up of their ballots. 
<J Walte r Cohen, Registe r of the Ne w 
Orleans Lan d Office, the last Negr o 
Federa l officeholder of any importance 
in Louisiana , was thrown out of a job 
by the mergin g of the Ne w Orleans and 
Natchitoche s Federa l Lan d Offices, wit h 
headquarters at Bato n Rouge. Th e Reg ­
ister of the Natchitoche s Lan d Office, a 
white Republican, was placed in charge 
of the consolidated office at Bato n 
Rouge. Mr . Cohe n gave out a statement to the newspapers, in whic h he 
bitterly attacked the national administration for its refusal to recognize 
Negroes. H e wil l vigorousl y oppose the 
"Lily-Whites. " 
<I A dispatch from West Virgini a says 
that three State senators face "a serious 
proposition. " Their three counties have 
a large colored population, and there is 
an alleged possibility that only colored 
candidates wil l be nominated in a primary. "If a primary law can be constructed so as to relieve this situation 
little opposition is to be expected." 
Ther e is some trouble also in Norfolk County , Virginia . A large number 
of Negroe s have paid their poll taxes 
and are entitled to vote. Some "leaders," 
gifted i n psychology, give it as their 
opinion that "most of the Negroe s pay 
their poll taxes in order to be able to 
vote and not because of any patriotic 
impulse that migh t lead them to contribute that amount toward the expenses 
of runnin g the government. " This situation also may be "relieved. " 
<] Th e Negr o Nationa l Democrati c Con ­
vention opened in Indianapolis on Ma y 
17 for a three days' session. Abou t 200 
delegates attended. James S. Greene, of 
Georgia , was chairman, and W . H . 
Grant, ex-auditor in the Treasury De ­
partment at Washington , was secretary. 
<J Dr. Henr y W . Furniss, of Indianapolis, since 1905 the Unite d States Min ­
ister at Port au Prince , Hayti , has sent 
his resignation to the State Department. 
Th e State Department gives no reasons 
and no one knows wh o wil l be Dr. Furniss' successor. Th e place pays a salary 
of $10,000 per annum. 
EDUCATION . 
A t the opening of Th e Worl d in Boston Missionar y Conventio n the forty-fifth 
anniversary of the founding of Fis k Uni ­
versity was celebrated. President Taft 
sent a letter in whic h he said: " I am 
not one of those wh o believe that it is 
well to educate the mass of Negroe s 
with academic or university education. 
O n the contrary, I am firmly convinced 
that the hope of the Negr o is in his in ­
dustrial education throughout the South, 
and in teaching him to • be a better 
farmer, a better carpenter, a better ma ­
chinist, and a better blacksmith than he 
is now, and to make more blacksmiths 
and more good farmers than there now 
are amon g the Negroes. " 
However, the letter carefully added 
that he had also become convinced it is 
necessary to have a few high-class universities for those wh o are to be the 
leaders of the race. Nothing , he wrote 
in conclusion, can do so muc h toward 
establishing a real nucleus for leadership 
among them as the maintenance of such 
a university as Fisk . 
Mr . Charles Edwar d Stowe, son of 
Harrie t Beecher Stowe, was of a less 
divided mind . "No t only justice, but 
self-interest," he said, "demand the education of the Negro . T o shut the door 
of opportunity on the Negro , to relegate 
to him the lowest place and shut the 
door of hope upon him is to make him 
desperate." 
<J Miss Virgini a McCormic k has made 
a gift of $4,500 to the Agricultura l and 
Mechanica l College for Negroe s at Nor ­
mal, Alabama . 50 THE CRISIS 
<I A dispatch from Jackson, Mississippi, 
says that a colored planter wh o does not 
wish his name disclosed has just given 
to Campbell College , a Negr o institution, maintained by the Africa n Metho ­
dist Episcopa l Church , a large tract of 
land in Cohoma County, valued at $7,000, 
the income of which is to go for the 
maintenance of poor but worth y 
students. 
•I Anothe r anonymous philanthropist 
belonging to Ne w Yor k is said to have 
given $10,000 to the Curr y Industria l 
Schoo l for Negr o youths in Champaig n 
County , Ohio . 
<J Th e announcement is made that the 
presidency of Selma University , Selma, 
Ala. , has been accepted by the Rev. M . 
W . Gilbert, D.D. , lately of Ne w York . 
Dr. Gilbert is one of the best-known 
clergymen of the Baptist denomination. 
H e succeeds Dr. R. T. Pollard . 
1$ Th e Society of Frenc h Professors of 
Americ a has awarded the pri x d'honneur 
for a Frenc h essay on a literary topic 
and a translation of a Frenc h author to 
James Bertram Clarke , the colored student at Cornel l University , whose recent 
article on the Negr o question at Cornell 
caused a storm of comment. Mr . Clarke 
was also awarded other prizes. H e is 
a junior in the College of Arts. 
Part of the exercises of the seminary 
commencement at Oberli n consist in the 
presentation by the senior class of a 
"Ke y of Fellowship " to the middle class. 
This year Mr . D . H . Sims, of the middle 
class, a colored student, was chosen to 
make the speech of acceptance. 
<I Miss F . Mario n Reid , an eighteenyear-old colored girl, wil l be valedictorian of her class in Brighton , Mass., this 
month. She gained an average of about 
92 points out of a possible 100 in her 
four years' course. This mark places her 
at the head, or very near the head, of the 
1.291 pupils who wil l receive diplomes in 
the fourteen Bosto n high schools. Ac ­
cordin g to the Bosto n papers Miss Rei d 
hopes to enter the domestic science department of Simmon s College in the fall. 
<I Edwar d Winthro p Robinson , the only 
colored member of the graduating class 
of the Weymouth , Mass., high school, 
has been awarded a scholarship for Am ­
herst College . H e has always stood high 
in his classes. Ther e are 55 pupils in 
the class and no one else secured a scholarship. H e hopes to enter the Harvar d 
La w Schoo l after finishing at Amherst. 
<J Mar y France s Gunner, daughter of 
the Rev. Byro n Gunner, of Hillburn . 
N . Y. , has led her class in the Hig h 
School during the course, and has averaged over 90, completing a four years' 
course in three years, although she is 
the youngest membe r of the class. She 
has been chosen valedictorian. 
<I Judge Pritchard , wh o served two 
terms as senator from Nort h Carolina , 
has been lecturin g in the West on "Th e 
Negr o as a Goo d Citizen. " H e described 
their fight for social betterment and said 
more schools were needed. 
<J Mr . Davi d Mannes, wh o founded the 
Musi c Settlement, to cultivate the musical talent of children on the lowe r East 
Side of Ne w York , has launched a project to establish a simlia r settlement in a 
colored neighborhood. A t the first meeting Dr. Feli x Adler, of the Ethica l Cul ­
ture Society, made a speech praising the 
naturally harmoni c ear of the colored 
race. "W e should aim, " he said, "at the 
outset to develop the distinctive and 
unique talent whic h the colored people 
possess." 
<J Ther e was a great deal of discussion 
Nort h and South some time ago about 
the protest at Roanok e College , Va. , 
against the use of a history whic h criticized sharply the- mora l conditions of 
slavery times and the frequent abuse of 
wome n slaves by their masters. It seems 
that Dr. J. A . Moorhead , as president of 
Roanoke , has issued a statement in regard to the whol e matter. On e of the 
trustees was very angry at finding such 
assertions in Elson's Histor y of the 
Unite d States, and demanded that the 
book be no longer used and the professor 
of history be censured for introduc ­
in g it. Th e college faculty refused to 
yiel d to dictation in this matter. It 
seems, too, that the trustees sustained 
the position of the professor of history 
and social science, but the use of the 
book has nevertheless been discontinued. 
Mr . Elson's wor k has been a good deal 
of a firebrand, as Professor Bank s of the 
State Universit y of Florid a was dismissed 
for using it in his classes, and also for 
writin g an article in the Independent to 
the effect that slavery had been a curse 
to the South. 
<J Wagne r Count y of Oklahoma has disposed with the services of Negr o school 
directors. Th e Wagne r Count y Ameri ­
can says that report accuses some directors of havin g violated the limita ­
tions of the law as to the money that 
should be spent on school libraries. Several white school directors were removed 
for violatin g the same law, but all the 
colored directors, innocent or guilty, 
have been dismissed. 
<I Th e Washingto n Conservator y of 
Musi c reports that in its seven and a 
half years' existence it has registered 
over 1,000 pupils. A number of scholarships are annually awarded. One of the 
special aims of the conservatory is the 
preservation and development of Negr o 
melodies, and another is the training of 
music teachers for the South. Mrs. Harriet Gibbs-Marshall , an Oberli n graduate, 
is the president of the Boar d of Man ­
agers. ALONG THE COLOR LINE 51 
(ft Gal e P. Hilyer, son of Mr . and Mrs. 
Andre w F . Hilyer, of Washington , D . C., 
a junior at the Universit y of Minnesota , 
whic h has over 5,000 students, is makin g 
a splendid record for scholarship and 
has wo n distinction as a speaker. H e 
was chosen by the Minnesot a State 
Foru m (colored) to represent Minne ­
sota at the recent interstate debate at 
De s Moines, Iowa , and has just been 
chosen by the faculty of the university, 
after havin g gone through the usual 
elimination contests, to be one of six 
to compete in the contest for the Pillsbury prize for oratory—$100 to the first; 
$50 to the second; $25 to the third. 
Th e winne r is to have the honor of 
representing the Universit y of Minne ­
sota at the Northwester n Intercollegiate 
Oratorica l Contest, whic h takes place at 
An n Arbor, Mich. , this month. Youn g 
Hilye r was prepared for college at the 
Academy of Howar d University . H e 
entered the Minnesot a Universit y with ­
out any "conditions, " and has established 
a record for high scholarship. Th e Uni ­
versity of Minnesot a is the alma mater 
of his father, wh o graduated A.B. , in 
the class of 1882, and has many friends 
in the twi n cities. 
<J Effort is being made to amend Ohi o 
school laws so as to permit segregation 
of Negroe s in schools mor e easily than 
at present. Some Cincinnati Negroe s 
favor it because white teachers are prejudiced. W . P . Dabney, colored paymaster i n the city treasurer's office, says: 
" I can see no mor e reason for the 
separation of colored children than I 
can for havin g separate schools for Hun ­
garians, separate schools for Italians or 
any other race or color of people. W e 
are all citizens, all taxpayers, directly 
or indirectly. Instead of establishing 
schools that wil l still further promot e 
race antagonism let us rather brin g the 
races together. If a colored child, any 
particular colored child, is unfit to attend 
a school, let that particular child be 
excluded, just as yo u woul d exclude 
any particular white child. I am most 
decidedly against the separate school 
plan. It looks to me that it is a clever 
scheme for some colored men to get 
a job for themselves and is not for the 
purpose of promotin g the welfare of 
the race." 
ECONOMIC . 
It is thought that the largest colony of 
colored people in the world , in simila r 
limits, is to be found in Ne w Yor k in 
the small territory bounded by Eight h 
Avenu e and Fift h Avenu e on the west 
and east and 132d and 137th Streets on 
the south and north. In that space 
there are more than 20,000 persons of 
Africa n descent. 
Th e Nationa l League for the Protec ­
tion of Colore d Women , now directed by 
Mrs. W . H . Baldwin , Jr., has just completed a census of the district. Ther e 
are nineteen churches, representing eight 
denominations. Fro m approximate in- ' 
formation given there is a church membership of about one-third and an attendance of little more than half of the 
population. Th e number of colored 
churches in the section are: Eigh t Bap ­
tist, one M . E. , one A . M . E. , one Presbyterian, one Moravian , one Episco ­
palian, two Unite d Christian , one Cosmopolitan Spiritualist, two Apostoli c 
missions and one Seventh Da y Adventist. 
Ther e are three public schools, two of 
which teach trades and industries, and 
each has some facilities for recreation. 
Ther e is an average attendance of 5,270 
—colored attendance, 1,514. 
"Worth y of note in two blocks are in ­
dustria l conditions observed in whic h 
Negroe s are engaged. Investigations 
show that there are ten grocers, ten restaurants, one oyster house, one laundry, 
two schools, nine hair dressers, eleven 
barbers, four undertakers, ten real estate 
offices, one bakery, nine employment 
agencies, one pharmacist, six ice, coal 
and woo d dealers, two confectioners, 
four expressmen, one chiropodist and six 
tailors. " 
Ther e are also forty-four saloons and 
"clubs, " eight run by colored men, and 
seven "street gangs " of boys, formed apparently for defense against aggression 
on the part of the white youth of the 
neighborhood. 
f$ Th e Tru e Reformers of Richmond , 
the organization whose bank suspended 
recently because of financial irregularities, has had its license restored by the 
insurance commissioners of Virginia . 
Th e Richmon d Reformer, the society's 
organ, says that while they have not 
done any new wor k for some time they 
never stopped payin g claims, and more 
than $30,000 has been paid in death 
claims to creditors since the license was 
suspended—a sum greater than that paid 
by any other like society in the same 
time. 
Th e Durham (N . C.) Reforme r says: 
"The struggle whic h the officers and 
members have hitherto made is indeed 
heroic. T o have raised nearly $40,000 in 
face of the disaster whic h had almost 
engulfed the order is a feat to be eminently proud of. W e have little doubt 
since this has been done that those in 
command wil l be able to carry the Tru e 
Reformers to complete rehabilitation. " 
^ Th e Columbi a State says in ten years 
1,597 Negroes, one-half the Negr o population, left the town of Beaufort. Th e 
Orangebur g Democra t wonders where 
they have gone. Th e population of the 
coast counties of South Carolin a has not 
increased. Ther e are no evidences that 
the Negroe s have increased in the in -52 THE CRISIS 
terior of the State, signs pointin g directly contrary. Examinatio n of the 
census figures so far published, says the 
Democrat, tend to the conclusion that 
the publication of the census race figures 
wil l reveal that South Carolin a is losing 
a considerable part of its colored population and that the ratio of Negroe s to 
whites in the State has grown perceptibly 
smaller. 
<I Th e Plaindealer, a (white) Palestine, 
Texas, paper, bears witness to the advance of the colored men in that ill -
famed town. It says ten years have 
brought about a great change in Negr o 
business enterprise in Palestine. Mor e 
of the colored men are ownin g homes, 
operating business houses, accumulating 
property and real estate and investing 
in various commercia l projects. Grocer y 
stores, dry goods stores, bank, printing 
offices, real estate business, all of whic h 
are thriving, are owned and operated by 
Negroes. 
f]| Colone l Allensworth's colored colony 
in Californi a has grown into a thrivin g 
little town named after the founder. It 
already boasts a postoffice, hotel, school, 
telephone exchange, a church, several 
general stores, and other places of business. It controls several thousand acres 
of land along the Santa Fe Railroad, 
through which an irrigation system has 
been completed. 
SOCIA L UPLIFT . 
Th e America n Tuberculosis Exhibition is going through the South and 
attempting especially to attract the attention of colored people. Special programs have been arranged for them 
under the charge of colored committees. 
Th e exhibition seems to have done good 
educational work, for we note the 
Natche z (Miss.) Time s says that whil e 
the "dread destroyer of all the colored 
races in America " is tuberculosis, this 
is so not because of race or color, but 
because of the livin g conditions of the 
great majority. 
It is probable that the new tuberculosis 
sanatorium at Atlant a wil l have a judiciously remote annex for colored patients, though this idea was not a part 
of the origina l plan. "Th e plan, as it is 
being now considered, of course does not 
contemplate any intercourse whatever 
between the white and colored patients." 
Th e city of Norfolk , Va. , reports that 
the $6,000 allowed for the establishment 
of a colored tuberculosis clini c seems to 
have been well spent. 
In Colorad o the Charles Sumne r Na ­
tional Tuberculosis Associatio n has been 
organized "not for pecuniary profit," but 
especially for the relief of colored people. 
<J Th e Howar d Colore d Orpha n Asylu m 
moves on June 1 from Brookly n to its 
new home at King's Park, Lon g Island. 
Th e new location consists of 572 acres 
of well-cultivated land, a gas plant whic h 
supplies all the buildings wit h lightin g 
fluid, and a water plant, wit h an 18,000-
gallon tank and fourteen horsepowe r gas 
engine, capable of irrigatin g the farm. 
Seven new buildings are almost completed. Th e ol d ones are being repaired, 
the entire cost amountin g to $100,000. 
•J Subscriptions for a $100,000 buildin g 
to be used as a headquarters in Atlant a 
for the colored Od d Fellow s of Georgia , 
are well under way. Th e sum of $65,000 
has been already raised. A campaign 
to complete the desired amount wil l be 
started on June 1. 
1$ Recently the Atlant a recruitin g station received orders from the Wa r Department to enlist colored recruits for the 
Twenty-fourt h Regiment, whic h was under orders to sail for the Philippines. 
Th e response was instantaneous, and in 
a short time more men had applied than 
could be taken. 
<I A unique feature of the Confederate 
Memoria l Da y celebration at Newberry . 
S. C , was the presentation to an old 
Negro , Ne d Gilliam, of a badge for 
heroism. Gilliam, at the risk of his life, 
recovered the body of his master from 
the field of battle at Fredericksburg , and 
dug a temporary grave for it. A s soon 
as possible he carried the body back 
home to South Carolin a for final burial. 
<J Amon g the awards of the Carnegi e 
Her o Meda l Commission , last month , 
was the following : T o Boyc e Lindsa y 
(colored), sixteen, saved E . ReynoldsSmit h from train at Spartanburg, S. C , 
Ma y 26, 1910. Bronz e meda l and $2,000 
as needed for educational purposes. 
<I Theodor e Cable, Harvard's colored 
athlete, broke the Harvar d record for 
the hamme r throw in the annual Harvard handicap games held at the Harvard stadium. Cable's heave measured 
150 feet 7 7-10 inches. Th e previous, 
record made in the intercollegiate games 
in 1907 was 149 feet 6 inches. Mr . Cable 
is in his freshman year, and durin g the 
winte r wo n second place in the broad 
jump. 
^ One of the four runners wh o represented Bosto n in the Pennsylvani a relay 
carniva l and wo n the race was a colored 
boy, I. T. Howe , of the Bosto n Hig h 
School. This team also defeated the 
Bosto n Lati n School and the Harvar d 
freshmen last winter. 
TH E CHURCH . 
A n odd example of "Christianity " 
comes from South Carolina , where 
Bisho p Guerry, of the Episcopa l Church , 
has been asked to appoint a Negr o Suffragan bishop. Althoug h the movement 
is reported to have "ardent supporters," 
the bishop says he is consistently opposed to it, largely because it woul d ALONG THE 
make it "awkwar d and practically im ­
possible " for any white priest or layman 
engaged in colored wor k or desirous of 
doing this wor k in the South to serve 
under a Negr o bishop. 
"Wha t the Negr o needs more than 
anything else, in my judgment, " said 
Bishop Guerry, wit h a somewhat notable 
lack of humor, "is the lovin g guidance 
and spiritual counsel and help of the 
white race." 
LEGAL . 
Th e followin g tale is of a sort rarely 
told. I n Detroit one Davi d Markowitz , 
proprietor of a small theatre, forcibly 
ejected a colored ticket holder who took 
the case to court. Judge Jeffries sat the 
day of the trial. 
"Hav e yo u ever been arrested for 
drawin g the color line before?" asked 
the judge, before passing sentence. 
"Yes, your honor, " said Markowitz ; 
" I was convicted and fined $25 by Judge 
Stein for discriminating against colored 
people, but I appealed it and Judge Con ­
nolly threw the case out of court." 
"Well , I want yo u to understand that 
no discrimination against colored people 
is allowed by the laws of Michigan . It 
must be stopped," said the judge. "Th e 
only disturbance created in your theatre 
was created by yourself." An d Marko ­
wit z was fined $10 or ten days in jail, 
wit h a warnin g that another offense 
woul d brin g a heavier sentence. 
CRIME . 
A t the Negr o Fellowshi p meeting in 
Chicago, of whic h Mrs. Ida B. WellsBarnett is the president, an open letter 
was sent to the Christian Endeavor 
Unio n on the evil of lynching . Th e 
League calls attention to the fact that 
a month after the Springfield riot with 
its "notorious exhibition of savagery," 
several Christian bodies were in session 
in that county, and "di d not find anybody to indict for this outrage against 
human principle and Christianity. " Th e 
League urges the Christian Endeavor 
Unio n "to use some of its powerful in ­
fluence against these sickening evidences 
of barbarism and savagery." 
<J McLea n Count y was startled by the 
arrest of eighteen alleged members of 
the mob that lynched Wil l Porte r on the 
stage of the Livermor e Oper a Hous e on 
the night of Apri l 12. Th e Gran d Jury, 
composed of twelve Kentuck y farmers, 
has been at wor k on the case for a week. 
It is believed that all the men involved 
wil l be arrested. 
Q Th e Lethbridge (Alberta ) Dail y Herald gives an interesting tale of "crime " 
in Canada. A fifteen-year-old girl was 
found in the kitchen of her home supposedly bound, gagged and chloroformed. She told a story of assault comCOLOR LINE 53 
mitted by a "black, burly Negro. " Th e 
polit e arrested a colored man, but allowed him to go, as there was no case 
against him. Upo n investigation it was 
learned that nothing was stolen from 
the house, that there were no bruises or 
injuries on the girl from the alleged assault, but that she had lost a rin g and 
some money, whic h loss she feared 
woul d bring reprimand and rebuke from 
her parents. She thought out the scheme 
of binding her hands and slipping a 
handkerchief around her mouth, but 
made the error of tyin g an eye bandage 
over her forehead instead of her eyes. 
This fact aroused the suspicion of the 
police, and when openly charged wit h 
doing the thing herself she confessed. 
AFRICA . 
Monseigneur Gaughren, Vicar-Apostolic of Kimberley , has issued a letter on 
the subject of the bill to prohibit marriage between the races. H e says: 
"Whil e many are agreed that marriages 
between the white and the black races 
are. generally speaking, very undesirable, 
and while we can, therefore, give Mr . 
Groble r credit for the best of intentions 
in introducing the prohibitory clauses in 
the Marriage Bill , nevertheless, in view 
of the deplorable consequences certain 
to result from the adoption of this 
clause, it is the duty of every lover of 
the country to protest against it, and to 
oppose it by every legitimate means. 
Th e result of a mixe d marriage of the 
kin d referred to is, at worst, but a physical evil, while the prohibition wil l issue 
in a flood of mora l evil incomparably 
more ruinous and degrading. A n effect 
probably not foreseen by the author of 
the clause is that it will , if accepted, 
brin g men, whose great desire is to live 
as dutiful and law-abiding citizens, into 
conflict with the law. Whateve r the new 
law may enact, it wil l be the duty of the 
Catholi c clergy, for whom I speak wit h 
authority, to bless marriages of the kin d 
referred to, if their people call upon 
them to do so. The y must take the consequences of their opposition to the law 
of Parliament, in order to be faithful to 
the law of God. " 
<J The next President of Liberi a wil l be 
Danie l E . Howard , now Secretary of the 
Treasury. Th e Vice-president wil l be 
Senator S. C. Harmon , of Gran d Bassa, 
a port town about half way down the 
Liberia n coast. Th e Liberians elect 
their President in much the manner that 
prevails in the Unite d States, but they 
have only one political party and the 
nomination is the same as an election. 
Mr . Howar d has made a good Secretary 
of the Treasury, and his experience in 
financial matters wil l be much to his advantage in this critical period of Li ­
beria's history. Th e Vice-president is 
pre-eminently a business man. Men of the Month 
COL . T. W. HIGGINSON . 
Al l friends of human liberty wil l grieve 
over the death on Ma y 9 of Colone l 
Thoma s Wentwort h Higginson , aged 87 
years. Colone l Higginso n died at his 
COL . T. W . HIGGINSO N 
home in Cambridge , Mass., and six 
Negr o soldiers bore to his grave this 
lifelong champion of their race. 
Bor n in Cambridge , Mass., in 1823, the 
son of Stephen Higginson , steward of 
Harvard , he was from his earliest days 
surrounded by literary influences. A s 
soon as he had his degree, Mr . Higgin ­
son entered the Harvar d Divinit y Schoo l 
and in 1847 was called to the ministr y of 
the First Religious Society of Newbury -
port, Mass. 
Th e youn g preacher's strong antislavery views soon got him into trouble. 
Man y of his congregation were sea captains wh o believed in the "peculia r institution, " and one of them was the man 
wh o cast Willia m Lloy d Garriso n into 
jail. The y soon tired of the fervent abolitionist and he went to Worcester, where 
wit h Theodor e Parke r he established the 
Fre e Church . 
Durin g this pastorate, whic h lasted for 
six years, Mr . Higginso n was concerned 
in the attempt to rescue Anthon y Burn s 
from the Bosto n Court House . A man 
was kille d in the fight, and he, wit h 
Wendel l Phillip s and Theodor e Parker, 
was indicted for murder. Th e case was, 
however, dropped on the discovery of an 
informality in the papers. 
In 1856 Mr . Higginso n took part in the 
civil strife whic h marke d the struggle 
for the control of Kansas. H e served 
on the staff of James H . Lane , and recounted his experiences in that wil d land 
in a pamphlet, " A Rid e Throug h 
Kansas. " There , too, he formed the acquaintance of Joho n Brow n of Osawa -
tomie, and when that agitator was captured, was ready to make an attempt at 
rescue if Brow n had not himself forbidden it. 
Meanwhil e Mr . Higginso n gave up the 
ministr y and turned to literature. It 
was durin g this period that Mr . Higgin -
EDWAR D D . GREE N MEN OF THE MONTH 55 
MB . GE0EG E B . WIBECA N 
son became intimate wit h such men as 
Emerson , Longfellow, Whittier, Holmes, 
Lowel l and Thoreau, and in his ol d age 
he had many things to tell of this brilliant circle. 
Whe n the Civi l Wa r began the wellknow n kindliness that Mr . Higginso n 
had for Negroe s made him particularly 
fitted for a comman d i n a black regiment. 
H e was at first gazetted Captain in the 
Fifty-first Massachusetts Volunteers, but 
resigned to become Colone l of the First 
South Carolin a Volunteers. H e captured 
Jacksonville , Fla. , and was wounded at 
Milltow n Bluff, S. C , wit h the result 
that he was forced by ill-health to resign. 
Th e Colone l was a warm friend of 
women's education, and was one of those 
wit h sufficient courage to attend the first 
Women's Rights Convention . H e was 
ever on the side of progress and ready 
as a youn g man to move forward. H e 
was too feeble to take active part in the 
wor k of the N . A . A . C. P., but repeatedly expressed his deep sympathy wit h 
our movement. 
A COLORED LEGISLATOR. 
Edwar d D . Green, Illinois' only colored 
member of the legislature, has fought 
race battles wit h energy and success on 
more occasions than one. Th e Supreme 
Court has just decided in favor of his 
"Anti-Mob-Law " bill , put through the 
Assembly , and bitterly contested. Th e 
bill provides for the severe punishment 
of lynchers and delinquent sheriffs. It 
is the first law of the kin d to stand the 
test of any supreme court. 
MBS . GEORG E E . WIBECA N 
Mr . Green has just succeeded in securin g the passage of the amended Civi l 
Rights bill, which makes it unlawful for 
the owners of cemeteries to discriminate 
in the price of graves against colored 
people or other nationalities. 
Mr . Green is a member of the committees on building, loan and homestead 
associations, Chicago charter, education, 
finance, judicia l appointment, liberal, mil ­
itary affairs, parks and boulevards, primary elections, public buildings and 
grounds, and State institutions. H e is 
well liked by both his Republican and 
Democrati c associates. 
A GOLDEN WEDDING. 
A golden nuptial mass for a colored 
man and wife was celebrated for the first 
time in this country on Ma y 1, in honor 
of the 50th anniversary of the marriage 
of Mr . and Mrs. George E . Wibecan , Sr. 
The y were married in Liverpool , Eng ­
land, in 1861, came to this country shortly 
afterward, and settled in Ridgewood , 
Lon g Island. Fo r half a century they 
have been prominently identified wit h 
every forward movement in their section 
of the country, and are amon g the most 
respected citizens of Lon g Island. Th e 
parish, white and colored, turned out to 
honor the pair on their golden anniversary, and the parish priest paid a high 
tribute to their influence in the community. 
George E . Wibecan , Jr., is one of 
Brooklyn's well-known colored men, and 
is high in the councils of the Republican 
party. OPINIO N 
TH E NORTHWAR D MIGRATION . 
It is quite generally believed in the 
South that the census wil l show a comparative decrease in its Negr o popula ­
tion. Man y colored men have gone 
northward, some as far as Canada , as 
the recent resentment at their immigra ­
tion to the Northwest shows. 
Th e Southern papers comment on the 
exodus to the Norther n States. Th e 
Ne w Orleans Picayune says: 
"Tha t the Negroe s are migratin g has 
been apparent for years, but they are 
not movin g in hordes, as do immigrants 
from foreign countries when they come 
to the Unite d States, or as did the Goths, 
Huns, Vandals and other barbarians, 
when they swarmed into the dominions 
of ancient Rome . Th e Southern 
Negroe s simply vanish across the border, 
and they are gone. 
"South Carolin a and Mississipp i started 
after the sectional wa r of 1861-65 with 
populations of Negroe s greater than 
those of the whites, whil e in Louisian a 
there were about equal numbers of the 
two races. No w Louisan a has a decided 
white majority, whil e the other two 
States still have excessive Negr o populations, but the relative positions of the 
two races, as shown by the census of 
1910, are awaited wit h interest. In ­
formation concerning South Carolin a 
shows that there is a movement among 
the Negroes there as well as in other 
Southern States. 
"Th e dispersion and distribution of the 
Negr o population amon g the whites in all 
the Norther n States is the proper and 
true solution of the Negr o problem. 
Their migration northward, whil e it is 
actively opposed by many Southern 
whites, is the mitigation of a great evil 
and should be encouraged, instead of the 
contrary. O f course, not all wil l go. 
Ther e wil l be enough left in this section." 
Th e Knoxvill e (Tenn.) Sentinel calls 
attention to what it considers the in ­
creased "tolerance" of the North , whic h 
some of us call increased race prejudice. 
"Ther e has been no noteworthy increase 
of the Negr o population of any Southern 
State during the last decade, as far as 
observation and census information already at hand afford a hint. The dispersion of the Negroe s in the Nort h has 
been of great service to the South. It 
has taught the Nort h some of the meaning of the race problem and has made 
the Nort h more tolerant." 
Norther n papers comment in their turn 
on the migratio n still farther north and 
the unfriendly reception: "Th e white 
American s wh o have taken up wheat 
lands in the Canadian Northwest have 
no friendly feeling for the Negroes, " says 
the Chicag o Tribune . "The y woul d not 
object to them as laborers, for labor is 
in demand. The y do not want them to 
become land owners and factors in loca l 
life. " 
Othe r papers take a simila r view of the 
situation and see the America n leaven of 
race prejudice workin g across the border. 
"It is more than probable, " remarks the 
St. Pau l Pionee r Press, "that the opposition to the Negroe s does not come 
so much from native Canadians as from 
forme r citizens of this country wh o have 
settled in Wester n Canada, and have 
aroused new prejudice against Negr o 
neighbors. " 
Th e Springfield (Mass.) Republica n is 
of the same opinion : "Th e trouble seems 
to be not wit h the native Canadians, but 
with the American s wh o have gone and 
are goin g over the border to settle, and 
wh o are carryin g wit h them all their 
merciless race prejudice. Ther e is apparently no place withi n the range of our 
America n influence where the Negr o can 
go and live in peace and white toleration. " 
NEGR O CRIME . 
Mr . R. R. Wright , Jr., contributes to 
the Southern Workma n an important 
article on Negr o crime. Th e Ne w York ' 
Natio n refers to the "apparently growin g 
belief that the Negr o is essentially lawless in the Nort h as well as the South. " 
and summarize s Mr . Wright's article 
wit h comments of its own : 
"It is a patent fact that in this present 
period of color hysteri a the crime of 
every Negr o is 'played up' wit h large 
headlines, whil e his good deeds go unrecorded. If a Negr o at the risk of his life 
saves the lives of white men, as in Wash ­
ington, D . C., a couple of weeks ago, that 
is chronicled inconspicuously in a few 
lines, if at all. Mor e than that, the 
newspaper reader not onl y takes his opinions from sensational cases, but these 
cannot readily be offset by authoritative statistics of crime, as Mr . Wrigh t 
sets forth. Fo r man y cities in the Nort h 
do not distinguish offenders by color, 
and in the South there are no vital or 
crimina l statistics of genuine reliability. 
"Mr . Wright's figures relating to arrests of Negroe s in Ne w York , Chicago, 
and Philadelphi a are distinctly encouraging. I n the first two cities there has OPINION 57 
been a marke d improvement, according 
to Mr . Wright , the proportion of arrests to population in Ne w Yor k being 
1 to 9 in 1900 and 1 to 12 in 1910, whil e 
for Chicago the same figures were 1 to 
5 1/2 in 1900 and 1 to 11 in 1910. Phila ­
delphia is the only Norther n city, Mr . 
Wrigh t finds, in whic h there are statistics of arrests goin g back a generation. 
Ther e it appears that the Negr o arrests 
have borne always about the same proportion to the total number of arrests 
and to the total Negr o population. 
"In Chicago, the only city in which the 
causes of arrests are given according to 
races, it appears that three-fourths are 
due to violations of city ordinances, onetenth to State misdemeanors; whil e felonies account for but 15 per cent, of the 
total number of arrests. Amon g the 
felonies larceny is at the head of the list, 
followed by burglary and assault with 
intent to kill . In 1907 there were 180 
arrests for rape, of which but 16 were 
of Negroes; the same figures for 1908 
being whites 172, Negroe s 16. Mr . 
Wrigh t examined the police books in a 
typical Negr o ward in Philadelphi a and 
found that more than one-half of the 
225 arrests of Negroes were due to five 
causes: disorderly conduct, breach of the 
peace, intoxication, drunkenness and 
disorder, and crap shooting. Abou t onethird of those arrested were taken for 
felonies, that is, on serious charges. 
'Afte r arrest.' says Mr . Wright , 'comes 
conviction. Bu t here we are all at sea, 
so far as the Negr o is concerned. Ther e 
is nowhere published the number of Ne ­
groes convicted or the crimes for whic h 
they are convicted.' 
"In the absence of more definite statistics, Mr . Wrigh t feels that the impressions of officials are of great value. 
Thus, in reply to a question the sheriff 
of Hartford , Conn. , says that crime is 
increasing amon g Negroes, and a slight 
increase is reported from Albany . Bu t 
Morristown , N . J. ; Ironton, O. ; Colum ­
bus, O. ; Fort Scott, Kan. ; Oskaloosa , 
Ia., and Hudso n County, N . J., report 
that crime is not increasing among the 
colored people. Th e chief of police of 
Cleveland, O., reports an increase, due to 
increase of population. Th e prosecuting 
attorney of Springfield, O., writes that 
'the chief offences of Negroe s are not 
essentially different from those committed by white people; they do not 
seem to confine themselves to any particular classes of crime.' This official is 
positive that criminals as a class are 
not increasing amon g the black people. 
'W e have a large colored population, 
something like 15 to 20 per cent, of the 
total, and I believe there is a greater 
proportion of them in the crimina l class 
than is true of the white, yet, as a whole , 
they are not a crimina l class of people. 
Man y of them now own homes, are in ­
dustrious, and make good citizens.' 
"So far as the criminality of Negr o 
wome n is concerned, the arrests in Chicago for the years 1905-1909 were 18.2 
per cent, of all the Negroes apprehended; in Ne w Yor k (from 1905 to 
1910), 38.7, and in Philadelphia , 23.4. 
Th e chief charges on whic h the women 
were arrested seem to be disorderly conduct, breach of the peace, intoxication 
and immorality. 'The general impression as to the increase of crime among 
Negroe s in the Nort h is,' Mr . Wrigh t 
concludes, 'erroneous.' H e admits, 
however, that there is still too great a 
difference between the proportion of Ne ­
groes arrested and their relative number 
to the general population. Th e chief 
hope of cutting down the disproportionate amount of crime lies, he feels, in 
opening up larger economic opportunities for the race. 
"Fe w people wh o have not made a 
study of the subject realize how disproportionate are the temptations of the 
Negr o and the evil effects of his environment when contrasted with the condition confronting white people of the 
same class. Th e recently published report of the Chicago Vic e Commissio n 
dwelt upon the fact that the police of 
that city have invariably driven the 
whit e prostitutes into the best Negr o 
sections, where they are a demoralizing 
example and influence for the colored 
youth of both sexes. A large proportion 
of the Negroe s live in the worst parts of 
every city, but it is by no means always 
by choice that they drift to quarters distinguished by the lowest forms of vice. 
"Th e bad government of most of our 
America n cities, as Mr . Wrigh t points 
out, gravely affects the Negro . Ba d 
government makes for bad citizens, black 
or white. Then , the politica l organizations debauch Negr o and foreigner alike, 
and permit them both to violate the laws 
in exchange for votes. If to these 
causes for mental and mora l depression 
of the race are added the evil effects of 
race prejudice, it might well be expected 
that Negr o crime woul d increase faster 
than it has; that it has not done so must 
be a cause of rejoicing among the educated colored people." 
PROGRESS . 
Th e Sacramento (Cal.) Unio n finds a 
"compellin g eloquence" in the figures of 
the department of commerce and labor 
as to the Negro's progress, and writes 
a forceful editorial on the subject. Th e 
figures are even a little better than the 
Unio n makes apparent, for a cipher has 
been omitted from the property valuation. It should be over $560,000,000. 
However, the main point is the paper's 
cordia l appreciation. 
"I n both numbers and mora l and mental enlightenment the race has grown wit h 
strides of whic h the average America n 58 THE CRISIS 
has no comprehension. Is it generally 
known , for instance, that to-day there 
are 10,000,000 black people in the Unite d 
States? Is it known , except to the in ­
vestigators, that 3,700,000 Negroe s are 
members of churches, presided over by 
35,224 ordained ministers in 35,160 
houses of worship? Tha t the total value 
of property owned by Negroe s is $56,-
650,000? Tha t there are 35,000 Negr o 
Sunday schools wit h 1,700,000 pupils and 
210,000 teachers? Tha t the Negr o 
churches contribute annually $500,000 
for education, $50,000 for foreign missions and $100,000 for the support of 
missionaries at home? Tha t the Negroe s 
are themselves maintaining 175 colleges, 
industria l schools and academies? 
"These are facts. Th e statistics are 
authentic and cannot fail to make a deep 
impression upon the min d of any 
thoughtful person. Fe w races under like 
circumstances have ever shown their 
ability to live and to increase in numbers, as far as our knowledge of history 
serves us. 
"No t in a spirit of condescension can 
the white man help the Negro . Th e 
desire of the black man is to be let alone. 
H e wants only mora l assistance as he 
endeavors to improve his condition, and 
then the privilege of applyin g his trainin g and education without undue prejudice against his color. " 
SOUT H CAROLIN A CONDITIONS . 
" A South Carolinian " writes in the 
Socialist Cal l of colored folk in his State: 
"M y knowledge of the exact conditions relates only to the State of South 
Carolina , where the 'Educationa l Clause ' 
is applied to the Negr o citizen, and 
rarely, if ever, is detrimental to the poor 
whites. 'The Law ' is the opinion of the 
registration officer. Th e white man goes 
up to register and is not asked to 'read 
and explain a paragraph' to the 'satisfaction' of the officer—the latter is satisfied that he is 'intelligent enough to vote' 
because his face is white. Well-know n 
Negroe s are disposed of in like manner. 
Now , when an unknown Negro , or one 
whose local standing is not of sufficient 
importance, or when the tolerated number of Negroes are registered, for the 
instances are rare where all are refused 
—then 'The Law ' is applied. Th e applicant is given a paragraph (often selected 
from a ponderous volume of law) and 
told to 'read and explain what it means.' 
Th e results are easily foreseen. 
"Then , as to the children. It is a 
cause of rejoicing that Negroe s are not 
admitted as laborers in the factories and 
mills of the South. This, I think, is true 
in all the States, wit h one exception. 
Nort h Carolin a has one mil l whic h employs Negroes. 
"Bu t for this fact the schools woul d 
be empty—for in almost every instance 
where a Negr o boy can find employment 
even at 25 cents a week (the usual price 
paid a boy to min d a cow), he is kept 
out of school to do this work . A s it is, 
however, there is very little for the vast 
numbers of Negr o boys and girls to do 
to place them amon g the wage-earners 
of the family, and so the publi c and 
private schools are crowded. Th e term 
of the country schools averages about 
three months, and is given durin g the 
months when there is not muc h wor k 
to be done on the farms, and thus the 
child gets the full advantage of the meager school facilities. Th e white chil d is 
mor e often taken from the country to 
the towns where he or she can find employment in the factory until time to 
begin wor k on the farm. Some years 
ago, under the shadow of the capitol of 
South Carolina , there were two schools 
less than three miles apart. In one a 
Negr o teacher was employe d for nine 
weeks at a salary of $25 a month , and 
had enrolled 140 Negr o pupils. Th e 
other, a whit e teacher employe d for four 
months at a salary of $40 a month , had 
enrolled five white pupils. 
"Th e Negro , in the majorit y of instances, is aware of his handicap and 
is using every available metho d to improve himself; whil e the poo r whites 
are so secure in their superiority, because of their race, that they are blinded 
to their real need as individuals. 
"Anothe r curious feature is the 'Prop ­
erty Clause.' This provide s that a voter 
must be possessed of $300 wort h of personal property. This is another 'blessing in disguise,' for the usually spendthrift Negr o wit h the ambition to cast 
a vote wil l put forth unusual effort to 
become possessed of $300 wort h of personal property, and the habit once 
acquired of saving his small earnings is 
likel y to be retained. 
"Th e 'Pol l Ta x Law ' is of such lon g 
standing that it is looke d upon as a 
'natural law.' Ther e are a few men of 
questionable character wh o employ large 
numbers of Negroes, wh o advise them 
of the futility of payin g the 'poll tax,' 
since they are not allowed the privilege 
of voting. This seems quite a sensible 
view of the matter, and the advice is 
taken in the majority of cases. 
"Wha t is by far more serious than the 
'poll tax' law is that prisoners, unless 
pardoned before the expired term, forfeit 
their rights of citizenship. Numbers of 
Negr o boys are arrested on the slightest 
pretext and sentenced to the chain gang 
for various terms—and are thus branded 
forever—far less guilty of crime than 
those wh o sent them there. Th e attitude 
of the court is so well understood that 
Negroe s feel that the only necessary bit 
of testimony for the judge or jury is 
the answer to the question, 'Wh o is the 
prisoner ? Whit e or colored? ' If white, 
in most cases, 'No t guilty;' if colored, OPINION 59 
'Guilty—next!' Ther e is no sense of justice and no fear of retribution, since the 
people wh o are most wronge d have no 
voice in the administration of the government itself." 
TH E "EVERLASTIN G NEGRO. " 
"It is provoking, " observes the Ne w 
Yor k Independent, "that whatever we 
want to do the Negr o should be everlastingly putting himself in the way to 
bother us. I n the most unexpected ways 
and places he bobs up, stumbles in 
where he is not wanted and sets agley 
the wisest plans of statesmen. On e has 
to look out for him always. If some 
new scheme of public reform is proposed, the first thought is, "Cherche z le 
negre.'" 
Th e Independent reviews the most recent intrusion of the Negr o question in 
the Senate, where it defeated the bill 
for the popular election of Senators, and 
concludes: "The sole reason why the 
Negro is so everlastingly poking himself in front of every national discussion is because a dominant white oligarchy is tryin g to hol d him unjustly in 
subjection in certain States. I n other 
States where the Negr o is politically 
just like the whit e man he does not 
bother us. It is simpl y because certain 
States shut out the Negr o that the Ne ­
gro jumps up and says he does not 
want to be shut out i n the votin g for 
Senators. If we cannot secure from 
Congress the privilege to elect Senators 
by popular vote, it is the Southern Ne ­
gro, not the Norther n Negro , that stands 
in the way. A n injustice is always a 
nuisance; it always is ready to block 
reform. Mor e than half the States want 
the right to elect Senators by popular 
vote, but others refuse to allow it unless 
the privilege is given to shut out the 
Negr o vote. Tha t is the block. Tha t is 
the everlasting Negro. " 
TH E CATHOLI C CHURCH . 
A t the Unitaria n Clu b in Bosto n a 
tribute was paid to the influence of the 
Unitarians in abolishing slavery. Th e 
Republic, of Boston , a Catholi c paper, 
quoting this tribute, calls attention to 
the wor k of the Catholi c Churc h amon g 
colored people. It declares that "i n 
purely Catholi c countries race prejudice 
is unknown. A Negro bishop in the 
Ne w World , Sylveri a Gome z Pimeta , 
Archbisho p of Marianna , Brazil , died not 
many months ago, and he, as a singularl y beloved churchman, is still mourne d 
throughout the great Southern republic. 
Incidentally, Blessed Marti n de Porres, 
of Lima , Peru, was a colored man, a 
membe r of the Dominica n Order. Bor n 
in the sixteenth century, he lived a life 
of wonderful holiness, founded the Col ­
lege of the Hol y Cross for orphans— 
this was, in part, a school of manua l 
training—and died in 1639. H e was 
beatified in 1836. 
"W e all know the College of the Pro ­
paganda in Rome , where Negr o and 
Mongolia n students sit side by side wit h 
white men of various nationalities, all 
preparing for the same priesthood. Wen ­
dell Phillip s renders testimony to the 
profound impression made on him in a 
visit to St. Peter's, Rome , when he saw 
a Negr o priest celebrating mass and two 
white priests assisting him. 
"Th e fewness and poverty of Catholic s 
in most of the Southern States hindered 
the Church's Apostolat e to the Negroe s 
until after the war; but where she was 
fairly, strong, as in Marylan d and Louisi ­
ana, free Negroe s were numerous and 
conditions better, in general, than elsewhere in the section. 
"Direc t mission wor k to the Negroe s 
has been growin g steadily in the South 
for over forty years, as well as in all 
Norther n cities where there are a considerable number of Negroes. W e have already five Negr o priests i n America . 
We hope soon to have man y more. " 
TH E DARKE R SIDE. 
Th e Chicago Evenin g Post comments 
on the proposition to celebrate the jubilee of emancipation in Boston. "Suc h 
a celebration, " it says, "especially if it 
brought together in the large cities in 
the Nort h such exposition material as 
woul d show the social and economic 
progress of the Negro , woul d be a useful thing. It could scarcely give the 
other side of the picture, could not give 
the whol e story; could not—as, indeed, 
perhaps, it should not—trace the growth 
of race prejudice in the Nort h wit h the 
disappearance of the old Abolitio n generation. Such an exposition could not 
show the discouragement—not to say 
weariness—which has paralyzed that 
most idealistic of Southern movements, 
the one represented by the efforts 
of men like Wad e Hampton , of South 
Carolina , and Senator Lamar, of Mississippi, to wor k out the redemption of the 
South by the politica l co-operation of 
blacks and whites. 
"Bu t if the race problem has acquired 
many somber aspects during the last 
half century, no one wil l contend that 
the old situation was not far blacker, 
far more demoralizing to both races." 
HONES T ELECTIONS . 
Eigh t officers have been found guilty 
of fraud in Louisiana . Th e Ne w Orleans 
States explains the mental processes of 
the convicted officials as follows: 
"Fo r the men wh o must suffer imprisonment in order that a stern lesson may 
be taught. Th e States is not without sympathy. Apparentl y they believed that 60 THE CRISIS 
because the election was entirely perfunctory in character* they were inflicting no injury upon anyone by returning 
a larger vote than was cast. The y have, 
however, now been made to realize that 
public sentiment is no longe r tolerant 
of crookedness at the ballot box. 
"Ballot-bo x stuffing was the natural sequel of the war. Manipulatio n of the elections or expulsion of the Negroe s from 
the polls was necessary to prevent the 
State from falling back into the control 
of the inferior race. These conditions, 
justified by the law of self-preservation, 
continued to a greater or less extent, not 
only in the city, but wherever in the 
State there was a preponderance of 
Negr o population, until the convention 
of 1898 which , followin g the example of 
Mississippi, constitutionally eliminated 
the Negr o from the electorate. Since 
then there has been no warrant for dishonesty in elections, though frauds have 
continued, not generally but sporadically, 
both here and in the country parishes." 
Th e States concludes that ballot-box 
stuffing, except to disfranchise Negroes, 
is no longer an ethical occupation. 
<I "Th e Ne w South is a little too new 
for some of those wh o live in it, " observes the Ne w Yor k Evenin g Post. "A s 
one of its newspapers points out, it was 
not lon g ago that the railroads passing 
through a certain town maintained separate stations, or, to be more accurate, 
'depots,' each with its ticket-seller. 
'Since the union depot has been in use, 
there is but one windo w and one seller 
for white and colored patrons alike.' Th e 
Corporatio n Commissio n of the State in 
question wil l be hard put to it to justify 
its exemption of this and other cities 
from the two-window provision . It 
would doubtless fall back upon the argument that the amount of traffic does 
not warrant the added expense of the 
second window, but this is to put expediency above principle , and dollars above 
prejudice. Fro m separate depots to a 
commo n window is degeneracy indeed. 
If it is undesirable to prohibit the Ne ­
groes from usin g the railroads altogether, wh y not limit them to, say, the 
first and the fifteenth of each month? " 
fi Mr . James Bryce , ambassador from 
Great Britain , recently addressed the colored Youn g Men's Christia n Associatio n 
in Washington . In the course of his address he said: 
"You r forefathers were brought to 
this country by our forefathers, and it is 
our duty to see that yo u have every 
chance for advancement and education. 
This is not an obligation resting upon 
any one country, but upon every nation 
that was instrumenta l i n takin g you r ancestors from their native lands. 
"England , Germany, France , Spain and 
Portugal, all were responsible for takin g 
Negroe s to Europe , and it has fallen 
upon the present generation to stand by 
the acts of their ancestors, and to see 
that yo u are properl y educated." 
TH E N . A . A . C. P. 
A month ago a woma n was brutally 
murdered in a woo d near Lakewood , 
Ne w Jersey. Ne w Jersey seems lately 
to have changed the phrase "Loo k for 
the criminal " to "Loo k for the Negro. " 
A s in the case of the murder of Mari e 
Smith at Asbur y Park, in whic h this 
Associatio n secured the release of an in ­
nocent black man, the first Negr o found 
near the scene of the crime was arrested. 
H e proved an alibi, however, and was 
not lon g detained. Th e police, nothin g 
daunted, arrested another colored man, 
Henr y Graham. 
Whil e the Associatio n was preparing 
to take up the case Mrs. Graham sent us 
a letter asking our aid and saying that 
her husband was il l in prison. W e at 
once sent a lawye r to Lakewoo d and it 
was a somewhat gratifying evidence of 
the Association's growin g influence that 
our representative was greeted on his 
arriva l wit h the remark : "W e thought 
yo u people woul d send somebody 
down. " 
Th e press despatches whic h reported 
the arrest of Graham said that the search 
for the murdere r woul d now be abandoned, so sure were the authorities that 
Graham was the man. It turned out, 
however, that there was not the remotest 
bit of evidence to hol d him, any more 
than there was to hol d William s in the 
Mari e Smit h case, and at the protest of 
the Association's lawye r the prisoner was 
released. 
Ther e is said to be no clue whatever 
to the murderer. It wil l be remembered 
that in the Asbur y Par k case the guilty 
man (white) subsequently made a 
confession. THE N. A. A. C. P. 61 
Th e Associatio n interested itself two 
months ago in the case of two boys, 
James Sharp, aged 17, and Harr y Brown , 
alias Williams, 19 years old, wh o had 
been sentenced to death at Georgetown, 
Delaware , for the murder of a white boy, 
the fourteen-year-old Wilmor e Rogers. 
Th e boys had been before the Children's 
Court in Philadelphia , where they had 
relatives, and from these persons and 
court officials the Associatio n received 
word of their conviction. Th e story told 
in Philadelphi a was that the two boys 
who were sent to wor k for Joh n Rogers, 
a farmer, had been terribly ill-treated. 
"The y had been whipped with a goad; 
their clothin g was torn from their 
backs." The y trie d to run away but 
were brought back. Eventuall y they beat 
youn g Rogers, one of their torturers, to 
death. 
Th e evidence at the trial did not altogether bear out this story, but it was 
clear that the Rogers boys terrorized the 
neighborhood. So great was the fear of 
them that few persons dared say a wor d 
about them. Th e murde r was described 
in Delaware as revolting. Th e boys borrowed the gun of youn g Rogers and 
shot him wit h it, buryin g the body in a 
swamp. Their attitude during the trial 
was described as hardened and indifferent, though a letter to the mothe r of 
Brow n pathetically shows a boy's terror 
at his plight. 
Whethe r or not they were hardened 
or merely terrified and hopeless, the fact 
remains that they made a bad impression on the jur y and judges, and were 
sentenced to death. Ou r lawye r arrived 
after the sentence, but we were able to 
secure commutation to life imprisonment. 
The Associatio n sent a protest to the 
Governo r of Kentuck y after the shocking press reports of the lynchin g in the 
theatre at Livermore , when it was said 
admission was charged and spectators 
were allowed to shoot one or more bullets at the victim, according to the loca ­
tion of their seats. 
Governo r Willso n replied: 
"I have the honor to acknowledge to 
your letter of Ma y 5th callin g my attention to the recent lynchin g at Livermore. Ky . O f course my attention was 
called to this shocking crime at the time 
and I immediately made inquiry about 
it, and whil e it was bad enough, I am 
glad to say that it was not as bad as 
reported in the sensational dispatches; 
that it was not conducted as a public exhibition, that the theatre was not opened 
nor lighted, much less were people there 
by admission either paid or unpaid, but 
a small mo b did murde r this man in 
that buildin g in the dark, and I am very 
glad to say that the Gran d Jur y under 
the earnest instruction of the judge has 
already indicted eighteen men. Al l 
but six of those indicted arc under arrest, and earnest wor k wil l be done 
to arrest all. I do not permit any 
lynchin g if I know of it before hand. 
Ther e has never been a case where 
1 had any reason to fear a mob committin g a crime that I have not 
taken every possible precaution against 
it, but this was a sudden mob gathered 
on the Negr o shooting a white man, the 
merits of whic h I kno w nothing, and it 
was in the western part of the State, a 
lon g distance from the capital, and no 
one outside of the immediate locality 
knew anything about it until the next 
day. I have taken a great deal of care 
to prevent injustice through race prejudice being done to our colored people. 
I have pardoned them when it was plain 
they were wrongfull y convicted or too 
severely punished, and I have in every 
case where there was reason to fear a 
mob taken great care to prevent such a 
disgrace. 
"Th e Executive Department has no 
control whatever of any prosecution except to grant clemency. I have the 
powe r to offer rewards for the apprehension and conviction of people wh o 
confederate together to injure another 
and I had that powe r in this case and 
should have exercised it if it had been 
necessary, but the action of the Gran d 
Jur y makes it unnecessary. 
"Wit h your horror of this crime as it 
was I full y sympathize. I feel as earnestly as yo u do the solemn duty of preventing men being put to death by mobs 
or i n any other wa y except by law. 
Whe n men are guilty of offenses punishable wit h death. I do not interfere 
with the sentence, but they are entitled 
to the protection of the State if it takes 
the whole State to do it, until convicted, 
and in cases like this there could be no 
question whatever of at least just punishment very promptly, so there was no 
excuse whatever for a mob. Before I 
came to your letter I had written this 
in answer to a letter from the Count y 
Judge asking me to offer a reward for 
the murderers if his request was necessary, but the indictment and the arrest 
of the people guilty have made it unnecessary. 
"Yours truly, 
"AUGUSTU S E . WILLSON. " 
Th e Bosto n branch wil l not be definitely organized until the autumn, but a 
loca l committee is working , and meetings to protest against race prejudice have 
been held and noted in the newspapers. 
Th e loca l committee on organization 
consists of Mr . and Mrs. Joseph P. Loud , 
Dr. Horac e Bumstead. Mr . Francis J. 
Garriso n and Mr . Butle r R. Wilson . EDITORIA L 
EDUCATION . 
THER E are people in the United 
States who say: "W e have 
tried education as a solution 
for the race problem and failed, 
therefore," etc. 
W e cannot too often insist that 
this is not true. W e have never tried 
the experiment. W e have begun the 
experiment—we have tried it here 
and there, but the United States has 
not to-day, and never has had, a complete rational system of elementary 
education for its myriads of black 
and white children, and this fact is 
perhaps the greatest arraignment of 
American democracy. 
Educational facilities are not good 
throughout the North, while in the 
South they are, on the whole, 
wretched. 
The Birmingham Age-Heral d said 
editorially in 1910: "About one-third 
of the children of school age in this 
State go to school, and two-thirds do 
not. . . . This puts Alabama on 
the Russian basis. . . . It is safe 
to say that one-half of the 700,000 
children of to-day are not sent to 
school and are, therefore, growing up 
without a public school education. It 
is also safe to say that the school 
accommodations of this State are not 
ample enough to care for one-half of 
the State's children." Wh y in the face 
of such facts will people insist that 
education has failed? 
Le t us try education and try it on a 
national scale. Let us have federal 
aid to common school training, even 
if it delays our battleships and puts 
the annual army manoeuvres out of 
business. A statement made a few 
years ago by the superintendent of 
education in the Southern States set 
forth these facts: 
"Comparative statistics of undoubted authority show that of all sections of the United States the public 
schools of the South have the poorest 
houses and equipment, the most 
poorly paid teachers, the shortest 
school terms, and the most inadequate 
supervision. The average salary of 
teachers for the country at large is 
$49 for men and $40 for women, 
while the average salary for teachers 
in the Southern States is $35.63 for 
men and $30.47 for women. The 
average length of the public school 
term for the country at large is 145 
days. The average length of the 
public school term for the Nort h 
Atlantic States is 177.3 days; the 
average length of the public school 
term for the Southern States, including Tennessee, Mississippi, Nort h 
Carolina, South Carolina, Louisiana, 
Arkansas, Georgia, Texas, Virgini a 
and Florida is 99 days. 
"Fo r every woman and child of its 
population the country at large is 
spending $2.99 for the education of 
its children. The South is spending 
barely 98 cents. The country at large 
is spending $20.29 for every pupil 
enrolled in its public schools. The 
Southern States are spending only 
$6.95. The country at large is spending for every child of school age in 
the United States an average of 
$10.57; the Southern States are spending for every child of school age 
within their borders $4.05. 
Twenty-four per cent, of the white 
population of the United States dwell 
in the Southern States that composed 
the Confederacy, while 64 per cent, 
of all the white illiterates over 10 years 
of age are found in these States." 
STARVATIO N AN D PREJUDICE . 
TWO utterances by Mr . Booker 
T. Washington this week il ­
lustrate the reasons why so 
many thinking men, black and white, 
are coming to doubt Mr . Washington's statesmanship. One statement EDITORIAL 63 
is in the current Outlook and is to 
the effect that Mr . John E . Milholland and "certain members of my own 
race in the Nort h have objected because they said I did not paint conditions in the South black enough. 
. . . I have never denied that the 
Negro in the South frequently meets 
with wrong and injustice, but he does 
not starve." An d he quotes facts to 
show that there is actual starvation 
in London. 
This argument reduces itself to 
several propositions: 
I. It is not well to tell the whole 
story of wrong and injustice in the 
South, but rather one should emphasize the better aspects. 
II. Starvation is worse than other 
kinds of wrong and injustice. 
III. Because there are persons 
starving in England, neither England 
nor black men in Americ a ought to 
harp on America's injustice. 
The last two propositions are matters of opinion and taste; but the 
first proposition has been the keynote 
of Mr . Washington's propaganda for 
the last fifteen years. It has, however, been ineffective in practice and 
logically dangerous. It is ineffective 
in practice because under its aegis— 
under the silence, the absence of criticism, the kindly sentiments and widespread complacency, we have seen 
grow up in the South a caste system 
which threatens the foundations of 
democracy, and a lawlessness which 
threatens all government. 
W e have seen wholesale disfranchisement of colored voters, color 
caste carried to the point of positive 
cruelty, the rule of the mob and the 
lynching of 2,000 men without legal 
trial, growing discrimination in 
schools, travel, and public conveniences, and an openly declared determination to stop the development of 
millions of men at the dead line of 
color. 
T o offset this Mr . Washington has 
a right to point to increased accumulation of property among Negroes and 
increased numbers of intelligent and 
forceful black folk. But what has 
been the result of this? It has been 
an intensified prejudice as shown in 
the new Ghetto laws, the strikes 
against black workers, spread of civil 
discrimination, and the crystallization 
of the disfranchising sentiment. Ho w 
any intelligent American can calmly 
and without hysteria or prejudice 
look on the development of the Negro 
problem in the United States in the 
last ten years and say that race and 
color prejudice has decreased, South 
or North, or shows reasonable signs 
of abating in the near future, passes 
our comprehension. An d yet Mr . 
Washington is reported to have said 
at the recent Unitarian dinner that 
"Prejudice still exists, but it is not 
so bitter as it. was," and that the 
South is an example of the overcoming of race prejudice. 
Wh y now does Mr . Washington 
persist in making from time to time 
statements of this kind? It is, we 
believe, because of a dangerous logical 
fallacy into which Mr . Washington 
and his supporters fall. They assume 
that the truth—the real facts concerning a social situation at any particular time—is of less importance 
than the people's feeling concerning 
those facts. There could be no more 
dangerous social pragmatism. Its 
basic assumption is that the facts 
are in reality known, while its whole 
action prevents the facts from being 
known. It is a self-contradictory 
and deceptive position and it has historically led to social damnation in 
thousands of awful cases. Eve n 
where its complacent ignorance has 
accidentally evolved into good, the 
good came not because of it but in spite 
of it. Just here it is that Mr . Wash ­
ington utterly fails in his English 
comparisons: It is not starvation 
that civilization need fear, if civiliza ­
tion faces the awful fact and calls it 
starvation, knows its gaunt and threatening shape and says with Lloyd -
George, W e will stop it if we shake 
the economic foundations of the empire. But the starvation which the 
world and Mr . Washington would do 
well to fear is that which blinds its 
eyes to stalking misery in the East 
End and cries, "Lo ! the Powe r of 64 THE CRISIS 
England! " So, too, in the United 
States: Awfu l as race prejudice, lawlessness and ignorance are, we can 
fight them if we frankly face them 
and dare name them and tell the 
truth; but if we continually dodge 
and cloud the issue, and say the half 
truth because the whole stings and 
shames; if we do this, we invite 
catastrophe. Le t us then in all charity 
but unflinching firmness set our faces 
against all statesmanship that looks 
in such directions. 
BUSINES S AN D PHILANTHROPY . 
THE talented, systematic, hardheaded youth of our nation 
are put into business. W e 
tell them that the object of business 
is to make money. Ou r dull, softheaded, unsystematic youth we let 
stray into philanthropy to work for 
the good of men. Then we wonder 
at our inability to stop stealing. This 
is the great American paradox. 
Small wonder that we see in our 
world two armies: one large and successful, well dressed and prosperous. 
They say bluntly: "W e are not in 
business for our health—business 
pays!" The other army is seedy and 
diffident and usually apologetic. It 
says: "There are things that ought 
to be done, and we are trying to do 
them—philanthropy begs." Between 
the business men, pure and simple, 
and the professional philanthropists 
waver the world's hosts—physicians, 
lawyers, teachers, and servants, some 
regarding their work as philanthropy, 
most of them looking at it as business 
and testing its success by its pay. 
Business pays. 
Philanthropy begs. 
Business is reality, philanthropy is 
dream: business first, philanthropy 
afterward—is this true? No , it is 
not. It is the foundation falsehood 
of our perverted social order. 
In reality it is business enterprise 
that continually tends to defeat its 
own ability to pay and it is philanthropy that works to preserve a social 
order that will make the larger and 
broader and better business enterprises pay. 
Wha t is meant when we say a business pays? Simply this: that for 
the service rendered or the thing 
given, the public wil l to-day pay a 
valued equivalent in services or goods. 
Me n do this because of their present 
wants. Given a people wanting certain things and corresponding business enterprises follow. Wil l this 
demand continue? Tha t depends: if 
the satisfaction of these wants minister to the real health and happiness 
of the community, the demand wil l 
continue and grow; if not, eventually 
either the business or the nation wil l 
die. The fact then that a business 
pays to-day is no criterion for the 
future. The liquor traffic pays and 
so does the publishing of school 
books; houses of prostitution pay and 
so do homes for renting purposes: 
and yet alcoholism and prostitution 
mean death while education and 
homes mean life to this land. 
The amount then that a business 
pays is no test of its social value. 
It may pay and yet gradually destroy 
the larger part of all business enterprise. Her e enters philanthropy. Its 
object is to do for men not what they 
want done, but that which, for their 
own health, they ought to want done. 
Wil l such service pay ? Possibly it 
will : possibly the people wil l want 
the service as soon as they learn of 
it and lo ! "Philanthropy and five 
per cent." appears. Mor e often, however, the people do not recognize the 
value of the new thing—do not want 
it; wil l not use baths or have anything 
to do with coffee rooms. Wil l they 
pay, then? If they perform a service 
necessary to human welfare and if 
the people are gradually learning 
what is really for their good, then 
sometimes such philanthropy pays. - If 
it does not pay then the service 
offered was really unnecessary or the 
people to whom it was offered have 
ceased to advance toward betterment 
and are in danger of death. 
The test, then, of business is philanthropy; that is, the question as to 
how far business enterprise is doing EDITORIAL 65 
for men the things they ought to 
have done for them, when we consider not simply their present desires, 
but their future welfare. Just here 
it is that past civilizations have failed. 
Their economic organization catered 
to fatal wants and persisted in doing 
so, and refused to let philanthropy 
guide them. Just so to-day. When ­
ever a community seats itself helplessly before a dangerous public desire, or an ingrained prejudice, recognizing clearly its evil, but saying, 
"W e must cater to it simply because 
it exists," it is final; change is impossible. Beware ; the epitaph of that 
people is being written. 
It is just as contemptible for a man 
to go into the grocery business for 
personal gain as it is for a man to 
go into the ministry for the sake of 
the salary. 
There is not a particle of ethical 
difference in the two callings. The 
legitimate object of both men is 
social service. The service of one is 
advice, inspiration and personal sympathy; the service of the other is 
fresh eggs and prompt delivery. Thus 
"from the blackening of boots to the 
whitening of souls" there stretches 
a chain of services to be done for the 
comfort and salvation of men. 
Those who are doing these things 
are doing holy work, and the work 
done, not the pay received, is the 
test of the working. Pay is simply 
the indication of present human appreciation of the work, but most of 
the world's best work has been, and 
is being done, unappreciated. 
"Ah , yes," says the cynic, "but do 
you expect men wil l work for the 
sake of working? " Yes, I do. That's 
the reason most men work. Me n 
want work. They love work. Onl y 
give them the work they love and 
they will ask no pay but their own 
soul's "Wel l done!" True it is that 
it is difficult to assign to each of the 
world's workers the work . he loves ; 
true it is that much of the world's 
drudgery will ever be disagreeable; 
but pay wil l never destroy inherent 
distaste, nor (above the starvation 
line) will it form a greater incentive 
than social service, if we were but 
trained to think so. 
These things are true, fellowAmericans ; therefore, let us, with 
one accord, attack the bottom lie that 
supports graft and greed and selfishness and race prejudice: namely, that 
any decent man has at any time any 
right to adopt any calling or profession for the sole end of personal gain. 
"Surely, " gasp the thrifty, "the 
first duty of man is to earn a living! " 
This means that a man must at least 
do the world a service such as men, 
constituted as they are to-day, will 
requite with the necessities of life. 
This is true for some men always; 
perhaps for most men to-day. W e 
pray for some sweet morning when 
it will be -true for all men. But it 
was not true for Socrates, nor for 
Jesus Christ. 
EARNIN G A LIVING . 
HOW do Northern colored 
people earn a living? There 
is no economic opening in 
the North : they are being displaced; 
starvation faces them." 
These and other phrases we hear 
continually. Ye t colored people continue to come North. They live in 
better and better homes, they are 
better dressed, they are growing in 
intelligence. Ho w do they earn a 
living? In ways that many do not 
dream. Turn , for instance, to your 
last magazine. See the advertisement 
of the Aeolian organs and piano 
players. Marvelous, is it not? Great 
triumph of white brains and ingenuity. No w if Negroes only—stop! 
The master mechanic in the Aeolian 
Organ Company's shops at Garwood, 
N . J., is Joseph H . Dickinson, a colored man. - Tur n to your telephone— 
did you know that a black man's 
patent is included in the transmitter? 
Scarcely a locomotive rolls in the 
United States but by aid of a blackman's lubricating device, and only 
recently Edison paid a colored man 
$62,000 for an improvement on the 
phonograph. 66 THE CRISIS Friends of the Freedmen: Some 
Founders of Negro Education. 
JUNE. 1911 67 68 THE CRISIS 
HARRIE T BEECHE R STOWE , 1811-1911. 
Fro m a Drawin g by Richmond. Done i n 1853, Whil e Mrs. Stowe Wa s Makin g 
He r First Visit in England . 
"Britain , Frenchman , Swede and Dane, 
Turk , Spaniard, Tarta r of Ukraine , 
Hidalgo , Cassock, Cadi, 
Hig h Dutchman , and Lo w Dutchman , 
too, 
Th e Russian Serf, the Polis h Jew, 
Arab , Armenian , and Manchoo , 
Al l shout 'W e know the lady!' 
"Kno w her! Wh o knows not Uncl e Tom , 
An d her he learned his gospel from, 
Ha s never heard of Moses; 
Ful l wel l the brave black hand we know 
Tha t gave to freedom's hand the hoe, 
Tha t kille d the weed that used to grow 
Amon g the Southern roses." 
—Olive r Wendel l Holmes. Harrie t Beecher Stowe's Personal 
Knowledge of the Negro Character 
By CHARLES EDWAR D STOW E 
If "Uncl e Tom's Cabin " was not true 
in minute particulars to plantation life, 
it was true to human nature in its great 
basilar fact that its organic elements are 
the same under a white or a black skin. 
Amon g the fondest recollections of 
Mrs. Stowe's childhood were the colored 
servants of her father's Ne w Englan d 
home, Zilla h and Rache l and old Aun t 
Candace. 
Whe n she was a very little child, between five and six, her mother died, and 
she thus describes the way in whic h 
Aun t Candace comforted her: "Eve n our 
portly old black washerwoman, Candace, 
wh o came once a week to help off the 
great family wash, woul d draw us aside, 
and, with tears in her eyes, tell us of 
the saintly virtues of our mother. 
"He r feelings were sometimes expressed in a manner that was truly 
touching. I remember her comin g one 
time to wash when the family were assembled for prayers in the next room, 
and I, for some reason, had lingered in 
the kitchen. She drew me toward her 
and held me quite still til l the exercises 
were over, and then she kissed my hand, 
and I felt the tears drop upon it. Ther e 
was something about her feeling that 
struck me wit h awe. She scarcely spoke 
a word, but gave me to understand that 
she was paying that homage to my 
mother's memory. " 
Immediately after the publication of 
"Uncl e Tom's Cabin " she wrote to Mrs. 
Follen , in England , of her experiences 
wit h the Negroe s near her Cincinnati 
home. 
"If anyone wishes to have a black face 
look handsome let them be left, as I 
have been, wit h a sick baby in the arms 
and one or two other little ones in the 
nursery, and not a servant in the house 
to do a single turn. Then , if they could 
see my good old Aun t Franki e comin g 
wit h her honest, bluff, black face; her 
long, strong arms; her chest as bi g and 
stout as a barrel, and her hilarious hearty 
laugh, perfectly delighted to take one's 
washin g and do it at a fair price, they 
woul d appreciate the beauty of black 
people. 
"M y cook, poor Eliz a Buck—ho w she 
woul d stare to think of her name goin g 
to England!—wa s a regular epitome of 
slave life in herself; fat, gentle, easy, lov ­
ing and lovable, always callin g my very 
modest house and dooryard 'The Place,' 
as if it had been a plantation wit h seven 
hundred hands on it. She had lived 
through the whole sad history of a Vir ­
ginia-raised slave's life. I n her youth 
she must have been a very handsome 
mulatto girl. 
"He r voice was sweet, her manners 
refined and agreeable. She was raised in 
a good family as a nurse and seamstress. 
Whe n the family became suddenly financially embarrassed, she was sold onto a 
plantation in Louisiana . She has often 
told me how, without any warning , she 
was suddenly forced into a carriage, and 
heard her little mistress screaming and 
stretching her hands toward her as she 
was driven away. 
"She told me of scenes on the Louisiana plantation and how she had often 
been out by stealth at night to minister 
to poor slaves wh o had been macerated 
and mangled by the lash. She was then 
sold into Kentucky , and her last master 
was the father of all her children. On 
this last point she always maintained 
a delicacy and reserve that seemed to me 
remarkable. She always called him her 
husband, and it was not till she had lived 
with me for some years that I discovered 
the true nature of the connection. I 
shall never forget how sorry I felt for 
her nor my feelings at her humble apology, 'Yo u know, Mrs. Stowe, slave women 
cannot help themselves.' She had two 
very pretty quadroon daughters, wit h her 
beautiful hair and eyes; interesting children, whom I had instructed in our famil y school wit h my own children. Time 
woul d fail me to tell yo u all I learned 
incidentally of the slave-system in the 
history of various slaves wh o came into 
my family, and of the Undergroun d 
Railroa d which, I may say, ran through 
our house." 
In a letter to Frederick Douglass Mrs. 
Stowe tells of her earliest impressions 
of slavery. "I was a child in 1820 when 
the Missouri question was agitated, and 
one of the strongest and deepest impressions on my min d was that made by 
my father's sermons and prayers, and 
the anguish of his soul for the poor slave 
at that time. I remember his preaching 
drawin g tears down the faces of the 
hardest old farmers in his congregation. 
I well remember his prayers in the family for 'poor, oppressed, bleeding Africa ' 
that the time of her deliverance might 
come; prayers offered wit h strong cry-70 THE CRISIS 
in g and tears, prayers that indelibly im ­
pressed m y heart, and made me what I 
am, the enemy of all slavery. " 
Mrs. Stowe's affection for and devotion 
to the colored race continued to the last, 
and was the burden of her farewell 
words to the America n people when she 
spoke as follows on the occasion of the 
garden party given in her honor on her 
seventieth birthday. She said among 
other things: 
"If any of yo u have a doubt or a sorrow or a pain, if yo u doubt about this 
.world , just remembe r what Go d has 
done; just remember that this great sorrow of slavery has gone, gone by forever. I see it every day at the South. 
I wal k there and see the lowl y cabins. I 
see these people growin g richer and 
richer. I see men very happy in their 
lowl y lot; but, to be sure, yo u must have 
patience wit h them. The y are not perfect; but have their faults, and they are 
serious faults in the eyes of white people. Bu t they are very happy, that is 
evident, and they do kno w how to enjoy 
themselves—a great deal mor e than yo u 
do. A n old Negr o friend i n our neighborhoo d has got a nice two-story house, 
and an orange grove, and a sugar mill . 
He's got lots of money in the bank, too. 
Mr . Stowe met him one day, and he 
said: I have got twenty head of cattle, 
four head of hoss, forty head of hen, and 
I have got ten children, all mine, every 
one mine.' Well , now, that's a thin g 
that a black man could not say once, and 
this man was sixty years old before he 
could say it. 
"Wit h all the faults of the colored 
people, take a man and set him down at 
sixty years of age wit h nothin g but his 
hands, how many could do better? I 
think that they have done well! " 
One of the most touching incidents in 
Mrs. Stowe's life is that she narrates in 
a letter to the Duchess of Southerland at 
the time that her oldest son, Henr y 
Stowe, was drowned. "Whil e I was visiting in Hanover, where Henr y died, a 
poor, deaf old slave woman , wh o has still 
five children in. bondage, came to comfort me. 'Bea r up, dear soul,' she said, 
'yo u must bear it for the Lor d loves ye.' 
She said further: 'Sunday is a heavy day 
to me, 'cause I can't read so I can't 
keep my min d off my poor children. 
Some on 'em the blessed Master's got, 
and they's safe; but O there are five 
that I don't kno w where they are.' Wha t 
are our mothe r sorrows to this! I shall 
try to search out and redeem these children, though, from the il l success of efforts already made I fear it wil l be hopeless. Ever y sorrow I have, every lesson 
on the sacredness of family love, makes 
me the mor e determined to resist to the 
last this dreadful evil that makes so 
many mothers so much deeper mourners 
than I ever can be." 
N o wonde r that wit h such experiences 
Mrs. Stowe had learned the oneness of 
human nature under a black or a whit e 
skin. Wha t she learned she taught to 
others; on finishing "Uncl e Tom's 
Cabin " as a serial i n the Era , she wrote : 
"I n particula r the dear children wh o 
have followed her story have the author's 
warmest love ! Dea r children, yo u 
wil l soon be men and women , and I 
hope that yo u wil l learn from this story 
always to pity the poo r and the oppressed. Whe n yo u gro w up, show you r 
pity by doin g all yo u can for them. 
Never, if yo u can help it, let a colored 
child be shut out of school, or treated 
wit h neglect on account of his color. 
Remembe r the sweet exampl e of little 
Eva , and try to feel the same regard 
for all that she did. The n I hope that 
when yo u grow up the foolish and unchristian prejudice against people merely 
on account of their complexio n wil l be 
done away with. " 
I n view of the approaching centennial 
of Mrs. Stowe's birt h on June 14 next,, 
her publishers, Houghton , Miffli n & 
Company , of Boston , Mass., are to brin g 
out a new life of her, writte n by her 
son and grandson. It is not to be a 
"Lif e and Letters, " still less a "Lif e 
and Times. " Nor, indeed, is it to be 
a biograph y i n the ordinar y sense of 
the term; but her life story told as one 
woul d tell the story of a character in a 
wor k of fiction. Tha t is, it seeks to portray not so muc h wha t she did and what 
she said as what she was and wha t her 
life meant to her. It is an effort, in 
short, to brin g the personality of Harriet. Beeche r Stowe vividl y before the 
reader's mind . It tells how the child 
grew, and became a teacher and writer, 
wife and mother, and rose from obscurity 
to fame through the writin g of "Uncl e 
Tom's Cabin. " 
It was the passage of the Fugitiv e 
Slave La w that wok e Mrs. Stowe to a 
sense of the full horro r of the condition 
of the poo r slave at the South. It 
seemed to her as if the system once 
confined to the Southern States was 
about to invade the entire country and 
overwhelm the institutions of free society. It was wit h astonishment and distress that she heard even humane and 
Christian people declare that slavery of 
the Negr o was a guaranteed constitutiona l right that could be interfered wit h 
only at the peril of disunion and bloodshed. She saw tender-hearted and truly 
humane men and wome n closin g their 
eyes and ears to the cries of those in 
bondage, and she said to herself that it 
was impossibl e to believe that they knew 
the true nature of slavery, and hence 
came the purpose of writin g a book to 
show the worl d the true nature of 
slavery as it then existed i n the Southern 
States, and threatened to spread all over 
the Nort h under the baleful influence of 
the celebrated Dre d Scott decision. Vacation Opportunities 
By G. S. DICKERMA N 
Th e closing of school and the comin g 
of the lon g summe r vacation is an event 
that means a good deal. Th e change is 
so great for both teachers and pupils; a 
pause in the round of regular duties and 
a sudden relief from responsibilities that 
have been a daily habit; no more necessit y for punctuality, nor for orderly system, nor for diligence in the use of time ; 
no pressure to prepare for a recitation, 
and no anxiety about the comin g examination. Thre e months of doing as yo u 
please, at least in those things whic h belon g to your school life. 
Vacatio n is a time of peril. In Cambridge, Massachusetts, some years ago, 
it was noticed that when the schools 
closed a- reign of lawlessness began and 
the police court was filled wit h waywar d 
boys wh o were brought in for all sorts 
of petty misdeeds, robbin g roosts, breakin g into houses, annoyin g peaceable 
passersby and quarreling wit h one another. A summer school for manual 
training was then opened, and forthwith 
the riot of youthful crime was stayed. 
The boys had something else to interest 
them and so gave up their marauding. 
No t many communitie s can afford* to 
maintain such a school as that at Cambridge, but i n every communit y there is 
the same danger of the youn g people 
running wil d when they are left wit h 
very little to do. 
An d vacation has its perils also for 
the teacher. It is about as bad for the 
teacher to be left wit h nothing to do as 
it is for the pupils. Th e temptation may 
not be of the same sort; it is not likely 
that he wil l break the laws or outrage 
public sentiment; but if he changes from 
industry to indolence, or from the 
earnest interests of the schoolroom to 
trifling gossip wit h vulga r companions 
and other shallow occupations, having 
no resolute purpose of doing anythin g 
useful, he cannot but suffer harm and 
come to the end of the summer worse 
rather than better for what he has been 
through. Teachers sometimes so lose 
their grip on their wor k during vacation 
and get so far away from their school 
interests that it takes them months to 
recover- if indeed they are not so caught 
with other fascinations that they never 
recover. 
Wha t safeguards are there against 
this? Teachers ma y well put to themselves this question as a vacation draws 
near. 
1. Fo r one thing, the teacher should 
not relax his interest in his pupils wit h 
the close of school. If he does, it proves 
him to be a hireling, and not a teacher 
in the higher meaning of that great 
word . Th e true teacher does his wor k 
in love, and love takes no vacations. 
"Lov e never faileth." Havin g taken it 
on his heart to do his best wit h these 
boys and girls, and to lead them alon g 
by all lessons to the nobler meanings of 
life, his interest in them must grow; it 
cannot flag and cease because they are 
out of his sight for awhile, or out from 
under his official control. Tha t ought 
only to give his interest a new turn and 
other ways of showin g itself. Th e pupils 
are still i n his thought and he wants 
to know how he can be of use to them; 
how keep them from going wrong ; help 
them each to do something wort h while ; 
draw them to himself and wi n their confidence so as to kindle them wit h his 
own ambitions for them. 
An d the true teacher holds on to his 
pupils long, year after year, while they 
are i n school, and then for scores of 
years when they are abroad in the worl d 
filling their several places and doing their 
wor k as men and women. Great numbers of most interesting people, of many 
ages, engaged in various ways, does the 
teacher of the better sort have on his 
mind ; and the number becomes ever 
larger as he grows older. Th e venerable 
head of a celebrated school in Tennessee 
is said to have made the -remark that 
he could drive a horse from Washingto n 
to the border of Mexic o and be entertained every night on the way at the 
home of one of his old pupils. Some, 
even if they knew where all the homes 
were, might not be so sure of their welcome. Onl y one wh o had kept up his 
warm friendships with old pupils could 
be confident of that. Fo r such the danger of becoming stale is very small. H e 
carries withi n him a never-failing spring 
of freshness and vitality. 
2. Again , it woul d be profitable for 
teachers to think of ways in whic h they 
may be helpful to the community. O f 
course it is to be expected that they 
wil l have some thought for the improve ­
ment of their schools—what repairs may 
be needed on the building? Wha t new 
furniture should be added? Wha t is the 
condition of the blackboards? Wha t 
desks and seats are crippled? Ho w the 
grounds may be beautified by setting out 
trees? An d what generous friends may 72 THE CRISIS 
be induced to add some interesting 
books to. the library, or furnish the children wit h a supply of entertaining maga ­
zines? Bu t there are other things, not 
immediately connected wit h the school, 
that the people may fairly expect their 
teachers to take an interest in. Fo r the 
teacher holds a peculiar place in the 
community, a place of honor and of responsibility. H e is supposed to kno w 
mor e on a great many things than other 
people, for he has had a better education. This education should be wort h 
something to his neighbors wh o are less 
fortunate, not to the children only, but to 
their parents and to all wh o help support the school, not to speak of the rest 
wh o may be even mor e in need. Th e 
teacher wil l be looked to for help in 
church wor k and in the Sunday-school, 
in social affairs of all sorts, in efforts 
at reform, in movements to prevent disease, and to promot e better health con ­
ditions, in attempts at village improve ­
ment and in enterprises for the purification of morals—in all these the teacher 
is wanted to take an active hand and be 
an intelligent leader. H e should be the 
alert guardian of all high interests, wit h 
eyes open to see what is goin g on and 
voice ready to speak wit h sound judgment, when his opinion is called for. 
One of this type wil l not be likel y to 
weaken in tone on account of a vacation. 
3. Finally , the teacher should look out 
for his own intellectual growth . If he 
can go to a teachers' association and 
meet the multitude of others engaged i n 
the same work , for mutua l encouragement and companionship, it is well . If 
he can attend a summe r school and come 
under the instruction of masters superior 
to himself, that is well . If he can afford 
to travel and enlarge his ideas by acquaintance wit h other lands and other 
peoples, that also is well . Bu t one thin g 
is essential, the teacher must read. Read ­
in g is the open door to hig h intellectual 
attainments, and in these days it is wide 
open. O f all times i n the year vacation 
is the golden period for reading—not for 
random, desultory trifling wit h newspapers and the current novels, but for the 
thorough mastery of great books, by 
great authors, on great subjects. Fo r 
example, read Andre w D . White's "Seven 
Great Statesmen," and it wil l be to yo u 
the opening of new worlds, an enlargement of your range of vision, a quickenin g of you r appreciation of steadfast devotio n to a truth, a kindlin g of your 
admiration for sublime heroism, and a 
strengthening of you r faith in the ultimate triump h of justice. Th e , teacher 
must guard his own integrity, deepen his 
own convictions, fortify his own faiths, 
anchor his own hopes—not for himself 
alone—but for the sake of the pupils he 
is to influence. Th e greatest of all teachers said: "Fo r their sakes I sanctify my ­
self, that they also migh t be sanctified 
through the truth. " 
LINCOL N POLYTECHNI C HIG H SCHOOL , EAS T ST . LOUIS , ILL . ARMSTRON G MANUA L TRAININ G HIG H SCHOOL , WASHINGTON , D . C. 
Colored Hig h Schools 
By MASO N A. HAWKIN S 
Principal of the Baltimore Colored High School 
Th e average colored America n citizen 
has a very inadequate conception of the 
wor k and standards of the best public 
high schools for colored youth, whil e 
many whites are absolutely ignorant of 
the existence of such schools as the M 
Street Hig h Schoo l and the Armstron g 
Manua l Trainin g School, i n Washington , 
and the colored high schools of St. 
Louis, Baltimore , Kansa s Cit y and elsewhere. 
The larger schools are for the most 
part furnished wit h the modern buildings 
and apparatus, and are directed by efficient teachers, trained chiefly in the best 
colleges of the country. Th e smaller 
schools are not so well appointed either 
in buildings or equipment, and are generally ordinary gramma r schools doin g 
one or mor e years of high school work . 
T o get an adequate conception of the 
wor k whic h these schools are doin g and 
the things wherein they fall short, one 
may examine a few figures from the 
Report of the Unite d States Commissioner of Education : 
Ther e were in 1908-9, the latest published figures, 112 high schools, 383 
teachers (about one-third of whom were 
males), 6,806 pupils (4,646 girls and 2,160 
boys. In other words, there were in 
1908-9, in round numbers, 7,000 pupils 
enrolled in public high schools. Ther e 
were, according to the twelfth census, 
about one millio n colored boys and girls 
of high-school age. A n enrollment then 
of 7,000 means that only seven colored 
boys and girls out of a thousand are 
enrolled in public secondary schools. O f 
white children, 100 out of every 1,000 
are enrolled. 
Considerin g the fact that the oldest 
colored high school was established little more than forty years ago, and that 
there are not more than 112 separate 
schools of this grade in all the States 
providin g separate schools, one need not 
marve l at the present showing, although 
it is disquieting to kno w that the number of colored schools has decreased 33 1/3 
per cent, since 1905. T o the 7,000 pupils 
in the public high schools may be added 74 THE CRISIS 
SUMNE R HIG H SCHOOL , ST . LOUIS , MO . 
12,796 in private schools, a total of more 
than 20,000 receiving high-school education. Th e limited number of public high 
schools is a matter of grave concern, for 
the public high school is the people's 
college. Unti l each county in each State 
establishes separately or jointl y wit h 
other counties a public school of secondary grade, the education and development of the people are bound to suffer. 
Fo r example, in the whol e State of Mary ­
land, wit h a colored population of 250,000 
in round numbers, there is onl y one colored publi c high school. Th e 170,000 
colored people livin g outside of Baltimore must either move to Baltimor e and 
pay tuition, or do without a publi c highschool course. 
COLORE D HIG H SCHOOL , BALTIMORE , MD . COLORED HIGH SCHOOLS 75 
Th e 7,250 pupils enrolled in public colored high schools in 1905 pursued courses 
as follows: 
1,575, or 15.7 per cent., classical course. 
1,943, or 19.3 per cent., scientific course. 
6,309, or 63.2 per cent., Englis h course. 
147, or 1.4 per cent., business course. 
It' is to be observed that many pupils 
are counted in more than one course. 
Th e graduates of the best colored high 
schools enter many of the Northern , 
Wester n and Ne w Englan d colleges 
upon certificate privilege without examination. In addition to the small number that go to college, 50 per cent, of 
the high-school graduates engage in 
teaching, others take up business positions, and some few find their way into 
civil service. But all, in whatever community yo u find them, contribute perceptibly to the mora l and intellectual advancement of the people. Th e highschool teacher, too, exerts a helpful in ­
fluence in his community. 
Ho w well trained for bis wor k the 
public secondary teacher is might be seen 
from a classification of the teachers in 
the Baltimor e Colore d Hig h School. O f 
the twenty-eight teachers employed here 
sixteen are college graduates, six are 
graduates of trade or technical schools, 
such as Pratt, Drexel , Hampto n and 
business colleges, and the remaining five 
are teachers of experience and proven 
worth. O f the sixteen holdin g degrees, 
there are nine A.B.'s — two from Harvar d 
University , one from the Universit y of 
Illinois, one from Wesleyan , three from 
Howard , one from Atlant a and one from 
Wilberforce ; five hol d the degree of 
Ph.B., representing the University of 
Chicago, Brown, Wesleyan and Syracuse; two M.E . degrees, representing 
Cornel l Universit y and Armou r Institute, 
and one Maste r of Arts degree from 
Columbi a University . 
Th e Baltimor e buildin g cost $28,000, 
and enrolls 612 pupils. A few facts 
concerning other schools may be of in ­
terest. Th e Sumne r Hig h School, of St. 
Louis, was erected and furnished at a 
cost of $500,000, and is one of the best 
buildings in the Unite d States; there are 
24 teachers and 543 pupils. Th e Lincol n 
Hig h School, of Kansa s City , Mo. , has 
a buildin g wort h $80,000, wit h 14 teachers and 310 pupils. In Washington , 
D. C , there are two high schools—the 
M Street, erected in 1890 at a cost of 
$107,000, with 33 teachers and 726 pupils. 
Congress has appropriated $60,000 for a 
new buildin g site, where a new schoolhouse wil l be erected. Ther e is also the 
Armstron g Manua l Trainin g Hig h 
School, which, wit h buildin g and equipment, cost $185,000. It has 36 teachers 
and 697 pupils. Th e Lincol n Polytechni c 
Hig h School, East St. Louis, Ill., build ­
in g cost $66,000. Richmond , Va., has a 
colored high-school buildin g which cost 
$30,000, wit h 375 pupils. Fort Worth , 
Texas, has a fine new high school, and 
several other Texa s cities are supplied. 
Fro m these facts one may get some 
faint idea of the wor k whic h is being 
done by the public high schools for colored youth. Tha t more is not accomplished is due to lack of schools, inadequate salaries for teachers, and a regrettable indifference on the part of the public, for in most cases public officials 
would willingl y vote necessary improve ­
ments if the sentiment of the communit y 
did not oppose it. 
CLAS S I N CHEMISTRY , HOWAR D UNIVERSITY , WASHINGTON , D . C. TH E BURDE N 
COLORE D ME N 
OU T 
1885 78 
1886 71 
1887 80 
1888 95 
1889 95 
1890 90 
1891 121 
1892 155 
1893 154 
1894 ; 134 
1895 112 
1896 80 
1897 122 
LYNCHE D WITH -
TRIAL . 
1898 102 
1899 84 
1900 107 
1901 107 
1902 86 
1903 86 
1904 83 
1905 61 
1906 64 
1907 60 
1908 93 
1909 73 
1910 65 
Tota l 2,458 
TH E AFRICAN . 
No t long ago a missionary was to 
preach upon Afric a in a wealthy white 
church of the South. It was announced 
that he woul d make an appeal for money 
to carry the gospel of Christ to the 
ignorant, unenlightened heathen of the 
Dar k Continent. Th e missionary was 
a well-known personage, and the church 
was well attended on the mornin g announced for him to preach. A few min ­
utes before the service was to commence 
a youn g colored girl, quietly dressed and 
of pleasant manner, mounted the church 
steps. She was met in the vestibule by 
a polite but determined usher, wh o told 
her that she had come to the wron g 
church. "Th e colored church is further 
downtown, " he said. 
" I am an African, " the youn g girl replied, "and I came to hear the preacher 
tell about my own country. I felt it 
would be pleasant to hear of home. " 
Th e usher was nonplussed. Leavin g 
the youn g girl to stand and wait, he consulted wit h the important trustees who m 
he could gather around him; and when 
the good missionary stood up to tell of 
the need in Afric a of teaching the gospel of Christ—the gospel to whic h the 
church he stood in was dedicated—away 
off in a corner of the gallery, where few 
white people could see her, and where 
no white person might sit next her, was 
one little Africa n "sister in Christ. " 
A TAL E O F RESTAURANTS . 
A colored woman , a stranger to Ne w 
York , tells the followin g story of her 
effort to get a midday meal. 
" I was on. Broadwa y shopping wit h 
two colored wome n friends, and at 
twelve o'clock we decided that we were 
ready for our luncheon. W e went into 
a restaurant, one of a numbe r under the 
same management in Ne w York , and, as 
we had been told, one i n whic h Negroe s 
woul d be served, but were kept waitin g 
for fifteen minutes. Findin g that our 
neighbors were served and not ourselves, 
we left. Enterin g a smaller, less pretentious establishment, we received the same 
treatment. I n a third we were told by 
the man at the door that 'niggers' 
wouldn't be served. B y this time it was 
nearly one o'clock, and we were becoming tired. Inquirin g of a policeman, we 
were directed to a block further uptown, 
but on reaching there we found no restaurant of any sort. Anothe r policeman 
treated us in the same manner. I do 
not kno w whether they meant to amuse 
themselves wit h our plight, or whether 
they simpl y wished to get us out of the 
way. I n any case, they were of no service. I, for one, began to feel very faint 
as well as sadly mortified. W e were 
quietly dressed, unobtrusive persons, 
wit h money to pay for a meal, and yet 
we were obliged to go hungr y in the 
cosmopolitan city of Ne w York . A t 
length I suggested that we try a department store. In the Wester n city from 
whic h I had come I was always treated 
wit h especial courtesy in such stores, and 
I felt we should try in Ne w York . W e 
walke d wearil y still further uptown and, 
entering at last a large establishment, 
made our way upstairs to the restaurant. 
W e were treated wit h the greatest courtesy. It seemed to me that the waitress 
must understand how we felt, she was 
so helpful in letting us kno w the good 
but inexpensive dishes and in makin g us 
feel at home. I blessed the store and 
the friendly service it gave us." 
PARK S AGAIN . 
W e have called attention mor e than 
once to the discrimination practiced 
against Negroe s in publi c parks of the 
South, parks supported by taxes levied 
upon black and white alike. In those 
places where race prejudice is recognized 
as a legitimate attitude on the part of 
a municipality, a commo n solution for 
the evident injustice practiced against 
the black man is to give him a park of 
his own . Such a recognition of race 
prejudice, however, only brings out more 
race prejudice. A t Memphis, Tenn. , owin g to the protest of the colored citizens, 
the Par k Commissio n passed an ordinance to purchase a park for colored 
people. Bid s were called for, and one 
site after another was chosen onl y to be THE BLACK SOLDIER 77 
relinquished at the indignant protests 
of adjacent white property owners. A t 
length an out-of-town park was decided 
upon, to be situated beyond the line of 
city residents. A t this a new protest was 
raised, the people livin g on the car line 
runnin g to the proposed park objecting 
to the increase that this woul d mean of 
Negr o passengers. Th e park must be 
abandoned that they might in a public 
conveyance have no company disagreeable to them as they went back and 
forth to their homes. Th e last wor d 
that comes to us is that the Par k Com ­
mission has listened to the white citizens 
and given up the whol e matter. Th e 
Negroes are to go without their park, 
and the six parks of the city remain 
closed to them. 
Th e youn g people of the Universit y of 
Michiga n are improvin g their minds in 
many ways. Ther e is a youn g colored 
sprinter there, Lapsley, of Nashville , wh o 
has a way of beating his white competitors wit h considerable ease. B y various 
kinds of cheating and subterfuge he has 
been kept off the track team, although 
he is easily one of the best two or three 
runners in the university. Lately , however, they lost in their contest wit h Cornell, and now Lapsle y is on the track 
team. 
In Chicag o a colored driver a few 
weeks ago was crossing the street railway tracks when his dray became stalled. 
A motorman swore at him and he swore 
at the motorma n roundly. A passing policeman ran up. "Wha t do yo u mean by 
swearing at a white man? " he yelled, 
and struck the drayman wit h his club 
across the head wit h all his might. Th e 
man fell like a log. The y rushed him to 
two hospitals, whic h refused to admit 
him. Whe n they reached the third hospital the colored man was dead. Th e 
officer was tried, "exonerated, " and is 
to-day patrolling his beat. Th e public 
must be protected. 
Tke Black Soldier-A Letter from a Friend 
Fro m one of the last surviving majorgenerals of the Civi l War : 
M Y DEAR MR . VILLAR D : 
I am in receipt of yours of Marc h 6, 
and I fully appreciate what you r association is doing, and I wil l give my mite 
to help it along. I have had a good deal 
to do wit h the Negro , from the time of 
the Civi l Wa r up to date. I n the Civi l 
Wa r I raised several regiments of them. 
I have found them tractable and that 
their efficiency as soldiers was in accordance wit h the ability and efficiency 
of their officers. I raised one of the 
first regiments in the war—the 1st Ala ­
bama, commanded by Col . Alexander, 
wh o was the chaplain of the 27th Ohi o 
Infantry. This was an excellent regiment and wo n its spurs in the celebrated 
campaign of Sturgis against Gen. For ­
rest, where Sturgis was badly whipped, 
but where they claim this regiment was 
very efficient i n saving the destruction 
of the force. It was also i n other engagements. 
I raised the 2d Alabama , A . D. , for 
the purpose of filling the Pionee r and 
Engineerin g Corp s of the 16th Arm y 
Corps, and as teamsters and cooks they 
took the places of that many white soldiers who m we put into the line. Th e 
Pionee r Corps was often under fire, and 
the colored boys stood up right beside 
the white soldiers every time. 
Whil e I was in comman d in Middl e 
Tennessee in the winte r of 1863-64 I raised 
two or three regiments there, and when 
we left on the Atlant a campaign Gen. 
Sherman was greatly pleased that I 
could take all my corps into the field, 
except one brigade, replacing that portion of them that was guarding a portion 
of railroad from Nashvill e to Decatur 
by colored troops. I had a great deal 
of experience, too, in secret service. I 
had charge of most of that wor k with 
Gens. Grant and Sherman, and they utilized Negroe s to a great extent in communicating wit h our spies wh o stayed 
withi n the enemy's lines, and I don't 
know of a single case of a Negro's 
givin g up one of the spies or a soldier, 
to their credit; they also stood by their 
masters and their families wh o had gone 
into the Confederate service. 
I think their action in the Civi l Wa r 
is entitled to a great deal of praise. 
Since the Civi l Wa r a great deal of 
my wor k has been in the Southern 
States, where I have had to utilize the 
Negroe s to a large extent, and I have 
found that where properly handled and 
cared for they make an efficient laboring 
force. 
I wish every success to your Association. I appreciate that the race prejudice is runnin g strong against the Negro, 
but I cannot see any reason for it. It 
certainly does not exist among the survivors of the Civi l War, I don't think, 
on either side. 
Truly , 
(Signed) GRANVILL E M . DODGE. 78 THE CRISIS 
DA Y NURSER Y BABIE S 
T
HER E is no form of activity quite 
so near and dear to the woman -
heart as that whic h finds its expression in efforts for the proper care 
and comfort of children. Mothers' meetings, kindergartens, day nurseries, orphanages and all kindre d enterprises 
touch the tenderest chord of woman's 
nature. In them she discovers her field 
of service to whic h she is willin g to give 
the fullest measure of lovin g sacrifice, 
without reckonin g the cost or counting 
the returns. It is in such a class we 
woul d place the Empt y Stockin g and 
Fres h Ai r Circl e of Baltimore . 
It is often difficult to tell the story 
of these little efforts for improve d conditions, attempted by our women, and to 
preserve the bit of sentiment or romance 
involved i n their beginnings whil e speakin g wit h truth and exactness. But the 
Empt y Stockin g and Fres h Ai r Circl e 
is the response to a real need, realized 
by the alert and intelligent wome n of 
Baltimor e more than six years ago. 
It was that season when the air was 
atune wit h the melody of "Goo d Will! " 
and "Peace on Earth! " These wome n 
asked themselves questions concerning 
the reality of this melody as they saw, 
throngin g the streets, hundreds of children who, poor and neglected, had never 
known or felt the Christma s spirit. A s 
if by magi c stockings were filled for 
these children; there were dolls for the 
girls, various toys for the boys, and 
candies and other goodies for all. Truly , 
there was plenty for these poor children, 
too, for gifts came simpl y for the asking. 
It just happened no one had thought 
before. 
Bu t soon Christma s had passed and 
summe r approached. This same Circl e 
thought once again, this time mor e seriously, for the question was mor e im -
Women's Clubs: 
Caring for the 
Children 
By 
A. W. HUNTO N 
portant, the need mor e vital. It was 
not simpl y a matter of givin g jo y to 
the child-heart, but of helpin g them live 
through the fierce heat of summer. Th e 
Circl e faced not onl y the problem of 
financial support for its efforts, but, havin g no home of their own , they confronted the great difficulty of finding 
suitable country homes that woul d receive the neglected class they desired to 
benefit. 
However, hardly two years passed before the Circl e had found a beautiful 
farm of ten and a half acres, wit h shade 
and fruit trees, pure wate r and a good 
dwelling , all of whic h they purchased 
for $1,750, and named Delight. T o state 
that hundreds of children have been 
given a week or mor e each summe r at 
this fresh-air home is but to relate 
a fact, barren in its expression of all the 
benefits that blessed the little ones. Th e 
benefits cannot even be estimated by the 
time and dollars spent in the work . It 
has richl y proven its value and has become one of the permanent charities of 
Baltimore . 
Muc h of the success of the Empt y 
Stockin g and Fres h Ai r Circl e is directly 
due to the enterprising spirit of the 
president, Miss Ida Cummings. Fore ­
most amon g the kindergartners of her 
city, she has carried her knowledge of 
child life into the plans and working s of 
the Circl e wit h excellent results. Ever y 
woma n and every other organization of 
the city have manifested their pride in 
this successful effort by generous help 
to the Far m Delight. 
Da y nurseries are generally a positive 
need for those communitie s in whic h any 
considerable numbe r of mothers are 
forced to find employment outside of the 
home. The y are a pressing need in those WOMEN'S CLUBS 79 
congested or poverty-stricken districts, 
where, because of the cost of livin g or 
the unstable conditions of family relations, the wome n are driven to be wageearners. 
It is the one fostered charity for whic h 
the demand, thus far, has been more 
urgent at the Nort h than at the South. 
This has been due, probably, to the difference in conditions of labor that obtain 
in the two sections. Th e Hop e Da y and 
Lincol n Nurseries are meeting a real demand in their respective localities in Ne w 
Yor k City . In Brooklyn , the Da y Nursery of the Lincol n Settlement is endeavorin g to make life easier for the mothers 
of the most poverty-stricken district of 
that city. Althoug h but 260 colored families were found to be livin g in a dozen 
different streets near this settlement, just 
a few words on this subject, taken from 
the president's report, are sufficient to 
emphasize the great need of a day nursery in this particular neighborhood : 
"Th e severity of poverty is, I believe, 
greater than that amon g any other race 
group in the city. Ou r colored men are 
usually unskilled laborers, makin g a dollar or a dollar and a half a day. This 
is supplemented by the wife's earnings 
at washing and housework, but the combined wages do not maintain a norma l 
standard of living . Th e infant death rate 
is appalling. One of our most responsive, energetic mothers has lost six children out of eight. She herself after a 
desperate struggle to supplement the 
eight-dollar wage of her hard-workin g 
husband, has been stricken wit h tuberculosis. Whe n our Nurser y was closed, 
the dearest of our babies died of want. 
Such are the ordinary happenings that 
we see from our Settlement." 
It requires money to properly support 
a day nursery, and so it is hardly to be. 
wondered that the band of wome n wh o 
had struggled to keep this day nursery 
open for two years should finally give 
up because of the extreme difficulty experienced in raising funds 'for its support. Neithe r was it a small thing for 
twenty other colored women, wit h no 
assets except devotion, desire and determination, to reopen the nursery. 
But it seemed wort h while , when, at 
the end of the first month, 151 children, 
representing twenty families, were reported as havin g been cared for. 
Unde r the supervision of a trained 
nurse and assistant, wit h Dr. V . Morto n 
Jones as chairman of the committee, 
and a continuance of the faith accompanied by wor k now manifested, this 
children's refuge wil l soon gain the support it merits and we shall continue to 
delight in "the rows of clean and sparklin g 
little folk, who, wit h bibs tucked under 
their chins, fold their small hands and 
murmu r together— 
" 'Go d is great and Go d is good, 
An d we thank Hi m for this food.' " 
A Stud ent Credo from Oberlin 
Ther e has always been idealism at 
Oberli n College , and a sense of the 
brotherhood of man. Latterl y it seemed 
for a time as if the old standards might 
be declining, but the little outburst of 
race prejudice was soon quieted. Thank s 
not only to the wisdom of the faculty, 
but also to white students like the youn g 
lady wh o has written the followin g 
credo: 
I believe that every norma l human bein g is entitled to equal opportunity wit h 
every other norma l human being, for 
education, culture, work , progress, personal development, all civil and politica l 
rights and privileges. I believe that 
neither sex nor race should be made the 
basis for special privilege or special disqualification. I believe that every individual is entitled to do the wor k whic h 
is suited to his own powers, and that 
no artificial barrier should be placed in 
his way ; that no human being has the 
right to refuse any other the opportunity of absolute and complete selfdevelopment, self-realization, and selfdirection, save in such measure as all alike 
are deprived of certain liberties for the 
benefit of all. I believe that society must 
and wil l at last be organized on a basis 
of absolutely equal opportunity for all 
mankind , of absolute justice and fair 
dealing; and I pledge my sacred honor 
to further the sentiment which wil l lead 
to organization upon these principles. 
MIRIA M E . OATMAN , 
Oberli n College , '12. TALK S ABOU T WOME N 
NUMBE R SIX By Mrs. JOH N E . MILHOLLAN D 
London , Ma y 10.—My spring movin g 
across the Atlanti c interfered wit h last 
month's "Talk, " though I did not intend 
that it should, and I hope my friends 
wil l overlook this seeming carelessness. 
I really ' believe I felt the hiatus more 
than any one else. True , our association 
has been limited to a few months, yet 
there is already a sense of acquaintanceship and co-operative sentiment that I 
treasure very highly. 
Whil e sounding this personal note let 
me take occasion to thank my friends for 
their many kindl y expressions whic h I 
cannot acknowledge individually, owin g 
to the exacting demands upon my time 
and energies, but whic h are none the 
less appreciated and gratefully received. 
In this connection let me add still further, and in doing so I trust that neither 
Dr. . DuBois nor the business management wil l think I am trespassing on their 
territory, that I congratulate the colored 
wome n of the country for the splendid 
manner in whic h they have helped to 
make TH E CRISI S a success; for it is a 
success now beyond all question, and 
far beyond the expectation of its founder 
and friends. Ho w much of this success is due to the devotion and practica l 
assistance of the good wome n wh o read 
it, Dr. DuBois declares, cannot well be 
overestimated. I rejoice to hear. it. 
TH E CRISI S now has 12.000 circulation. 
Tha t means at least 50,000 readers. 
Ther e is no reason why it should not 
* have 100,000 copies circulated and a half 
millio n readers. It seems reasonable to 
expect so splendid a result in the light 
of present progress. Te n millio n colored 
men and wome n of the Unite d States 
have at last a national organ, capable 
of indefinite expansion and usefulness. 
It rests wit h them, particularly the 
women, to say how far and how fast it 
shall grow. 
T o any man or woman imbued with 
the principles of modern civilization the 
recent Ghetto attempts in Baltimor e 
and other America n cities is to say the 
least surprising; to people of the Ol d 
World , wh o . have outgrown medieval 
prejudice, it seems incomprehensible. 
Here , where class distinctions are supposedly deep rooted, it assumes a ridiculous aspect. It is even more so in 
Franc e and throughout the Continenta l 
countries. Th e color line is quite indistinct. A n attempt in London , Paris, or 
any city, great or small, to segregate 
any class of people arbitraril y on account of race, color or creed woul d be 
almost certain to precipitate a revolution. Mor e congregation and less segregation is the solution of race friction. 
Recallin g the ol d Ghettos and the 
prejudice that once existed i n Englan d 
against the Jews, mor e intense than 
Negrophobia , one begins to realize how 
thoroughl y the old countries have advanced on a question touchin g whic h 
we seem to exhibit the most deplorable 
retrograde movement. 
Th e famous Englis h statesman wh o 
confessed his utter inability to draw an 
indictment against a nation woul d find 
his powers overtaxed still mor e in framing legislation against a race, and where 
Edmun d Burk e failed we doubt that any 
loca l limb of the law from Roanok e to 
the Ri o Grande wil l ever succeed. It is 
an antiquated effort. It must fail. 
Ther e is no element of our population 
mor e thoroughly America n than the 
Negro . H e has no yearnings toward 
Africa , and though he has many reasons 
to feel bitter towar d the government that 
refuses to defend his rights and right 
his wrongs, yet wh o questions his patriotism or devotion to the flag? The 
truth is our colored friends have been 
entirely too patient. 
The y have to put up wit h treatment 
that no other class of citizens woul d have 
endured. Their patience has been 
banked on by their oppressors. They 
have submitted too lon g in silence. The y 
are only beginning to learn the value of 
agitation and indignant protest and, 
above all, organized effort. 
Le t them take a leaf from the experience of the Irish people wh o are now 
about to realize the results of their long, 
long battle for Hom e Rul e against overwhelmin g odds; a struggle that at times 
seemed so unequal as to be hopeless, but 
in whic h the indomitabl e spirit of the 
race never failed to assert and reassert 
itself regardless of temporary defeat or 
apparent disaster. In all the vicissitudes 
of that struggle Irish womanhoo d is 
everywhere in evidence, assisting, encouraging, stimulating their husbands, 
sons and fathers, and defiantly refusing 
to consider such a thin g as ultimate failure amon g the possibilities, and, as the 
old Roma n poet has it, they are able 
because they believe themselves to be 
able. WHA T T O REA D 
BOOKS . 
Collier, Price—"Th e West in the East 
from an America n Poin t of View. " 
Scribner. 
Cooney, Doti a Trigg—" A Study in 
Ebony. " Neale. 
This is the story of a little colored 
girl wh o lived in a Mississipp i town. 
Stowe, Charles E . and Lyma n Beecher— 
"Harrie t Beecher Stowe. " Houghton , 
Mifflin & Company. 
PERIODICALS . 
" A Question of Character. " Edga r C. 
Macmechen. Th e America n Maga ­
zine, May . 
"India's 'Untouchables.' " Saint Niha l 
Singh. Th e Southern Workman , May . 
"Negro Crimina l Statistics." R. R, Wright. 
Jr. The Southern Workman, May . 
"Th e Cong o Fre e State and Cong o 
Beige. " Frederick Starr, of the Uni ­
versity of Chicago . Th e Journa l of 
Race Development, published by Clar k 
University , Worcester, Mass., April . 
"Th e Dismissa l of Prof. Banks. " James 
W . Garner. Independent, Apri l 27. 
"The Girlhoo d of Harrie t Beecher 
Stowe. " Charles Edwar d and Lyma n 
Beecher Stowe. McClure's, May . 
"The Ma n Farthest Down : Th e Ma n at 
the Bottom in London, " and "The Ma n 
Farthest Down : Lif e and Labo r on the 
Continent. " Booke r T. Washington . 
Outlook , Ma y 6 and Ma y 13. 
"The Present Situation in the Congo. " 
Rev. W . L . Ferguson. Th e Journa l 
of Race Development, April . 
Whil e at Wilberforc e for Commencement, June 12 to 17, Ea t at the 
Breakfast 35 c 
Dinne r 50 c 
Suppe r 35 c 
Cafe Service 
7:30 to 12 p. m. 
A la Carte 
COLLEG E IN N 
RESTAURAN T AN D LUNC H ROO M 
Special Hac k Lin e to and from Al l Trains 
YOR K & PRUITTE , Props. 
WILBERFORCE , OHI O 
G O T O LONDO N 
FIRST UNIVERSA L RACE S CONGRES S 
LONDO N JUL Y 26th to 29th 
OFFICIAL TOUR FOR DELEGATE S FROM TH E UNITED STATES VISITING 
HAVR E TH E RHIN E STRATFOR D 
PARI S COLOGN E WARWIC K 
VERSAILLE S BRUSSEL S KENILWORT H 
LUCERN E ANTWER P LEAMINGTO N 
HEIDELBER G LONDO N CHESTE R 
MAYENC E OXFOR D LIVERPOO L 
QUEENSTOW N 
37 DAYS, AL L EXPENSES INCLUDED, $275.00 
Same trip leaving New York, July 15th, arriving London, July 25th, continue 
as in above itinerary from London to New York, all expenses included, $175.00 
This rate includes steamer passage, going and returning, railroad fares 
throughout, good hotels, carriage drives and side trips as stated in itinerary, 
free allowance of 60 pounds of baggage in addition to usua l hand baggage, 
ordinary gratuities to hotel servants, porters and guards, and the services of an 
experienced manager from port of arriva l in Europe to departure for America. 
Under Management of 
TH E PILGRIM TOURS 
225 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CIT Y 
Indorsed by Prof. W. E . Burghardt DuBois, American Co-Secretary of the Congress 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 8 2 THE CRISIS 
BROWN-SPENCE R CORRESPONDENC E 
SCHOO L O F SHORTHAN D 
Th e Best, the Easiest, and Most Sellable . 
A syste m tha t ca n b e learne d durin g spar e 
moments an d thereb y increas e you r salar y fro m 
5 0 to 10 0 pe r cent. A thoroug h knowledg e of 
Shorthan d make s the positio n sur e an d th e one 
so skille d i n great demand. Yo u pa y as yo u 
learn . Term s reasonable . Writ e fo r particulars. 
BROWN-SPENCE R CORRESPONDENC E 
SCHOO L O F SHORTHAN D 
214 5 Missour i Ave . East St. Louis, Ill. 
ADVERTISER 
JOINING TH E NAVY ; OR, 
ABROA D WIT H UNCL E SA M 
B y JOH N H . PAYNTER , A.M . 
First Race Contribution to Navy 
Literature 
Ordered b y the Government for Librarie s of 
Wa r Vessels 
''I t is a perfec t pictur e of lif e o n boar d 
shi p whe n I first wen t to sea . Th e stor y is 
tol d so simpl y an d i n suc h goo d style , an d 
hold s its interest so, tha t I rea d i t throug h 
at on e sitting."—Richardso n Clover , Rea r 
Admiral . U . S. N. , Retired . 
Cloth Bound . 30 0 Pages. Full y Illustrated. 
SECON D EDITIO N 
Sent Postage Pai d on Receipt of One Dolla r 
Addres s car e o f 
SUDWART H PRINTING CO. 
WASHINGTON , D . C . 
O. M . Waller , M.D. , Pres. A . M . Thompson , Treas. B . C . Waller , M.D. , Sec . 
Sphinx Silver Polish 
The unsurpassed renovator of silver and plated ware. No acids; no scratching; absolutely harmless. Adopted in the largest hotels. Best for family use. Endorsed by silversmiths. Sells readily to the trade. Doubles your income. Agents wanted in every city 
and town. Fift y per cent, commission. Write to-day. 
Manufacture d b y 
Sphinx Labor-Saving Soap Co., Inc. 
Office and Factory: 117 West Street, New York City 
Legal Directory 
Real Estate and Probate Matters a Specialty 
ROBERT B. BARCUS 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
NOTAR Y PUBLI C 
Office : Roo m 502 , Eberl y Bloc k Columbus, O . 
B. S. SMITH 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LAW . 
Offices: Suit e 610 , Syke s Bloc k 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
GEORG E W. MITCHELL 
ATTORNEY-AT-LA W 
908 Walnu t Stree t 
Philadelphia , Pa . 
J. DOUGLA S WETMOR E 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
5 Beekma n Stree t (Templ e Court ) 
Ne w Yor k Cit y 
Tel . 622 2 Cortland t Cabl e Address, Judowe t 
FREDERICK L. McGHEE 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
Unio n Block , Fourt h an d Ceda r Streets 
St. Paul , Minn . 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
ATTORNE Y AN D COUNSELOR-AT-LA W 
102 0 Metropolitan Lif e Building 
Minneapolis, Minn . 
A BIOGRAPHY OF SPECIAL 
APPEA L T O TH E NEGRO 
Harriet Beecher Stowe 
By her Son and Grandson 
"It is rarel y tha t so fascinatin g a volum e 
come s int o the hand s o f the reader. It is 
no t a history . It is no t a biography . It 
is a fascinatin g serie s o f article s i n regar d 
to the home lif e an d publi c lif e o f the 
autho r o f 'Uncl e Tom' s Cabin. ' 
Th e whol e stor y o f ho w she wrot e he r 
grea t boo k is give n i n detail . . . . Th e 
sorrow s as wel l as the pleasure s o f he r 
lif e are al l depicte d so clearl y tha t the 
reade r immediatel y come s int o clos e touc h 
wit h the rea l Harrie t .Beeche r Stowe." — 
Boston Journal. 
Illustrated $1.50 net. Postpaid $1.62. 
Houghton-Mifflin Company 
4 Park Street Boston 
Mention TH E CRISIS . THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 83 
TH E WRITINGS OF 
Charles W. Chesnutt 
The Conjure Woma n $1.25 
The Wif e of His Youth, and 
Other Stories of the Color 
Line 1.50 
The House Behind the Cedars. 1.50 
The Marrow of Tradition 1.50 
Published by 
HOUGHTON, MIFFLI N & CO. 
4 Park Street, Boston, Mass. 
Lif e of Frederick Douglass, 50c. 
Published by 
SMALL, MAYNAR D & CO. 
15 Beacon Street, Boston, Mass. 
Ma y be ordered through any book 
store or direct from the publishers 
"A noteworthy book of the epoch." 
The Souls of 
Black Folk 
By W. E . BURGHABD T DUBOIS 
Eighth Edition 
"It is one of the noteworthy 
books, not merely of a year, but of 
the epoch. Its every page is filled 
with vigor, spontaneity and spirituality. ''—Boston Transcript. 
'' A stripping bare of the moral 
and mental anatomy of the African 
in America so as to reveal the naked 
soul in its primitive simplicity, 
seared and scarred by ages of suffering."—New York Age. 
With Author's Portrait, $1.20 Net 
A t book stores or from the publishers 
A. C. McCLURG & CO. 
CHICAGO 
To Colored People 
FO B SALE — W e have houses from $1,000 to 
$10,000. Our city is the capital of Ohio and 
a great manufacturing center—a good place to 
locate, plenty of work, a good place to locate 
for business. Can sell you a house for $50, 
$100 to $500 down, balance like rent. Fo r 
speculating houses or business places, $1,000 to 
$5,000, down, balance on long-time payments. 
An y of these are in good locations. Writ e for 
further information. 
THI S I S A COLORE D ENTERPRIS E 
EDWAR D A . SHANKLI N 
Real Estate 
1218 1/2 Mt. Vernon Ave., Columbus, O. 
RAC E ADJUSTMEN T 
By KELL Y MILLER . Howard University. Washington, D . C . A Standard Book on the Race Question. 
PRIC E $2.00 
Social Equality 5 cents 
A n Appeal to Reason, open letter 
to John Temple Graves 10 cents 
Roosevelt and the Negro 10 cents 
Forty Years of Negro Education.. 10 cents 
Ultimate Race Problem 10 cents 
The Political Capacity of the. 
Negro 10 cents 
ADDRESS AUTHO R 
Bom. 2220 Cen. 6322 
Van Noy Printing Co. 
100 Line n Finis h Cards by Mail , 60c. 
COMMERCIA L PRINTIN G 
SOCIET Y PRINTIN G 
BOO K AN D JO B PRINTIN G 
2315 MARKE T ST . ST . LOUIS , MO . 
PUBLICATION S O F TH E N . A . A . C. P. 
The N . A . A . C . P. has for sale the following pamphlets: 
1. Disfranchisement: a powerful argument by the Rev. John Haynes Holmes. 
2. Education in the South: Facts about 
the discrimination against the Negro. By 
the Rev. Horace Bumstead, former president of Atlanta University. 
3. The Real Race Problem: A scientific 
comparison of the black and the white man 
by America's foremost anthropologist, 
Prof. Boas, of Columbia University. 
4. Social Control. By Jane Addams, of 
Hul l House. 
5. The Negro as a Soldier. By BrigadierGeneral Burt, U . S. A . 
Fiv e Cent s Each , Thre e Dollar s a Thousan d 
Mention THE CRISIS . 84 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
American Negro Academy 
OCCASIONA L PAPER S 
No. 2. Conservation of Races. W . E . 
Burghardt DuBois $0.1 5 
No. 3. (a) Civilization the Prima l Need 
of the Race ; (b) Th e Attitude 
of the American Min d Towar d 
the Negro Intellect. Alexande r 
Crummell 15 
No. 4. Comparative Study of the Negro 
Problem. Charles C. Cook 15 
No. 5. Ho w the Blac k St. Doming o 
Legion Saved the Patriot Arm y 
in the Siege of Savannah, 1779. 
T . G . Steward, U.S. A 15 
No. 6. Disfranchisement of the Negro. 
Joh n L . Lov e 15 
No. 7. Right on the Scaffold, or the 
Martyr s of 1822. Archibal d H . 
Grimk e 15 
No. 8. Educated Negro and His Mission. 
W . S. Scarborough 15 
No. 9. Earl y Negro Convention Move ­
ment. John W. Cromwell 15 
No. 11. Negro and the Elective Fran ­
chise : A Symposium by A . H . 
Grimke , Charles C. Cook, Joh n 
Hope , Joh n L . Love , Kell y Mil ­
ler and Rev. F . J . Grimk e 35 
No. 12. Moder n Industrialism and the 
Negroes of the Unite d States. 
Archibal d H . Grimk e 15 
No. 13. Demand and the Suppl y of Increased Efficiency in the Negro 
Ministry . J . E . Morelan d 15 
No. 14. Charles Sumne r Centenary. Historical Address. Archibal d H . 
Grimke . 15 
J . W . CROMWELL , 
Corresponding Secretary, 
1815 Thirteenth St., N.W. , 
Washington, D . 0. 
SEN D TE N CENT S FO R AN Y ON E O F TH E 
FOLLOWING : 
No. 1. Confessions of Nat Turner . 
No. 2. Contemporary Evolution of the Negro 
Race. Wm . G. Harper . 
No. 3. Benjami n Banneker . J . H . B . Latrobe . 
No. 4. Evolution of the Blac k South. W. E . 
B . DuBois. Address 
American Negro Monographs Co. 
609 F St., N . W . (Room 102), 
Washington, D . C. 
The Curse of Race Prejudice 
JAME S F . MORTON , JR. , A.M. , Author and Publisher 
Forceful, rational, comprehensive. A n arsenal 
of facts and unanswerable arguments. Invaluable 
for propaganda. Read the chapter on "Th e Bugbear of Social Equality," which is a veritable eyeopener. Thousands already sold. Agents wanted 
everywhere. 
PRIC E 25 CENT S 
Address the Autho r at 244 West 143d Street, 
New York , N . Y . 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
13 Monographs. Sold Separately. 
Address: 
A . G . DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga . 
Educational Directory 
Howard University 
WILBU R P. THIRKFELD , President 
Washington, D . C . 
The College of Arts and Sciences—Kell y Miller , 
A.M. , Dean. 
Th e Teachers' College—Lewis B . Moore , A.M. , 
Ph.D. , Dean. 
Th e Academy—Georg e J . Cummings, A.M. , Dean. 
The Commercial College—Georg e W . Cook, A.M. , 
Dean. 
School of Manua l Arts and Applie d Sciences— 
PROFESSIONA L SCHOOL S 
The School of Theology—Isaa c Clark , D.D. , Dean. 
The School of Medicine : Medical, Denta l and 
Pharmaceutica l Colleges—Edwar d O. Balloch, M.D. , Dean. 
The School of La w — Benjami n F . Leighton, 
LL.D. , Dean. 
Fo r catalogue and special Information address 
Dean of Department. 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully, located in the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
The courses of study include Hig h School, Normal School and College, with manua l training 
and domestic science. Amon g the teachers are 
graduates of Yale , Harvard , Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-one years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the South. Graduate s are almost 
universally successful. 
Fo r furthe r information addres s 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
Wilberforce University 
WILBERFORCE, OHIO 
Opens first Tuesday in September 
Located in Greene County, 3 1/4 miles from Xenia , 
Ohio. Healthful surroundings. Refined community. Faculty of 32 members. Expenses low. 
Classical and Scientific, Theological, Preparatory, 
Music , Military , Norma l and Business Departments. Te n industries taught. Great opportunities for Hig h School graduates entering College or 
Professional Courses. Tw o new buildings for girls 
to be erected this year—one now in process of 
erection, and the other to be begun in the spring. 
Catalogue and Special Information Furnished. 
Address 
W. S- SCARBOROUGH , President. 
Shaw University 
This institution of learning, established in 1865, 
has industrial departments for both young men 
and young women, as well as college, normal and 
preparatory departments. Ther e are also Schools 
of Law, Medicine , Pharmacy and Theology. 
Th e facilities have recently been increased. 
Other improvements are being planned that will 
be completed within the next two years. 
Applications should be made several months or 
a year in advance, for it has become impossible 
during the last few years to receive all who apply. 
Th e present enrollment is over 500. 
Th e academic year begins' on the Thursday 
nearest the first day of October and continues for 
thirty-two consecutive weeks. Th e charges are 
moderate. Catalogues furnished upon application. 
Address TH E PRESIDEN T 
Shaw University, Raleigh. N . C 
Mention THE CRISIS. THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 85 
Fisk University 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Sixty-five Colleg e Freshmen . 
A New Department of Sociology. 
A Notable Equipment in Lan d and Buildings. 
Successful Graduates in Nearly Ever y State. 
Endorsed by the General Education Board . 
Fo r information address 
GEORG E A . GATES , President. 
American Church Institute 
for Negroes 
SI X SCHOOLS . 
Th e Bishop Payne Divinit y School, Petersburgh, Va. , Warden , the Reverend G. B . Bryan , 
D.D. ; St. Augustine a School. Raleigh, N . C., for 
normal and collegiate training, the Reverend A . 
B . Hunter , Principal; the St. Pau l Norma l and 
Industrial School, Lawrenceville , Va. , the Reverend James S. Russell, Principal; St. Atha -
nasius' School, Brunswick, Ga. , Mr . A . N . Perry , 
Principal; St. Mark's School. Birmingham, Ala. , 
the Reverend G. W . Brooks, Principal; the 
Vicksbur g Industria l School, Vicksburg , Miss., 
the Reverend W . H . Marshall, Principal . Fo r 
information apply to the principal at any school 
or to the Reverend Samuel H . Bishop, General 
Agent, 416 Lafayett e Street, New Yor k City . 
Lincoln Institute 
JEFFERSON CITY, MISSOURI 
Founded b y the Soldiers of the 62d and 65th 
Regiments of the U. S. Colored Infantry. 
Supported by the State of Missouri. Ha s 
Normal, Collegiate, Agricultural, Mechanical and 
Industrial Courses. Building s and equipment 
unsurpassed. Thirt y teachers representing the 
best schools of the country. Students from all 
sections of the country. Fo r catalogue and further information address 
BENJAMI N FRANKLI N ALLEN , 
President. 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation, Healthful Location 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work 
Offers full courses i n the following departments: College, Normal, Hig h School, 
Grammar School and Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, 
good drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fall Term Opens Sept. 27, 1911. 
Fo r information address 
President R. W. McGranahan 
KNOXVILLE , TENN . 
Washington Conservatory of 
Music and School of Expression 
902 T STREET , WASHINGTON , D . C. 
LARG E AN D COMPETEN T FACULT Y 
DEPARTMENT S 
Piano, Voic e and Violin , Piano Tuning . Theor y Analy ­
sis, Harmony , Counterpoint, Fugue,Voca l Expression, 
Win d Instruments, History of Music , Methods. 
Scholarship s Awarde d Artists ' Recital s 
HARRIE T GIBBS-MARSHALL , President. 
GEORG E WILLIA M COOK , Treasurer . 
ABB Y WILLIAMS , Secretary. 
LEWI S G. GREGORY , Financia l Secretary. 
ANNI E E . GRINAGE . 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA . 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological 
seminaries. 
A n Academy, with manual training, giving 
a preparation for life or for college. 
Th e positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of 
class work, its fine new buildings and wellequipped laboratories and library , 'prepare a 
faithful student for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RIC E HOVEY . President 
The National Religious Trainin
Offers special training to young 
me n and women as Settlement 
Workers, Association Secretaries, 
Missionaries, Literary and Other 
Branches. 
The following departments are now 
in successful operation: 
Commercial, Literary, Music, Theological 
Religious Training and Industrial 
FAL L TER M OPEN S OCTOBE R 1 2 
SUMME R SCHOOL. 
The Summer School and Chautauqua opens July 5, 1911, and closes 
August 14. 
The attractions and advantages 
offered in the Summer School are 
unsurpassed in the country for colored young men and women. 
Applications should be sent in at 
an early date. 
Loan Scholarships have been established for deserving young men 
and women. 
For further information address 
The President, National Religious 
Training School, Durham, N . C. 
Mention THE CRISIS. 86 THE CRISIS ADVERTISER 
FORWARD ! 
March Your Son Off to Wilberforce 
The Only school for Negro Yout h which 
has a Militar y Department equipped by the 
Nationa l Government and commanded by a 
detailed United States Arm y Officer. 
DEPARTMENTS : 
MILITAR Y CLASSICAL THEOLOGICA L 
NORMA L SCIENTIFIC MUSICAL 
BUSINESS TECHNICA L PREPARATOR Y 
Bankin g taught by the actual operations 
in the Students' Savings Bank. Twelve 
Industries, 180 acres of beautiful campus, 
Ten Buildings. Healthful surroundings, 
exceptional community. Maintaine d i n part 
by the State of Ohio. 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH, President. 
WM . A . JOINER, Superintendent, C. N. & I. 
CRISI S PRINT S 
Reproduced on heavy paper, suitable for framing, 50 cents each. 
Cove r illustration , Apri l number , 7x 9 inches, Two-pag e photograph , Ma y number , 10x1 3 
' 'Gir l Reading.' ' inches, ' 'Eight h Illinoi s Regiment. " 
Cove r illustration , Ma y number , 7x 9 inches, Cove r illustration , Jun e number , 7x 9 inches, 
"Bisho p Holly. " "On e of th e Littl e Ones. " 
Address Art Editor of THE CRISIS 
20 VESEY STREET Room 311 NEW YORK CITY 
No. 4 Special Buggy 
$65.0 0 
A value unequaled. Sold o n 
$1.00 Profit Margin. Write 
for prices and other styles. 
Send for catalog. 
C. R. Patterson & Sons 
GREENFIELD, OHIO 
Largest Negro carriage concern in the United States 
Your Carpet Needs Cleaning! 
Let the NEW YORK CAREFUL 
CLEANING BUREAU Do It 
We Clean and Renovate for Particular People— 
from a Rug to a House—by the Vacuu m System. 
Le t us give you a Clean Hous e for 
the year 191 1 
•Phone 3253 Harlem. 12 West 135th Street 
TELEPHON E 5277 MORNINGSID E 
Dr. Gertrude E. Curtis 
471 Lenox Avenue, New York City 
SURGEO N 
DENTIS T 
Office Hours: 
9-12 a.m . 
2-9 p. m. 
Bellevue Dental Clinic 
Monday s from 
2 to 5 p. m. 
SUNDAY S B Y APPOINTMEN T 
WOMEN' S and CHILDREN' S WOR K A SPECIALT Y 
Mention TH E CRISIS . PEOPL E WH O REA D 
THE CRISIS 
Find it intensely interesting because 
it is different from the ordinary. 
When a magazine is so interesting that 
the reader says " I was sorry because 
there was no more to read" it is very 
valuable as an advertising medium, because, when "there is no more to read," 
the advertisements are invariably read 
with the same zest and enthusiasm as the 
reading matter. 
Advertisements read in this frame of 
mind always leave an after-thought and 
are more likely to " make the sale." 
Let us tell you WH Y the CRISIS is different as an 
advertising medium. 
Let us tell you HO W we co-operate with our 
advertisers. 
ADVERTISING ALBON L. HOLSEY, MANAGE R 
Address: Room 311,20 Vesey Street, New York A limited numbe r of 
free beds maintained 
for the worthy poor. 
Othe r war d patients 
maintained at $7.00 
per week. 
Privat e rooms can 
be secured from 
$12.00 to $30.00 per 
week. 
Th e training school 
for nurses maintains 
a two years' course. 
A high school certificate, or an education sufficient to 
be considered an 
equivalent, necessary 
for admission. 
Fiv e thousand dollars endows a free 
bed. 
Andrew F. Stevens, 
President. 
Nathan F . Mossell, M.D. . 
Medica l Director and 
Superintendent. 
Frederick Douglass Memorial Hospital and Training School, Philadelphia, Pa. 
READ Y EARL Y I N JUN E 
HAL F A MA N 
The Status of the Negro in New Yor k 
By 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N 
With a Foreword by Dr. Franz Boas, of Columbia University 
"M y fathe r has alway s live d i n the 
South. " a youn g colore d ma n onc e sai d to 
me . "an d has attaine d success there ; but 
whe n I ceased to be a bo y he advise d me 
to liv e i n the North , wher e my manhoo d 
woul d be respected. H e himself canno t 
continuall y endur e his positio n of inferiority , an d i n the summe r he come s Nort h to 
be a man . No, " correctin g himself, "t o 
he HAL F A MAN . A Negr o is wholl y a 
ma n onl y i n Europe." — Fro m the Author's 
"Introduction." 
I Mis s Ovington's descriptio n o f the status 
I of the Negr o i n Ne w Yor k Cit y is base d o n 
j a most painstakin g inquir y int o his socia l 
an d economi c conditions, an d bring s ou t in 
| the most forcefu l wa y the difficultie s unde r 
;
 whic h the rac e is laboring , eve n in the larg e 
cosmopolita n populatio n o f Ne w York . It 
is a refutatio n o f the claim s tha t the Negr o 
has equa l opportunit y wit h the whites, an d 
tha t his failur e to advanc e mor e rapidl y 
I tha n he has, is du e to innat e inability. — 
I From Dr. Boas' "Forward." 
12mo, cloth. Price $1.00 net. By mail, $1.12. 
LONGMANS, GREEN & CO., Publishers, NEW YORK 
The above book may be purchased through any bookseller or will he mailed by 
TH E CRISIS on receipt of the price and postage. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 