THE CRISIS 
JUNE 1919 
10 c 
A COP Y 
ONE DOLLAR 
A YEAR 
THE HISTORY OF TH E NEGRO IN TH E WA R NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPL E Presiden t Secretar y 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y JOH N R . SHILLAD Y 
Chairma n Boar d o f Directors Directo r o f Publication s an d Researc h 
MAR Y WHIT E OVINGTO N DR . w. E . B . DUBOI S Treasure r Fiel d Secretar y OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLAR D JAME S WELDO X JOHNSO N 
Assistan t Secretar y 
WALTE R F . WHIT E 
D O YO U BELIEV E 
Tha t the Negr o should be free from the ever-present dange r of mo b 
murder ? 
D O YO U BELIEV E 
Tha t he should be allowe d to exercise his constitutiona l right to vote? 
D O YO U BELIEV E 
Tha t he should be given the same accommodation s as othe r citizens o n railroad trains — free from the detested and detestable "Jim-Crow " cars?. 
D O YO U BELIEV E 
Tha t he should be emancipated from the consistent exploitatio n throug h 
whic h he is robbed of million s of dollars annually by means of the credit 
system practiced i n Southern states? 
D O YO U BELIEV E 
Tha t he should be given a fair and equal apportionmen t of schoo l funds 
derived from public taxes to whic h he contributes at the same rate as the 
white ? 
D O YO U BELIEVE , I N SHORT , THA T DEMOCRAC Y SHOUL D 
APPL Y T O TH E COLORE D MA N A S WEL L A S T O AL L 
OTHERS ? 
If so, then yo u should be a membe r of the organizatio n that is fighting for 
democracy and all that that wor d implie s for the Negro . 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E ADVANCEMEN T 
O F COLORE D PEOPL E 
W e are workin g towards a goa l of 100,000 members by the 21st of June — 
the date of our Tent h Anniversar y Conferenc e i n Clevelan d — unde r the 
slogan: 
"W E AR E COMING , FATHE R ABRAHAM , ON E HUNDRE D 
THOUSAN D STRONG " 
Toda y we numbe r over 53,000. Wil l yo u be one of those wh o wil l help us 
reach our objective by becomin g a membe r yourself and securing as man y 
others as yo u can? 
Dat e 1919. 
Th e Crisis is sent without furthe r charge to member s payin g two dollar s or mor e 
OSWAL D GARRISO N VILLARD , Treasurer , 
70 Fift h Avenue , New York . 
SIR : 
I enclose $ in payment of membership dues for one year in the Nationa l 
Association for the Advancemen t of Colored People , wit h the stipulation tha t one 
dollar of any amount remitted herewith in excess of one dolla r is for one year's subscription to TH E CRISIS . 
Name 
Stree t 
Cit y and State DOUBLE WAR HISTORY NUMBER - EDITION 105,000 
TH E CRISI S 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHE D MONTHL Y AN D COPYRIGHTE D B Y TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T O F COLORE D PEOPLE , A T 70 FIFT H AVENUE , NE W YOR K CITY . CON ­
DUCTE D B Y W . E . BURGHARD T D U BOIS AUGUSTU S GRANVILL E DILL , BUSINES S 
MANAGE R 
Vol. 18—No. 2 JUNE, 1919 Whole No. 104 
PICTURES 
Page 
COVER - After the poster by Charles Fouqueray. 
TH E 163rd DEPO T BRIGADE 68 
ARTICLES 
A N ESSA Y TOWAR D A HISTORY OF TH E BLAC K MA N IN TH E GREA T 
WAR . W. E. Burghardt Du Bois 63 
TH E ATLANT A NEGRO VOT E 90 
TH E ANTI-LYNCHING CONFERENC E 92 
DEPARTMENTS 
OPINION 59 
TH E NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D 
PEOPLE 88 
TH E LOOKIN G GLASS 93 
TH E OUTE R POCKE T 98 
TH E HORIZON 100 
THE JULY CRISIS 
Th e Jul y CRISI S wil l be ou r Annua l Educatio n Number . W e wan t picture s o f Colore d College 
graduates. 
Th e Augus t CRISI S wil l be Clevelan d Conferenc e Number , 
Th e Septembe r CRISI S wil l be Labo r Number . 
TE N CENTS A COPY ; ONE DOLLAR A YEAR 
FOREIG N SUBSCRIPTION S TWENTY -FIV E CENT S EXTR A 
RENEWALS : Th e dat e o f expiratio n o f eac h subscriptio n is printe d on the wrapper. Whe n 
th e subscriptio n is due , a blu e renewa l blan k is enclosed . 
CHANG E O F ADDRESS : Th e address o f a subscribe r ca n be change d as ofte n as desired . 
I n orderin g a chang e o f address, bot h the ol d an d the ne w address must be given . Tw o weeks' 
notic e is required . 
MANUSCRIPT S an d drawing s relatin g to colore d peopl e ar e desired . The y must be accompanie d b y retur n postage . I f foun d unavailabl e the y wil l be returne d 
Entered as second class matter November 2, 1910, at the post office at New York, New York 
under the Act of March 3, 1879. 56 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
National Training School 
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA 
A School for the Training of Colored Young
Men and Women for Service 
Though it is young in history, the Institution feels a just pride in the work thus 
far accomplished, for its graduates are already filling many responsible positions, 
thus demonstrating the aim of the school to train men and women for useful 
citizenship. 
DEPARTMENTS ALREAD Y ESTABLISHED 
The Grammar School The Teacher Training Department 
The Academy The Divinity School 
The School of Arts and Science! The Commercial Department 
The Department of Music The Department of Home Economics 
The Department of Social Service 
NEXT TER M OPENS SEPTEMBER 22, 1919 
For further information and Catalog, address 
President James E. Shepard, Durham, North Carolina 
Wilberforce University 
Wilberforce, Ohio 
SUMMER SCHOOL 
Sixth Annua l Session 
June 16 to July 26, 1919 
Specia l arrangements have been made to 
maintai n the same hig h excellence in instruction force and work done. 
Al l of the equipment, buildings and grounds 
wil l be at the disposal of the Summe r 
School. 
Fee s and al l expenses low. Ful l credit 
toward certificates, diplomas and degrees 
wil l be given for Summe r School work. 
Th e Facult y for the Summe r Session wil l 
be member s of the Universit y Facult y augmented by specialists along various lines. 
Courses wil l be offered in Education , Psychology, English , Mathematics. History , 
Geography , Drawing , Business, Physica l 
Education , Music ; also in Physics, Chemistry , Ethics, Sociology, French , Germa n and 
Latin . 
Furthe r there wil l be courses in Voca ­
tiona l Study , Domesti c Science, Domesti c 
Ar t and Millinery . Additiona l courses wil l 
be offered as there ma y arise demands. 
W , S. SCARBOROUGH , 
The Cheyney Training School for 
Teachers 
CHEYNEY , PENNA. 
A normal school of high grade for 
young colored men and women of good 
abilities, who desire to prepare themselves to be teachers. Courses include 
the regular academic and professional 
subjects, and special departments i n domestic art, domestic science, manual 
training and agriculture. Boar d and 
tuition $125. Next regular term begins 
Thursday, September 18, 1919. Summe r 
school for teachers in active service, 
four weeks beginning July 1. Boar d and 
tuition for the month $20.00. Fo r fur­ President of the University . ther particulars and catalog write GILBER T H . JONES , Leslie Pinckney Hill , Principal, Chey­ Directo r of the .Summer Session 
ney, Penna. Fo r ful l particular s writ e the Director . 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 57 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifull y located In the Cit y of Atlanta , Ga . 
Th e courses of study Include Hig h School, Norma l 
School and College , wit h Manua l trainin g and domesti c science. Amon g the teacher s ar e graduate s 
of Yale , Harvard , Dartmout h and Wellesley . Forty -
nine year s of successful work hav e been completed. 
Students come fro m al l parts of the south. Grad ­
uates ar e almost universall y successful. 
Fo r furthe r informatio n address 
President EDWAR D T. WAR E 
ATLANTA , GA . 
THE FLORIDA A. and N. COLLEGE 
Tallahassee, Florida 
Offers long and short courses in 
Mechanic Arts, in Home Economics 
in Agriculture, in Education and in 
Science. 
For Catalog Address 
NATHA N B. YOUNG , President 
P . O . DRAWE R 524 
1870 CLAR K UNIVERSITY 1917 
SOUT H ATLANT A GEORGI A 
Most beautiful campus of 70 acres, commodious buildings with modern conveniences. 
Hig h Scholarship — Talented Faculty — Wel l 
equipped library and laboratories—Literary 
societies—Athletics—Co-educational— Expenses 
very low. $100 per year of eight months 
will pay tuition, board, room, etc. 
Comfortable dormitories with steam heat 
and gas light. 
COURSE S O F STUD Y 
Domestic Science for girls, cooking, sewing, 
dressmaking and embroidery. 
Pre-Academy—7th and 8th grades. 
Academy—Fou r years with diploma. 
Pre-Medical—Tw o years above academy. 
College—Fou r years leading to A . B . degree. 
Normal—Fiv e years above grades with diploma. 
First Semester opened October 2, 1918. 
HARR Y ANDREW S KING , President. 
BEREAN MANUAL TRAINING 
AND INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL 
South College Are. and N. 19th Street 
Phila., Pa. 
Fall Term and Twentieth Year opened 
Tuesday, October i , 1918. Domestic 
Art, Industrial Art, Mechanical Art, 
Commercial and English. 
Sessions both day and evening. 
Age, sex or previous training no bar 
if applicant has- good character. 
Years of honorable records and 
worthy traditions our trade-mark. 
Helpfulness our object 
Efficiency our aim. 
Write or visit the School now. 
MATTHEW ANDERSON, Principal 
1926 S. College Are. Phila, Pa. 
MOREHOUS E COLLEG E 
(Formerl y Atlant a Baptist College) 
ATLANTA , GA. 
College, Academy, Divinity School 
A n institution famous within recent years 
for its emphasis on all sides of manly develop 
ment—the only institution in the far South 
devoted solely to the education of Negru 
young men. 
Graduates given high ranking by greatest 
northern universities. Debating, Y . M . C. A . 
athletics, all live features. 
Fo r information , address 
JOH N HOPE , President. 
FISK UNIVERSITY 
NASHVILLE , TENN . 
Founded 1866 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational, 
Musica l and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro life. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
Hig h standard of independent manhood and 
womanhood. Fo r literature, etc., write 
FAYETT E AVER Y McKENZIE , President 
BIDDLE UNIVERSITY 
CHARLOTTE . N . C . 
Biddle University, operated under the auspices of 
the Northern Presbyterian Church, has four Departments—High School, Arts and Sciences Theological 
and Industrial. The completion of a Grammar School 
course is the requirement for entrance to the flrit year 
of the High School 
The School of Arts and Science* offers two courses 
of study, the Classical and the Scientific. In the 
scientific, German is substituted for Greek or Latin. 
The entrance requirement for the Freshman Class is 
15 units of High School work. 
The Theological Department offers two courses, each 
consisting of three years. The first Is purely English. 
Greek and Hebrew are taught in the others. 
All students in the High School Dept. are required 
to take trades in the Industrial Dept. 
For further Information, address 
President H. L. McCrorey, 
Charlotte, N. C. 
Morris Brown University 
Atlanta, Ga . 
Co-Educational 
Th e largest institutio n o f learnin g i n th e Sout h 
owne d an d controlle d b y Negroes. Facult y o f specialists, traine d i n some o f the best universitie s i n the 
Nort h an d i n th e South . Note d fo r hig h standar d of 
scholarship ; industria l emphasis an d positiv e Christia n influence . Wel l equippe d dormitories; san e 
athletic s unde r facult y supervision . Expense s rea ­
sonable . Locatio n centra l an d healthful . 
Departments: Theology , Colleg e Preparatory , Nor ­
mal , Commercial , Musical , Domesti c Science , Nurs e 
Training , Sewing , Printin g an d Tailoring . 
Firs t Semeste r bega n Octobe r 1, 1918. 
For furthe r informatio n address 
W. A . FOUNTAIN , President 
BISHOP J. S. FLIPPER, Chairman Trustee Board. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 58 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
KNOXVILLE COLLEGE Beautifu l Situation. Healthfu l Location. 
Best Mora l and Spiritua l Environment. 
Splendid Intellectua l Atmosphere . 
Noted for Honest and Thoroug h Work . 
Institution offers ful l courses in the following departments: College , Normal , Hig h 
School, Gramma r School, Domesti c Science 
and Industrial. 
Good water , steam heat, electri c lights, 
natura l drainage , splendid dormitories. Ex ­
penses very reasonable. 
Fo r catalog and other information address 
PRESIDEN T J . KELL Y GIFFE N 
Knoxville , Tenn . 
WILE Y UNIVERSIT Y 
MARSHALL , TEXA S 
Recognize d as a colleg e o f the Firs t Class b y Texas 
an d Louisian a Stat e Board s o f Education . Harvard , 
Yal e an d Columbi a represente d o n its faculty ; stu ­
dents gathere d fro m te n differen t states. 
Strongest Music Department in the West 
M . W . DOGAN , President 
COLEMA N COLLEG E 
GIBSLAND , LA . 
Supported by Baptist State "Woman's Hom e 
Mission Society of Chicag o and Boston and 
A . B . H . Society of Ne w York . Students 
fro m six different states. Graduate s exempted on first grade by Louisiana , Arkansa s 
and Oklahoma . 
O . L . COLEMAN , President 
TH E A .and T. COLLEG E 
SUMME R SCHOO L 
TH E TWENTIET H ANNUA L SESSIO N wil l 
begin June 16th, and continue for six 
weeks. In addition to the courses for teachers of academi c subjects, strong courses 
wil l be given for teachers of Agriculture , 
Manua l Training , Domesti c Art , Rafiia and 
Basketry . 
Th e following noted institutions are represented on the faculty : 
Harvard Columbia 
Cornell Chicago 
Howard Union 
Atlanta Fisk 
Drexel Ins. Hampton Ins. 
Myrtilla Minor Normal School 
Armour Institute of Technology 
Ithaca Conservatory of Music 
Pratt Institute A.and T. College 
Summe r School Bulletins are sent on request 
Ever y modern sanitar y convenience can be 
found in the commodious dormitories. Bat h 
rooms wit h showers and tubs are situated 
on every floor. 
Fo r furthe r information address 
PREST. DUDLEY 
A. and T. Summe r School 
GREENSBORO , N . C . 
The Slater Industrial and 
State Normal School 
Fo r Colore d Yout h o f Bot h Sexes WINSTON-SALEM , N . C . 
I. Offering Standard Course s 
I n Academi c Subjects 
I n Industrial and Vocational Subjects, 
I n Education. 
II. Graduates receive the Teachers* Certificate. 
III. Located amid the foothills of the mountain section of Western Nort h Carolina 
and the health conditions are ideal. 
IV . Accommodations excellent and expenses 
moderate. 
Fo r furthe r informatio n communicat e wit h 
S. G . ATKINS , Principal SLATE R STAT E NORMA L SCHOOL , 
Winston-Salem , N , C . 
Lincoln University 
Beginning September 22, 1919, the requirement for admission to the Theological Department will be graduation from a College of 
Libera l Arts. Youn g Me n wishing to prepare 
for the Ministr y in a Seminary , all whose resources will henceforth be devoted to the education of the adequately trained alone, are 
invited to write to 
President, John B. Rendall 
Lincol n Universit y P. 0., Pennsylvania . 
Summer School 
at the 
West Virginia Collegiate Institute 
June 16 to Jul y 25 
Fo r furthe r informatio n address 
BYR D PRILLERMAN , President Institute , West Virginia . 
Bell Phone Spruce 1924 30-Day Syitem Position 
Derrick 
Shorthand School Childs' Building 
1435 Chestnut Street 
PHILADELPHIA 
Enroll Immediately to Hold Place 
in Class 
Send for Enrollment Blank and full information 
Day and Evening Classes 
NOTE—W e are already enrolling Summe r 
Students and would advis e al l who desire 
to take Specia l Summe r Cours e to send i n 
applicatio n A T ONC E as places wil l be a t 
a premium , 
(Educational Institutions 
Continued on page 106) 
Mention TH E CRISIS THE CRISIS 
Vol. 18 No. 2 JUNE , 1919 Whole No. 104 
Opinion 
of W. E. B. DuBois 
TH E CLEVELAN D CONFERENC E 
TEN years ago, in 1909, the 
National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored 
People was founded when 
a hundred persons on Lincoln's 
birthday sent forth a ringing call to 
the nation to finish the work 
which the great Emancipator began. 
Through great vissisitudes this organization has grown and strengthened until today wit h a paid-up 
membership of over 50,000, a national organ of 100,000 circulation, it 
stands without peer, the greatest 
fighting force for Negro freedom in 
the world. Slowly but surely it is 
attacking every evil, every disability, 
every insult from which we suffer. 
The Negro who is not a member of 
it finds himself on the defensive. The 
white man who does not believe in it 
does not believe i n American democracy. 
This is the organization which i n 
the week from June 22-29 wil l celebrate its tenth birthday in Cleveland, 
Ohio. This ought to be in point of 
attendance, earnestness and effectiveness the greatest Emancipation convention this land has known. Not 
only should every branch of the 
N . A . A . C. P. be fully represented, 
but every state and locality should 
send its delegates. White and black, 
young and old, Northerner and 
Southerner, should unite at 
Cleveland to say: It is enough. We have 
waited fifty years. The Negro must 
and shall be free and the N . A . A . 
C. P. must do it. 
LYNCHIN G 
ONE hundred and nineteen of 
the most distinguished citizens of the United States 
—white and black, 
Northerners and Southerners, governors, 
statesmen, judges, college presidents, 
congressmen, ministers, reformers, 
authors, men and women—united recently in a call for an Anti-Lynchin g 
Conference which said: 
"It is time that we should wake to 
the need of action, and that public 
opinion, irresistible when aroused, 
should be enlisted against this barbarism in our midst." 
The result was a series of meetings 
in New York—two great mass meetings and two conferences. The occasion was epochmaking. It was a 
step toward civilization comparable 
only to the abolition conventions. 
Lynching must go and the convention 
thus called by the N . A . A . C. P. is 
the beginning of the end. 
TH E HISTOR Y O F TH E GREA T WAR 
THI S issue of TH E CRISI S contains a History of the Negro 
in the Great War. It is incomplete and has, doubtless, 
many minor mistakes; but it is the 
best possible at present. Late r this 
sketch will be expanded into a volume. Amon g those who will assist in 
the writin g and arranging of that 
volume will be Colonel Charles 
Young; Mr. E. C. Williams of 
Howard University; Benjamin Brawley 
of Morehouse College; Major 
Patterson and nearly all of the colored 
59 TH E 60 
officers of the 92nd Division ; Colonel 
Duncan and many officers of the 93rd 
Division ; John Hope and Mesdames 
Hunton and Curtis of the Y . M . C. A. ; 
and Dr. George E . Haynes of the 
U . S. Department of Labor. 
It is expected that the volume wil l 
be written and published, wit h illustrations, by October 1. It wil l be 
sold at the most reasonable price 
possible. The N . A . A . C. P. and 
TH E CRISI S are raising a fund to pay 
for its publication and to this fund, 
all friends of the truth are asked to 
contribute, 
I. w. w. AN editorial i n the Easter 
CRISI S (written during the 
Editor's absence) has been 
misunderstood and was, 
perhaps, itself partially misleading. 
Mr. F. H. M. Murray of 
Washington, D. C, writes us: 
I n a recent editoria l i n you r magazine 
the statement is made tha t there are no 
Negroe s among the Industria l Workers of 
the World . Whil e I am certai n that the 
statement is erroneous, I am not at this 
moment able to la y my hands on anythin g 
i n prin t to confirm my denial, except the 
followin g from an articl e i n last Sunday's 
New York Call magazine, by David 
Karsner, who reported the trial of the big batch 
of members of the I. W . W . i n Chicago 
last summe r and late r the tria l of the five 
Socialists at the same place. H e is writin g about Judg e Kenesaw M . Landis, who 
presided at both trials and who imposed 
upon the hundred or so I. W . W. , who were 
convicted, and the five Socialists, sentences 
aggregatin g over nine hundred years i n 
priso n and fines aggregatin g over two mil ­
lions of dollars. Mr . Karsne r says: 
"Ther e was only one defendant among 
the I. W . W. , to m y knowledge, who refused to believe i n Judge Landis [durin g 
the trial] . H e wa s Be n Fletcher, the sole 
Negr o defendant. One day i n the corrido r 
I asked Be n wha t he thought of Judge 
Landis. Be n smiled broadly, 'He's a fakir. 
Wai t unti l he gets a chance; then he'll 
plaste r it on thick.' Be n wa s a sure-thing 
prophet, fo r the Judg e plastered him wit h 
ten years, and his counsel said wit h not 
enough evidence to invit e a reprimand. " 
So it turns out tha t not only are there 
Negroe s who are members of this militan t 
workingmen's organization , but some—or at 
least one—prominent enough to be regarded 
as wort h puttin g behind the bars wit h the 
leaders—Haywood , Fannin g and others. 
I thin k tha t i n the interest of the trut h 
 CRISIS 
of histor y and fo r the honor of the blac k 
workers, yo u should correc t the statement 
to whic h I refer. 
I say "honor, " fo r even i f we regar d the 
I. W . W . as visionarie s (Joh n Brown , yo u 
know, was a "visionary" ) howeve r mistake n 
are their methods, i f their methods are as 
generall y set fort h (whic h I do not believe) 
the success of the cause fo r whic h they 
are strugglin g and sacrificin g an d sufferin g should be particularl y dea r to our people, since i n no other race or element of our 
populatio n is there a large r percentage of 
workers; albeit, too many—wha t a pity! — 
are obliged to wor k i n a menial, tha t is, a 
parasiti c capacity. 
TH E CRISI S did not say or intend to 
say that no Negroes belonged to the 
Industrial Workers of the World , nor 
did it intend to condemn that organization. On the contrary, we respect 
it as one of the social and political 
movements in modern times that 
draws no color line. We sought to 
say that we do not believe that the 
methods of the I. W . W. are today 
feasible or advisable. An d too we 
believe the Socialist Part y wrong i n 
its attitude toward the war, but we 
raise our hats silently to men like 
Eugene Debs who let not even the shadow of public shame close their lips 
when they think themselves right. 
We believe that the crushing of the 
monstrous pretentions of the military 
caste of Germany was a duty so 
pressing and tremendous that it 
called for the efforts of every thoughtful American. Bu t we recognize that 
some people did not agree wit h us and 
these folk we honor for their honesty, 
even though we question their reasoning. 
It is no credit to America n Negroes 
if they had NO "Conscientious 
Objectors." It is tremendously to their 
credit that the vast majority of them 
thought straight and fought true i n a 
mighty world crisis. 
ROOSEVEL T 
MAJO R SPINGAR N has sent 
the following telegram to 
Lieutenant-Colonel 
Theodore Roosevelt, Chairman 
of the First National Convention of 
the American Legion, an organiza­OPINION 61 
tion which is intended to include all 
soldiers and sailors who served in the 
war: 
Newspapers report that the exclusion of colored soldiers from the 
American Legion is being considered. 
If the Legion is to be a national organization of all those who served in 
the war, the exclusion of hundreds 
of thousands of Negro soldiers who 
gave devoted service to the greatest 
of causes is unthinkable. A s a delegate to the national caucus from New 
Yor k State, unable to be present on 
account of unforeseen circumstances, 
I protest against this injustice. 
DESCEN T INTO HEL L 
READ these three proposed 
amendments to the 
Constitution of the United 
B y Senator Jones of Washington: 
"Section 1. The right of citizens 
of the United States to vote shall not 
be denied or abridged by the United 
States or by any state on account of 
sex. 
"Section 2. Congress shall have 
power, by appropriate legislation, to 
enforce the provisions of this article." 
By Senator Jones of New Mexico: 
"Section 1. That the right of citizens of the United States to vote shall 
not be denied or abridged by the 
United States or by and state on account of sex. 
"Section 2. The several states shall 
have the authority to enforce this 
article by necessary legislation, but 
if any state shall enforce or enact any 
law in conflict therewith, then 
Congress shall not be excluded from enacting appropriate legislation to enforce it. " 
By Senator Gay of Louisiana: 
"Section 1. The right of citizens of 
the United States to vote shall not be 
denied or abridged by the United 
States or by any state on account of 
sex. 
"Section 2. The several states shall 
have the exclusive right to enact appropriate legislation to enforce the 
provisions of this article." 
We regret to say that some suffrage 
leaders agreed to accept even the Gay 
Amendment, which, of course, meant 
Negro disfranchisement. In the next 
Congress these Suffragists wil l bear 
strict watching. 
TH E TREAT Y 
IT is a hard, bitter penalty that 
the Allie s have drafted to fit a 
hard, cruel crime. We of the 
darker world greet Poland, 
dead so long as to be almost forgotten ; we greet the Slav States and 
Armenia ; Arabia , where our blood 
mingles; and the half-redeemed colonies of Africa . We send our sympathy to raped Belgium, saying 
simply: "Forget not the crime in 
Congo, and the 30,000 black coals of 
fire heaped on your head." We deplore the selfishness of Italy, and hold 
up hands of hope toward the Nation 
of Nations. An d as for William II, 
late German Emperor—was it a 
Frenchman who suggested that his 
punishment be condemnation to live 
in Americ a as a Negro all the days 
of his remaining life? Bu t no—not 
that. Senseless cruelty il l befits those 
who make the world safe for 
Democracy. 
HYSTERI A 
THES E are the facts so far as 
known: In 1915 Herman 
M. B. Moens visited the 
Editor of THE CRISIS and 
others and expressed his- interest i n 
a scientific study of the race problem. 
He was vouched for by the Dutch 
Minister and friends and Dr. Du Bois 
gave him letters to Professor Mille r 
of Howard and Mr. L . M . Hershaw. 
Others introduced him to prominent 
white people in Washington and he 
was received by the Smithsonian Institution, the Board of Education and 
put up at the exclusive Cosmos Club. 
Mr. Moens made many acquaintances and seemed universally liked. 62 TH E CRISIS 
In 1917 he was arrested and accused 
of being a German spy. He was acquitted. In 1918 he was again 
suspected of espionage, but when 
arrested, he was accused of exhibiting to some friends bust photographs 
of eight females. He was convicted 
of a misdemeanor and sentenced to 
one year in prison and a fine. He immediately appealed the case. 
A s a result of the above facts, 
there arose in colored Washington an 
astonishing turmoil. Rumor had 
large numbers of decent persons implicated in a terrible scandal. Gossip 
bandied names, dates and places; the 
whole school system was accused of 
unspeakable things until the District 
Attorney declared that the name of 
but one teacher was involved. This 
teacher, who had hitherto borne an 
unspotted reputation, was forced to 
resign, although not a single discreditable fact was proven against 
her. Mass meetings of five and six 
thousand people were held and bitter 
charges flung. The city, in other 
words, went wild wit h hysteria, resentment and rumor and then as suddenly settled into dumb calm. 
The moral is obvious: Unbridled 
license in imagination and crimina l 
gossip wil l do more harm to us in one 
minute than any white man, be he 
charlatan, spy or honest scientist, can 
do in years. 
EGYP T AN D INDIA 
THE sympathy of Black 
America must of necessity go out 
to colored India and colored 
Egypt. Their forefathers 
were ancient friends, cousins, bloodbrothers, in the hoary ages of 
antiquity. The blood of yellow and 
white hordes has diluted the ancient 
2. A Great Pageant of Negro black blood of India, but her eldest 
History. Buddha still sits black, with kink y 
hair; the Negro who laid the founding stones of Egyp t and furnished 
some of her mightiest thinkers, builders and leaders has mingled his blood 
with the invader on so vast a scale 
that the modern Egyptia n mulatto 
hardly remembers his descent. Bu t 
we are all one—we the Despised and 
Oppressed, the "niggers" of England 
and America . 
We of Americ a fight the great fight 
of Peace—we agitate, we petition, 
we expose, we plead, we argue. It 
is a long, slow, humiliating path, 
but for us War, Force, Revolution 
are impossible, unthinkable. Fo r 
anybody the costs of bloody uprising 
are so vast and uncounted that they 
must bring pause to the wildest. Yet, 
who can judge others? Who sitting 
i n Americ a can say that Revolution 
is never right on the Ganges or the 
Nile ? Wh o of us who suffer can 
judge how unbearable is the suffering 
of unknown friends? We bow our 
heads and close our aching ears. 
Only our hearts pray that Righ t may 
triumph and Justice and Pit y over 
brute Force and Organized Theft and 
Race Prejudice, from San Francisco 
to Calcutta and from Cairo to New 
York . 
TH E TERCENTENAR Y 
THE absence of Dr. D u Bois in 
Europe for four months 
disarranged the plans for 
the Tercentenary commemoration of the landing of the Negro, 
and necessitated some changes. We 
can now announce, however, that the 
celebration wil l take place beginning 
August 1, 1919—300 years after "a 
Dutchman of Warre sold us twenty 
Negroes." 
The commemoration wil l be in 
three parts: 
1. A National Day of Fasting and 
Prayer. 
3. Widespread local celebrations. 
We shall publish further details in 
the July CRISIS . A N ESSAY TOWAR D A HISTORY OF TH E 
BLACK MA N IN TH E GREA T WAR 
By W. E . BURGHARDT DuBois 
FOREWOR D 
THE mayor of Domfront stood in the village inn, high on the hill that hovers green 
in the blue sky of Normandy; and he sang as we sang: "Allons, enfants de la 
patrie!" God! How we sang! How the low, grey-clouded room rang with the strong 
voice of the little Frenchman in the corner, swinging his arms in deep emotion; with 
the vibrant voices of a score of black American officers who sat round about. Their 
hearts were swelling—torn in sunder. Never have I seen black folk—and I have seen 
many—so bitter and disillusioned at the seemingly bottomless depths of American color 
hatred—so uplifted at the vision of real democracy dawning on them in France. 
The mayor apologized gravely: if he had known of my coming, he would have 
received me formally at the Hotel de Ville—me whom most of my fellow-countrymen 
receive at naught but back doors, save with apology. But how could I explain in 
Domfront, that reborn feudal town of ancient memories? I could not—I did not. But 
I sang the Marseillaise—"Le jour de gloire est arrive!" 
Arrived to the world and to ever widening circles of men—but not yet to us. Up 
yonder hill, transported bodily from America, sits "Jim-Crow"—in a hotel for white 
officers only; in a Massachusetts Colonel who frankly hates "niggers" and segregates 
them at every opportunity; in the General from Georgia who openly and officially 
stigmatizes his black officers as no gentlemen by ordering them never to speak to French 
women in public or receive the spontaneously offered social recognition. Al l this ancient 
and American race hatred and insult in a purling sea of French sympathy and kindliness, of human uplift and giant endeavor, amid the mightiest crusade humanity ever 
saw for Justice! 
" Contre nous de la tyrannie, 
L'etendard sanglant est leve." 
This, then, is' a first attempt at the story of the Hell which war in the fateful years 
of 1914-1919 meant to Black Folk, and particularly to American Negroes. It is only 
an attempt, full of the mistakes which nearness to the scene and many necessarily missing facts, such as only time can supply, combine to foil in part. And yet, written 
now in the heat of strong memories and in the place of skulls, it contains truth which 
cold delay can never alter or bring back. Later, in the light of official reports and 
supplementary information and with a corps of co-workers, consisting of officers and 
soldiers and scholars, I shall revise and expand this story into a volume for popular 
reading; and still later, with the passing of years, I hope to lay before historians 
and sociologists the documents and statistics upon which my final views are based. 
SENEGALES E AN D OTHERS 
TO everyone war is, and, thank God, must be, disillusion. This war has disillusioned 
millions of fighting white men—disillusioned them with its frank truth of dirt, 
disease, cold, wet and discomfort; murder, maiming and hatred. But the disillusion 
of Negro American troops was more than this, or rather it was this and more—the 
fiat, frank realization that however high the ideals of America or however noble her 
tasks, her great duty as conceived by an astonishing number of able men, brave and 
good, as well as of other sorts of men, is to hate "niggers." 
Not that this double disillusion has for a moment made black men doubt the wisdom of their wholehearted help of the Allies. Given the chance again, they would again 
do their duty—for have they not seen and known France? But these young men see 
today with opened eyes and strained faces the true and hateful visage of the Negro 
problem in America. 
63 64 TH E CRISIS 
When the German host—grey, grim, irresistible, poured through Belgium, out of 
Afric a France called her sons; they came; 280,000 black Senegalese, first and last— 
volunteers, not drafted; they hurled the Bodies back across the Ourcq and the Marne 
on a ghastly bridge of their own dead. It was the crisis—four long, bitter years the 
war wore on; but Germany was beaten at the first battle of the Marne, and by Negroes. 
Beside the Belgians, too, stood, first and last, 30,000 black Congolese, not to mention 
the 20,-000 black English West Indians who fought in the East and the thousands of 
black troops who conquered German Africa. 
STEVEDORE S 
BUT the story of stories is that of the American Negro. Here was a man who 
bravely let his head go where his heart at first could not follow, who for the first 
time as a nation within a nation did his bitter duty because it was his duty, knowing 
what might be expected, but scarcely 
foreseeing the whole truth. 
We gained the right to fight for civilization at the cost of being "JimCrowed" and insulted; we were segregated in the draft; we were segregated 
in the first officers' training camp; and 
we were allowed to volunteer only as 
servants in the Navy and as common laborers in the Army, outside of the four 
regular Negro regiments. The Arm y 
wanted stevedores, road builders, wood 
choppers, railroad hands, etc., and 
American Negroes were among the 
first to volunteer. Of the 200,000 
Negroes in the American Expeditionary 
Force, approximately 150,000 were 
stevedores and laborers, doing the 
hardest work under, in some cases, the 
most trying conditions faced by any soldiers during the war. And it is the 
verdict of men who know that the most 
efficient and remarkable service has 
been rendered by these men. Patient, 
loyal, intelligent, not grouchy, knowingall that they were up against among 
their countrymen as well as the enemy, 
these American black men won the war 
as perhaps no other set of S. O. S. men 
of any other race or army won it. 
Where were these men stationed ? A t 
almost every seaport in France and in 
some English ports; at many of the interior depots and bases; at the various assembling 
places where automobiles, airplanes, cars and locomotives were got ready for use; i n 
the forests, on the mountains and in the valleys, cutting wood; building roads from 
ports of entry right up to the view and touch of Germans in the front-lines; Juryin g the 
dead; salvaging at great risk to their own lives millions of shells and other dangerous 
war material, actually piling up and detonating the most deadly devices in order that 
French battlefields might be safe to those who walk the ways of peace. 
Who commanded these thousands of black men assembled from all parts of the 
United States and representing in culture all the way from absolute illiterates from 
under-taught Southern States to well-educated men from southern private schools and 
colleges and even from many northern universities and colleges? By a queer twist of 
American reasoning on the Negro it is assumed that he is best known and best "handled" 
LT. BAKANE DIOP, A CHIEF OF TH E SENEGALESE AND CHEVALIER OF TH E LEGION 
OF HONOR. TH E HISTORY OF TH E BLAC K MA N 65 
by white people from the South, who more than any other white people refuse and 
condemn that sort of association that would most surely acquaint the white man with 
the very best that is in the Negro. Therefore, when officers were to be chosen for the 
Negro S. 0. S. men, it seems that there was a preference expressed or felt for southern white officers. Some of these were fine men, but the majority were "nigger" drivers 
of the most offensive type. 
The big, outstanding fact about the command of these colored soldiers is that southern men of a narrow, harsh type dictated the policy and method and so forced it that 
it became unpopular for officers to be generous to these men. When it is considered 
that these soldiers were abjectly under such men, with no practical opportunity for 
redress, it is easy to imagine the extremes to which harsh treatment could be carried. 
So thoroughly understood was it that the Negro had to be "properly handled and kept 
in his place," even in France, large use was made even of the white non-commissioned officer so that many companies and units of Negro soldiers had no higher Negro 
command than corporal. This harsh method showed itself in long hours, excessive 
tasks, little opportunity for leaves and recreation, holding of black soldiers to barracks 
when in the same community white soldiers had the privilege of the town, severe punishments for slight offenses, abusive language and sometimes corporal punishment. To 
such extremes of "handling niggers" was this carried that Negro Y . M . C. A . secretaries 
were refused some units on the ground, frankly stated by officers, that it would be 
better to have white secretaries, and in many places separate "Y " huts were demanded 
for white and colored soldiers so that there would be no association or fraternizing 
between the races. 
Worked often like slaves, twelve and fourteen hours a day, these men were wellfed, poorly clad, indifferently housed, often beaten, always "Jim-Crowed" and insulted, 
and yet they saw the vision—they saw a nation of splendid people threatened and torn 
by a ruthless enemy; they saw a democracy which simply could not understand color 
prejudice. They received a thousand little kindnesses and half-known words of sympathy 
from the puzzled French, and French law and custom stepped in repeatedly to protect 
them, so that their only regret was the average white American. But they worked 
—how they worked! Everybody joins to testify to this: the white slave-drivers, the 
army officers, the French, the visitors—all say that the American Negro was the best 
laborer in France, of all the world's peoples gathered there; and if American food 
and materials saved France in the end from utter exhaustion, it was the Negro stevedore who made that aid effective. 
TH E 805TH 
TO illustrate the kind of work which the stevedore and pioneer regiments did, we 
cite the history of one of the pioneer Negro regiments: Under the act of May 
18, 1917, the President ordered the formation of eight colored infantry regiments. 
Two of these, the 805th and 806th, were organized at Camp Funston. The 805th became 
a Pioneer regiment and when it left camp had 3,526 men and 99 officers. It included 
25 regulars from the 25th Infantry of the Regular Army, 38 mechanics from Prairie 
View1, 20 horse-shoers from Tuskegee and 8 carpenters from Howard. The regiment 
was drilled and had target practice. The regiment proceeded to Camp Upton late in 
August, 1918, and sailed, a part from Montreal and a part from Quebec, Canada, early 
in September. Earl y in October the whole regiment arrived in the southern end of 
the Argonne forest. The men began their work of repairing roads as follows: 
A—First 2,000 meters of Clermont-Neuvilly road from Clermont road past Apremont; 
B—Second 2,000 meters of Clermont-Neuvilly road, Charpentry cut-off road; 
C—Locheres crossroad on Clermont-Neuvilly road, north 2,000 meters, roads at Very; 
D—Clermont-Neuvilly road from point 1,000 south of Neuvilly bridge to Neuvilly, ammunition detour road at Neuvilly, Charpentry roads; 
E—Auzeville railhead, Varennes railhead; railhead work at St. Juvin and Briquenay; 
F—Auzeville railhead, Varennes railhead, roads at Montblainville, roads at LandrosSt. George; 
G—Roads at Avocourt, roads at Sommerance; 66 TH E CRISIS 
H—Roads at Avocourt, roads at Fleville; 
I—Construction of ammunition dump, Neuvilly, and railhead construction between 
Neuvilly and Varennes and Apremont, railroad repair work March and St. 
Juvin, construction of Verdun-Etain railroad from November 11; 
K—Railhead details and road work Aubreville, road work Varennes and Charpentry; 
M—Road and railhead work Aubreville, road work Varennes. 
The outlying companies were continually in immediate sight of the sausage balloons 
and witnessed many an air battle. Raids were frequent'. 
A concentration had been ordered at Varennes, November 18, and several companies 
had taken up their abode there or at Camp Mahout, but to carry out the salvage program, a re-distribution over the Argonne-Meuse area had to be affected immediately. 
The area assigned the 805th Pioneer Infantry extended from Boult-aux-Bois, 
almost due south to a point one kilometre west of Les Islettes; thence to Aubreville and 
Avocourt and Esnes; thence to Montfaucon via Bethincourt and Cuisy; thence north 
through Nantillois and Cunel to Bantheville; thence southwest through Romagne, 
Gesnes and Exermont to the main road just south of Fleville; and then north to Boultaux-Bois through Fleville, St. Juvin, Grand Pre and Briquenay. 
The area comprised all of the Argonne forest, from Clermont north and the 
Varennes-Malancourt-Montfaucon-Romagne sections. More than five hundred square 
miles of battlefield was included. 
A list of the articles to be salvaged would require a page. Chiefly they were Allied 
and enemy weapons and cannon, web and leather equipment, clothing and blankets, 
rolling stock, aviation electrical and engineer equipment. It was a gigantic task and 
did not near completion until the first week in March when more than 3,000 French 
carloads had been shipped. 
For some weeks truck transportation was scarce and work was slow and consisted 
largely in getting material to roadsides. 
As companies of the 805th neared the completion of their areas they were put to 
work at the railheads where they helped load the salvage they had gathered and that 
which many other organizations of the area had brought, and sent it on its way to 
designated depots. 
With the slackening of the salvage work, the regiment found a few days when it 
was possible to devote time to drilling, athletics and study. School and agricultural 
books were obtained in large numbers and each company organized classes which, though 
not compulsory, were eagerly attended by the men. 
Curtailment of this work was necessitated by instructions from Advance Section 
Headquarters to assist in every way possible the restoration of French farmlands to 
a point where they could be cultivated. 
This meant principally the filling of trenches across fields and upon this work the 
regiment entered March 15 with all its strength, except what was required for the 
functioning of the railheads not yet closed. 
There was up to this time no regimental band. 
A t Camp Funston instruments had been requisitioned, but had not arrived before 
the regiment left. Efforts were made to enlist a colored band at Kansas City whose 
members wished to enter the Army as a band and be assigned to the 805th Pioneer 
Infantry. General Wood approved and took the matter up with the Wa r Department. 
Qualified assent was obtained, but subsequent rulings prevented taking advantage of it, 
in view of the early date anticipated for an overseas move. 
The rush of events when the regiment reached Europe precluded immediate attention being given the matter and, meanwhile, general orders had been issued against 
equipping bands not in the Regular Army. 
Left to itself, without divisional connections, the regiment had to rely upon its 
own resources for diversion. The men needed music after the hard work they were 
doing and Colonel Humphrey sent his Adjutant to Paris to present the matter to the 
Y . M . C. A. , Knights of Columbus and Red Cross. 
The Red Cross was able to respond immediately and Captain Bliss returned 
January 1, 1919, with seven cornets, six clarinets, five saxophones, four slide trombones, TH E HISTORY OF TH E BLAC K MA N 67 
four alto horns, two bass tubas, two baritones and a piccolo and, also, some "jazz band 
effects." 
The band was organized on the spot and as more instruments and music were obtained, eventually reached almost its tabular strength while it reached proficiency 
almost over night. 
The following commendation of the work of the regiment was received: "The Chief 
Engineer desires to express his highest appreciation to you and to your regiment for 
the services rendered to the 1st Army in the offensive between the Meuse and the 
Argonne, starting September 26, and the continuation of that offensive on November 1 
and concluding with the Armistice of November 11. 
"The success of the operations of the Army Engineer Troops toward constructing 
and maintaining supply lines, both roads and railway, of the Army was in no small 
measure made possible by the excellent-work performed by your troops. 
"It is desired that the terms of this letter be published to all the officers and 
enlisted men of your command at the earliest opportunity." 
A soldier writes us": 
"Our regiment is composed of colored and white officers. You will find a number 
of complimentary things on the regiment's record in the Argonne in the history. We 
were, as you know, the fighting reserves of the Army and that we were right on this 
front from September to November 11. We kept the lines of communication going and, 
of course, we were raided and shelled by German long-range guns and subject to gas 
raids, too. 
"We are now located in the Ardennes, between the Argonne and the Meuse. This 
is a wild and wooly forest, I assure you. We are hoping to reach our homes in May. 
We have spent over seven months in this section of the battle-front and we are hoping 
to get started home in a few weeks after you get this letter, at least. Our regiment 
is the best advertised regiment in the A . E. F . and its members are from all over the 
United States practically. 
" A month or so ago we had a pay-day here and twenty thousand dollars was collected the first day and sent to relatives and banks in the United States. Every day 
our mail sergeant sends from one hundred to one thousand dollars per day to the United 
States for the men in our regiment,—savings of the small salary they receive as 
soldiers. As a whole they are and have learned many things by having had this great 
war experience." 
NEGR O OFFICER S 
ALL this was expected. America knows the value of Negro labor. Negroes knew 
that in this war as in every other war they would have the drudgery and the 
dirt, but with set teeth they determined that this should not be the end and limit of 
their service. They did not make the mistake of seeking to escape labor, for they knew 
that modern war is mostly ordinary toil; they even took without protest the lion's 
share of the common labor, but they insisted from the first that black men must serve 
as soldiers and officers. 
The white Negro-hating oligarchy was willing to have some Negro soldiers—the 
privilege of being shot in real war being one which they were easily persuaded to 
share—provided these black men did not get too much notoriety out of it. But against 
Negro officers they set their faces like flint. 
The dogged insistence of the Negroes, backed eventually by the unexpected decision 
of Secretary Baker, encompassed the first defeat of this oligarchy and nearly one 
thousand colored officers were commissioned. 
Immediately a persistent campaign began: 
First, was the effort to get rid of Negro officers; second, the effort to discredit 
Negro soldiers; third, the effort to spread race prejudice in France; and fourth, the 
effort to keep Negroes out of the Regular Army. 68 
Company 22, Sixth Battalion, 163rd Depot Brigade, Camp Dodge, Iowa, The Only Unit in the Depot Brigades Entirely Officered 
by Negroes. Captain C. C. Coopers, and Lieutenants T. M. Gregory, E. S. Horne, J. E. Oliver, W. B. Hall and W. C. Dickerson TH E HISTORY OF TH E BLAC K MA N 69 
First and foremost, war is war and military organization is, and must be, tyranny. 
This is, perhaps, the greatest and most barbarous cost of war and the most pressing 
reason for its abolition from civilization. As war means tyranny, the company officer 
is largely at the mercy of his superior officers. 
The company officers of the colored troops were mainly colored. The field officers 
were with very few exceptions white. The fate of the colored officers, therefore, depended almost absolutely on those placed in higher command. Moreover, American 
military trials and legal procedures are antiquated and may be grossly unfair. They 
give the accused little chance if the accuser is determined and influential. 
The success, then, of the Negro troops depended first of all on their field officers; 
given strong, devoted men of knowledge and training there was no doubt of their being 
able to weed out and train company officers and organize the best body of fighters on 
the western front. This was precisely what the Negro-haters feared. Above all, they 
feared Charles Young. 
CHARLE S YOUN G 
THER E was one man in the United States Army who by every consideration of 
justice, efficiency and long, faithful service should have been given the command of a division of colored troops. Colonel Charles Young is a graduate of West 
Point and by universal admission is one of the best officers in the Army. He has 
served in Cuba, Haiti, the Philippines, Mexico, Afric a and the West with distinction. 
Under him the Negro division would have been the most efficient in the Army. This 
rightful place was denied him. For a technical physical reason ("high blood pressure") 
he was quickly retired from the Regular Army. He was not allowed a minor command or even a chance to act as instructor during the war. 
On the contrary, the 92d and 93d Divisions of Negro troops were given 
Commanding Officers who with a half-dozen exceptions either distrusted Negroes or actively 
and persistently opposed colored officers under any circumstances. The 92d Division 
particularly was made a dumping ground for poor and inexperienced field officers seeking promotion. A considerable number of these white officers from the first spent more 
time and ingenuity in making the lot of the Negro officer hard and the chance of the 
Negro soldier limited than in preparing to whip the Germans. 
PREJUDIC E 
THES E efforts fell under various heads: giving the colored officers no instruction in 
certain lines and then claiming that none were fitted for the work, as in artillery 
and engineering; persistently picking the poorest Negro candidates instead of the best 
for examinations and tests so as to make any failure conspicuous; using court martials 
and efficiency boards for trivial offenses and wholesale removals of the Negroes; subjecting Negro officers and men to persistent insult and discrimination by refusing 
salutes, "Jim-Crowing" places of accommodation and amusement, refusing leaves, etc.; 
by failing to supply the colored troops with proper equipment and decent clothing; 
and finally by a systematic attempt to poison the minds of the French against the 
Negroes and compel them to follow the dictates of American prejudice. 
These are serious charges. The full proof of them cannot be attempted here, but 
a few examples will serve to indicate the nature of the proof. 
A t the colored Officers' Training Camp no instruction was given in artillery and 
a dead-line was established by which no one was commissioned "higher than Captain, 
despite several recommendations. Certain Captains' positions, like those of the 
Headquarters Companies, were reserved for whites, and former non-commissioned officers 
were given preference with the hope that they would be more tractable than collegebred men—a hope that usually proved delusive. 
The colored divisions were never assembled as units this side of the water. General 
Ballou, a timid, changeable white man, was put in command of the 92d Division and 
he antagonized it from the beginning. 70 TH E CRISIS 
General Ballou's attitude toward the men of his command, as expressed in his 
famous, or rather infamous, Bulletin 35, which was issued during the period of training in the United States, was manifested throughout the division during the entire 
time that he was in command in France. Whenever any occasion arose where trouble 
had occurred between white and colored soldiers, the burden of proof always rested 
on the colored man. Al l discrimination was passed unnoticed and nothing was done 
to protect the men who were under his command. Previous to General Bullard's suggestion that some order be issued encouraging the troops for the good work that they 
had done on the Vosges and Marbache fronts, there had been nothing done to encourage 
the men and officers, and it seemed that instead of trying to increase the morale of the 
division, it was General Ballou's intention to discourage the men as much as possible. 
His action in censuring officers in the presence of enlisted men was an act that tended 
toward breaking down the confidence that the men had in their officers, and he pursued 
this method on innumerable occasions. On one occasion he referred to his division, in 
talking to another officer, as the "rapist division"; he constantly cast aspersion on the 
work of the colored officer and permitted other officers to do the same in his presence, 
as is evidenced by the following incident which took place in the office of the Assistant 
Chief of Staff, G-3, at Bourbon-les-Bains: 
The staff had just been organized and several General Headquarters officers were 
at Headquarters advising relative to the organization of the different offices. These 
officers were in conversation with General Ballou, Colonel Greer, the Chief of Staff, 
Major Hickox, and Brigadier-General Hay. In the course of the conversation BrigadierGeneral Hay made the remark that "In my opinion there is no better soldier than the 
Negro, but God damn a 'nigger' officer"! This remark was made in the presence of 
General Ballou and was the occasion for much laughter. 
After the 92d Division moved from the Argonne forest to the Marbache Sector 
the 368th Infantry was held in reserve at Pompey. It was at this place that General 
Ballou ordered all of the enlisted men and officers of this unit to congregate and receive an address-
 to be delivered to them by him. No one had any idea as to the nature 
of this address; but on the afternoon designated, the men and officers assembled on 
the ground, which was used as a drill-ground, and the officers were severely censured 
relative to the operation that had taken place in the Argonne forest. The General 
advised the officers, in the presence of the enlisted men, that in his opinion they were 
cowards; that they had failed; and that "they did not have the guts" that made brave 
men. This speech was made to the officers in the presence of all of the enlisted men 
of the 368th Infantry and was an act contrary to all traditions of the Army . 
When Mr. Ralph Tyler, the accredited correspondent of the Wa r Department, 
reached the Headquarters of the 92d Division and was presented to General Ballou, 
he was received with the utmost indifference and nothing was done to enable him to 
reach the units at the front in order to gain the information which he desired. After 
Mr. Tyler was presented to General Ballou, the General walked out of the office of 
the Chief of Staff with Mr. Tyler, came into the office of the Adjutant, where all 
of the enlisted men worked, and stood directly in front of the desk of the colored 
officer, who was seated in the office of the Adjutant, and in a loud voice said to Mr. 
Tyler: "I regard the colored officer as a distinct failure. He is cowardly and has none 
of the traits which go to make a successful officer." This expression was made in the 
presence of all of the enlisted personnel and in a tone of voice loud enough for all of 
them to hear. 
General Ballou's Chief of Staff was a white Georgian and from first to last his 
malign influence was felt and he openly sought political influence to antagonize his 
own troops. 
General , Commanding Officer of the (92d Division), 
said to Major Patterson (colored), Division Judge-Advocate, that there was. a concerted action on the part of the white officers throughout France to discredit the work 
of the colored troops in France and that everything was being done to advertise those 
things that would reflect discredit upon the men and officers and to withhold anything 
that would bring to these men praise or commendation. TH E HISTORY OF TH E BLAC K MA N 71 
On the afternoon of November 8, the Distinguished Service Cross was awarded to 
Lieutenant Campbell and Private Bernard Lewis, 368th Infantry, the presentation of 
which was made with the prescribed ceremonies, taking place on a large field just outside of Villers-en-Haye and making a very impressive sight. The following morning 
a private from the 804th Pioneer Infantry was executed at Belleville, for rape. The 
official photographer attached to the 92d Division arose at 5 A . M . on the morning of 
the execution, which took place at 6 A . M. , and made a moving-picture film of the hanging of this private. Although the presentation of the Distinguished Service Crosses 
occurred at 3 P. M . on the previous day, the official photographer did not see fit to 
make a picture of this and when asked if he had made a picture of the presentation, 
he replied that he had forgotten about it. 
The campaign against Negro officers began in the cantonments. A t Camp Dix 
every effort was made to keep competent colored artillery officers from being trained. 
Most of the Colonels began a campaign for wholesale removals of Negro officers from 
the moment of embarkation. 
A t first an attempt was made to have General Headquarters in France assent 
to the blanket proposition that white and Negro officers would not get on in the same 
organization; this was unsuccessful and was followed by the charge that Negroes 
were incompetent as officers. This charge was made wholesale and before the colored 
officers had had a chance to prove themselves, "Efficiency Boards" immediately began 
wholesale removals and as such boards could act on the mere opinion of field officers 
the colored company officers began to be removed wholesale and to be replaced by whites. 
The court martials of Negro officers were often outrageous in their contravention 
of common sense and military law. The experience of one Captain will illustrate. 
He was a college man, with militia training, who secured a Captaincy at Des Moines 
—a very difficult accomplishment—and was from the first regarded as an efficient 
officer by his fellows; when he .reached Europe, however, the Major of his battalion 
was from Georgia, and this Captain was too independent to suit him. The Major 
suddenly ordered the Captain under close arrest and after long delay preferred twentythree charges against him. These he afterward reduced to seven, continuing meantime to heap restrictions and insults on the accused, but untried, officer. Instead 
of breaking arrest or resenting his treatment the Captain kept cool, hired a good 
colored lawyer in his division and put up so strong a fight that the court martial 
acquitted him and restored him to his command, and sent the Major to the stevedores. 
Not every officer was able thus to preserve his calm and poise. 
One colored officer turned and cursed his unfair superiors and the court martial, 
and revealed an astonishing story of the way in which he had been hounded. 
A Lieutenant of a Machine Gun Battalion was employed at Intelligence and 
Personnel work. He was dismissed and reinstated three times because the white officers 
who succeeded him could not do the work. Finally he was under arrest for one and 
one-half months and was dismissed from service, but General Headquarters investigated the case and restored him to his rank. 
Most of the Negro officers had no chance to fight. Some were naturally incompetent and deserved demotion or removal, but these men were not objects of attack 
as often as the more competent and independent men. 
Here, however, as so often afterward, the French stepped in, quite unconsciously, 
and upset careful plans. While the American officers were convinced of the Negro 
officers' incompetency and were besieging General Headquarters to remove them en 
masse, the French instructors at the Gondricourt Training School, where Captains 
and selected Lieutenants were sent for training, reported that the Negroes were among 
the best Americans sent there. 
Moreover, the 93d Division, which had never been assembled or even completed 
as a unit and stood unrecognized and unattached, was suddenly called in the desperate 
French need, to be brigaded with French soldiers. The Americans were thoroughly 
scared. Negroes and Negro officers were about to be introduced to French democracy 
without the watchful eye of American color hatred to guard them. Something must 
be done. 72 TH E CRISIS 
As the Negro troops began moving toward the Vosges sector of the battlefront, 
August 6, 1918, active anti-Negro propaganda became evident. From the General 
Headquarters of the American Army at Chaumont the French Military Mission suddenly sent out, not simply to the French Army, but to all the Prefects and Sous-Prefects 
of France (corresponding to our governors and mayors), data setting forth at length 
the American attitude toward Negroes; warning against social recognition; stating 
that Negroes were prone to deeds of violence and were threatening America with 
degeneration, etc. The white troops backed this propaganda by warnings and tales 
wherever they preceded the blacks. 
This misguided effort was lost on the French. In some cases peasants and villagers were scared at the approach of Negro troops, but this was but temporary and 
the colored troops everywhere they went soon became easily the best liked of all 
foreign soldiers. They were received in the best homes, and where they could speak 
French or their hosts understood English, there poured forth their story of injustice 
and wrong into deeply sympathetic ears. The impudent swagger of many white 
troops, with their openly expressed contempt for "Frogs " and their evident failure to 
understand the first principles of democracy in the most democratic of lands, finished 
the work thus begun. 
No sounding words of President Wilson can offset in the minds of thousands of 
Frenchmen the impression of disloyalty and coarseness which the attempt to force 
color prejudice made on a people who just owed their salvation to black West Africa ! 
Little was published or openly said, but when the circular on American Negro 
prejudice was brought to the attention of the French ministry, it was quietly collected 
and burned. And in a thousand delicate ways the French expressed their silent disapprobation. For instance, in a provincial town a colored officer entered a full diningroom; the smiling landlady hastened to seat him (how natural!) at a table with 
white American officers, who immediately began to show their displeasure. A French 
officer at a neighboring table with French officers quietly glanced at the astonished 
landlady. Not a word was said, no one in the dining-room took any apparent notice, 
but the black officer was soon seated with the courteous Frenchmen. 
On the Negroes this double experience of deliberate and devilish persecution from 
their own countrymen, coupled with a taste of real democracy and world-old culture, 
was revolutionizing. They began to hate prejudice and discrimination as they had 
never hated it before. They began to realize its eternal meaning and complications. 
Fa r from filling them with a desire to escape from their race and country, they were 
filled with a bitter, dogged determination never to give up the fight for Negro equality 
in America. If American color prejudice counted on this war experience to break the 
spirit of the young Negro, it counted without its host. A new, radical Negro spirit 
has been born in France, which leaves us older radicals far behind. Thousands of 
young black men have offered their lives for the Lilies of France and they return 
ready to offer them again for the Sun-flowers of • Afro-America, 
TH E 93RD DIVISIO N 
THE first American Negroes to arrive in France were the Labor Battalions, comprising all told some 150,000 men. 
The Negro fighting units were the 92nd and 93rd Divisions. 
The so-called 93rd Division was from the first a thorn in the flesh of the Bourbons. 
It consisted of Negro National Guard troops almost exclusively officered by Negroes, 
the 8th Illinois, the 15th New York, and units from the District of Columbia, Maryland, 
Ohio, Tennessee and Massachusetts. The division was thus incomplete and never really 
functioned as a division. For a time it was hoped that Colonel Young might be 
given his chance here, but nothing came of this. Early in Apri l when the need of 
the French for re-enforcements was sorest, these black troops were hurriedly transported to France and, were soon brigaded with the French armies, TH E HISTORY OF TH E BLAC K MA N 73 
TH E 369T H 
THI S regimen t wa s originall y authorize d b y Governo r Sulzer , bu t its formation ' 
wa s lon g prevented . Finall y i t wa s organize d wit h bu t on e Negr o officer. 
Eventuall y th e regimen t saile d wit h colore d an d whit e officers, landin g i n France , 
Januar y 1, 1918 , an d wen t int o th e secon d battl e o f th e Marn e i n July , east o f Verdun , 
nea r Ville-sur-Turbe . I t wa s thu s th e first America n Negr o uni t i n battl e an d on e 
o f th e first America n units. Colore d officers too k par t i n this battl e an d som e wer e 
cite d fo r bravery . Nevertheles s th e whit e Colonel , Hayward , afte r th e battl e secure d 
th e transfe r o f ever y singl e colore d officer, excep t th e bandmaste r an d chaplain . 
Th e regimen t wa s i n a stat e o f irritatio n man y times, bu t i t wa s restraine d b y 
th e influenc e o f th e non-commissione d officers—ver y stron g i n this cas e becaus e th e 
regimen t wa s al l fro m Ne w Yor k an d mainl y fro m Harlem—an d especiall y becaus e 
bein g brigade d wit h th e Frenc h the y wer e fro m th e first treate d o n suc h term s o f 
equalit y an d brotherhoo d tha t the y wer e eage r t o fight. Ther e wer e charge s tha t 
Colone l Haywar d an d his whit e officers needlessl y sacrifice d th e live s o f thes e men . 
This , o f course , is har d t o prove ; bu t 
certainl y th e casualtie s i n this regimen t 
wer e heav y an d i n th e grea t attac k i n 
the Champagne, in September and 
October, two hundred were killed and 
eigh t hundre d wer e wounde d an d 
gassed . Th e regimen t wen t int o battl e 
wit h th e Frenc h o n th e lef t an d th e 
Morrocan s o n th e righ t an d go t int o 
its ow n barrag e b y advancin g faste r 
tha n th e othe r units. I t wa s i n lin e 
seve n an d one-hal f days, whe n thre e t o 
fou r day s is usuall y th e limit . 
I n all , th e regimen t wa s unde r fire 
19 1 days— a recor d fo r an y America n 
unit . I t receive d ove r 17 0 citation s fo r 
th e Croix de Guerre an d Distinguishe d 
Servic e Cros s an d wa s th e first uni t o f 
th e Allie d armie s t o reac h th e Rhine , 
Novembe r 18 , wit h th e Secon d Frenc h 
Army . 
TH E 371S T AN D 372N D 
THE 371st Regimen t wa s drafte d 
fro m Sout h Carolin a an d ha d 
souther n whit e officers fro m th e first, 
man y o f who m wer e arrogan t an d over ­
bearing . Th e regimen t mobilize d a t 
Cam p Jackson , Octobe r 5-17 , an d 
embarke d fo r France , Apri l 9, fro m 
Newpor t News , Va . I t wa s traine d a t Rembercourt-aux-Port s (Meuse ) an d left fo r 
th e regio n nea r Bar-le-Duc , Jun e 5. Th e troop s arrive d i n th e Argonn e Jun e 22 . 
The y wer e brigade d wit h th e 157t h Frenc h Division , 13t h Arm y Corps , an d remaine d 
i n th e battle-line , fron t an d reserve , unti l th e Armistic e wa s signed . 
Ther e ar e fe w dat a a t presen t availabl e fo r th e histor y o f this regimen t becaus e 
ther e wer e n o colore d officers t o preserv e it . I t is rumored , however , tha t afte r th e 
first battl e th e numbe r o f casualtie s amon g th e meanest o f thei r officers le d t o som e 
mutua l understandings . Th e regimen t receive d a numbe r o f citation s fo r bravery . 
A s this regimen t wa s brigade d usuall y wit h th e 372nd , a par t o f its histor y follows : 
Th e officia l record s sho w tha t th e 372n d Infantr y wa s organize d a t Cam p Stuart , 
SERGEAN T E. W. BARRINGTINE, 369th V. S. 
I., WIT H FRENC H MEDAILLE MILITAIRE AND 
CROIX DE GUERRE. 74 TH E CRISIS 
Januar y 1, 1918 , Colone l Glendi e B . Young , Infantry , U . S. N . G. , commanding , an d 
include d th e followin g Nationa l Guar d units : Firs t Separat e Battalion , Distric t o f 
Columbia, Infantry; Ninth Battalion of Ohio, Infantry; Company L, Sixth 
Massachusetts, Infantry; and one company each from Maryland, Tennessee and Connecticut. 
T o thes e wer e adde d late r 25 0 me n fro m Cam p Custer ; exceptin g th e Staff , Machin e 
Gun , Headquarter s an d Suppl y Companies , th e regimen t wa s officere d b y colore d men . 
Th e regimen t wa s brigade d wit h th e 371st int o th e 186t h Infantr y Brigade , a 
uni t o f th e Provisiona l 93r d Division . I t wa s understoo d tha t th e 93r d Division , 
whic h wa s t o b e compose d o f al l Negr o troops, woul d b e full y organize d i n France ; 
bu t whe n th e 372n d arrive d a t St . Nazaire , Apri l 14 , 1918 , th e organizatio n wa s place d 
unde r comman d o f th e French . Fou r week s late r th e brigad e wa s dissolve d an d th e 
93r d Divisio n cease d t o b e mentioned . Its fou r regiment s wer e al l subjec t t o orders 
o f th e Frenc h G . Q . G. , Genera l Petain , commanding . 
Th e regimen t spen t five week s i n trainin g an d re-organizatio n a t Conde-en-Barroi s 
(Meuse) , a s a uni t o f th e 13t h Frenc h Arm y Corps . Th e me n wer e traine d i n 
Frenc h method s b y Frenc h officers an d non-commissione d officers wit h Frenc h ord ­
nanc e equipment . The y develope d so rapidl y tha t a Frenc h Majo r exclaime d en ­
thusiasticall y o n th e street : "Thes e me n ar e intelligen t an d alert . Thei r regimen t wil l 
hav e a gloriou s career. " Thus , fro m th e beginnin g th e wort h o f ou r troop s wa s recog ­
nize d b y a vetera n o f th e Frenc h Army . 
T o complet e its trainin g unde r actua l wa r conditions, th e regimen t wa s sen t to 
a "quie t sector"—sub-sector , Argonn e West , o n Jun e 8, wher e i t spen t twent y day s 
learnin g th e organizatio n o f defensiv e position s an d ho w t o hol d thes e position s unde r 
shel l fire fro m th e enemy . Durin g this tim e i t wa s a par t o f th e 63r d Frenc h Di ­
visio n an d durin g th e las t te n day s i t wa s a par t o f th e 35t h Frenc h Division . . O n 
Jul y 2 , th e 372n d Infantr y becam e permanentl y identifie d wit h th e 157t h Frenc h 
Division , commande d b y Genera l Goybet . Th e divisio n consiste d o f tw o colore d Amer ­
ica n regiment s an d on e Frenc h regimen t o f infantry . Th e artiller y units , engineers, 
sanitar y train , etc. , wer e al l French . O n his first inspectio n tour , a t Vanquois , Genera l 
Goybe t aske d on e o f ou r me n i f h e though t th e German s coul d pass i f the y starte d 
over . Th e littl e brow n privat e replied : "No t i f th e boche s can' t d o a goo d jo b i n 
killin g al l o f us. " Tha t please d th e ne w Genera l ver y muc h an d clinche d hi s confidenc e 
i n th e blac k troops. 
O n Jul y 13 th e regimen t retire d t o a reserv e positio n nea r th e villag e o f Lochere s 
(Meuse) , fo r temporar y rest an d t o hel p sustai n th e comin g blow . Th e nex t da y 
Colone l Youn g wa s relieve d o f comman d b y Colone l Hersche l Tupes , a regula r arm y 
officer. I n th e afternoo n th e regimen t wa s assemble d an d prepare d fo r action , bu t i t 
late r wa s foun d tha t i t woul d no t b e needed . Th e attac k o f th e German s wa s 
launche d nea r Rheim s o n th e nigh t o f Jul y 14 an d th e nex t evenin g th e worl d rea d 
o f th e decisiv e defea t o f th e German s b y Genera l Gourand' s army . 
Th e followin g Sunda y foun d th e regimen t billete d i n th e tow n o f Sivry-la-Perche , 
no t ver y fa r fro m Verdun . Afte r a ban d concer t i n th e afternoo n Colone l Tupe s 
introduce d himsel f t o his command . I n th e cours e o f his remarks , h e sai d tha t h e 
ha d alway s commande d regulars , bu t h e ha d littl e doub t tha t th e 372n d Infantr y 
coul d becom e a s goo d a s an y regimen t i n France . 
O n Jul y 26 th e regimen t occupie d sub-secto r 304 . Th e occupatio n o f thi s sub -
secto r wa s marke d b y har d wor k an d discontentment . Th e whol e positio n ha d t o b e 
re-organized , an d i n doin g this th e me n maintaine d thei r previou s reputatio n fo r goo d 
work . Th e tota l sta y i n th e secto r wa s seve n weeks. Th e regimen t too k par t i n tw o 
raid s an d severa l individual s distinguishe d themselves : on e ma n receive d a Croix de 
Guerre becaus e h e hel d his trenc h morta r betwee n hi s leg s t o continu e firin g whe n 
th e bas e ha d bee n damage d b y a shell ; anothe r carrie d a wounde d Frenc h comrad e 
fro m "N o Man' s Land " unde r heav y fire, an d wa s als o decorated . Severa l day s afte r 
a raid , th e German s wer e retaliatin g b y shellin g th e demolishe d villag e o f Montzeville , 
situate d i n th e valle y belo w th e Post-of-Comman d an d occupie d b y som e o f th e reserves ; 
Privat e Rufu s Pinckne y rushe d throug h th e heav y fir e an d rescue d a wounde d Frenc h 
soldier . TH E 75 HISTORY C F TH E BLAC K MA N 
O n anothe r occasion , Privat e Kennet h Lewi s o f th e Medica l Detachment , late r 
kille d a t his post , displaye d suc h fine qualitie s o f coolness an d disdai n fo r dange r b y 
stickin g t o dut y unti l th e en d tha t tw o post-morte m decorations : th e Croix de Guerre 
wit h Pal m an d Medaille Militaire wer e awarded . Th e latte r is a ver y distinguishe d 
recognitio n i n th e Frenc h Army . 
S o wel l ha d th e regimen t worke d i n th e Argonn e tha t i t wa s sen t t o reliev e th e 
123r d Frenc h Infantr y Regimen t i n th e sub-secto r Vanquois , o n Jul y 28 . A n attac k b y 
th e German s i n th e valle y o f th e Aire , o f whic h Vanquoi s wa s a key , wa s expecte d a t 
an y moment . Ne w defense s wer e t o be constructe d an d ol d one s strengthened . Th e me n 
applie d themselve s wit h a courageou s devotion , nigh t an d day , to thei r task s an d afte r 
tw o week s o f watchfu l workin g unde r fire, Vanquoi s becam e a formidabl e defensiv e 
system . 
Beside s th e gallantr y o f Privat e Pinckney , Montzevill e mus t b e remembere d i n 
connectio n wit h th e remova l o f colore d officers fro m th e regiment . I t wa s ther e tha t 
a boar d o f officers (al l white ) requeste d b y Colone l Youn g an d appointe d b y Colone l 
Tupes , sa t o n th e case s o f twenty-on e colore d officers charge d wit h inefficiency . Onl y 
on e ou t o f tha t numbe r wa s acquitted : h e wa s late r kille d i n action . Th e charge s o f 
inefficienc y wer e base d o n physica l disability , insufficien t training , unsuitability . Th e 
othe r colore d officers wh o ha d bee n remove d wer e eithe r transferre d t o othe r unit s o r 
sen t t o re-classificatio n depots. 
Th e Colone l tol d th e Commandin g Genera l throug h a n interpreter : "Th e colore d 
officers i n this regimen t kno w a s muc h abou t thei r dutie s a s a child. " Th e Genera l 
wa s surprise d an d whispere d t o anothe r Frenc h office r tha t th e Colone l himsel f wa s 
no t so brillian t an d tha t h e believe d i t wa s prejudic e tha t cause d th e Colone l t o mak e 
suc h a change . A fe w moment s after , th e Colone l tol d th e Genera l tha t h e ha d re ­
queste d tha t n o mor e colore d officers b e sen t t o th e regiment . I n repl y t o this th e Genera l 
explaine d ho w unwis e i t wa s because , th e colore d officers ha d bee n traine d alon g wit h 
thei r me n a t a grea t expenditur e o f tim e an d mone y b y th e America n an d Frenc h 
governments ; and , also , h e doubte d i f well-qualifie d whit e officers coul d b e spare d 
hi m fro m othe r America n units. Th e Genera l insiste d tha t th e tim e wa s a t han d 
fo r th e grea t autum n driv e an d tha t i t woul d b e a hindranc e becaus e h e feare d th e 
me n woul d no t b e please d wit h th e change . Th e Colone l heede d no t his Genera l an d 
forwarde d tw o requests fo r a n anti-colored-office r regiment . H e wen t so fa r a s to tel l 
th e Lieutenant-Colone l tha t h e believe d th e regimen t shoul d hav e whit e me n fo r 
non-commissione d officers. O f course , th e me n woul d no t hav e stoo d fo r this a t an y 
price . Th e Colone l ofte n woul d tel l th e Adjutan t t o neve r trus t a "damne d blac k 
clerk " an d tha t h e considere d "on e whit e ma n wort h a millio n Negroes. " 
Abou t Septembe r 8 th e regimen t wa s relieve d b y th e 129t h Unite d State s Infantr y 
an d wa s sen t t o th e rea r fo r a perio d o f rest . Twenty-fou r hours afte r arriva l i n th e 
rest area , orders wer e receive d t o procee d farther . Th e nightl y marche s began . Th e 
regimen t marche d fro m plac e t o plac e i n th e Aube , th e Marn e an d th e Haut e Marn e 
unti l i t wen t int o th e grea t Champagn e battl e o n Septembe r 27 . 
Fo r nin e day s i t helpe d pus h th e Hu n towar d th e Belgia n frontier . Thos e day s 
wer e hard , bu t thes e me n di d thei r dut y an d cam e ou t wit h glory . Fortunately , al l 
th e colore d officers ha d no t lef t th e regimen t an d i t wa s the y an d th e brav e sergeants 
wh o le d th e me n t o victor y an d fame . Th e ne w whit e officers ha d jus t arrived , some 
o f the m th e nigh t befor e th e regimen t wen t int o battle , severa l o f who m ha d neve r 
bee n unde r fir e i n an y capacity , havin g jus t com e ou t o f th e trainin g schoo l a t Langres . 
Nevertheless , th e regimen t wa s cite d b y th e Frenc h an d th e regimenta l colors wer e 
decorate d b y Vice-Admira l Morea u a t Brest , Januar y 24, 1919 . 
Afte r th e relie f o n th e battlefield , th e regimen t reache d Somm e Bionn e (Marne ) 
Octobe r 8. Congratulation s cam e i n fro m everywher e excep t America n Headquarters . 
Afte r a brie f rest o f thre e day s th e regimen t wa s sen t t o a quie t secto r i n th e Vosges , 
o n th e frontie r o f Alsace . Th e Colone l finally dispose d o f th e remainin g colore d 
officers, excep t th e tw o dentists an d th e tw o chaplains . Al l th e officers -wer e instructe d 
t o carr y thei r arm s a t al l time s an d virtuall y t o shoo t an y soldie r o n th e least provoca ­76 TH E CRISIS 
tion. As a consequence, a corporal of Company L was shot and killed by First 
Lieutenant James B. Coggins, from North Carolina, for a reason that no one has ever 
bee n abl e t o explain . Th e signin g o f th e Armistic e an d th e cessatio n o f hostilities , 
perhaps , prevente d a general , arme d oppositio n t o a syste m o f prejudic e encourage d 
b y th e Commandin g Office r o f th e Regiment . 
Despit e th e prejudic e o f officers towar d th e men , th e regimen t marche d fro m 
Ban-de-Lavelin e t o Grange s o f Vologne , a distanc e o f forty-fiv e kilometers , i n on e 
da y an d maintaine d suc h remarkabl e disciplin e tha t th e officers themselve s wer e com ­
pelle d t o accor d the m praise . 
While stationed »t Granges, individuals in the regiment were decorated on 
December 17 for various deeds of gallantry in the Champagne battle. General Goybet 
presente d fou r militar y medal s an d seventy-tw o Croix de Guerre t o enliste d men . 
Colone l Tupe s presente d fou r Distinguishe d Servic e Crosse s t o enliste d men . A t th e 
time , th e regimen t ha d jus t bee n returne d t o th e America n command , th e followin g 
orde r wa s read : 
157t h Divisio n Hqrs . Decembe r 15th , 1918 . 
Staff. 
General Order No. 246 . 
O n th e dat e o f th e 12t h o f December , 1918 , th e 371st an d th e 372n d R . I. , U . S. 
hav e bee n returne d t o th e disposa l o f th e America n Command . I t is no t withou t 
profoun d emotio n tha t I com e i n th e nam e o f th e 157t h (French ) Divisio n an d i n m y 
persona l name , t o sa y good-by e t o ou r valian t comrade s o f combat . 
Fo r seve n month s w e hav e live d a s brother s o f arms , sharin g th e sam e works , 
th e sam e hardships , th e sam e dangers ; sid e b y sid e w e hav e take n par t i n th e grea t 
battl e o f th e Champagne , tha t a wonderfu l victor y ha s ended . 
Th e 157t h (French ) Divisio n wil l neve r forge t th e wonderfu l impetu s irresistible , 
th e rus h heroi c o f th e colore d America n regiment s o n th e "Observatorie s Crest " an d 
i n th e Plai n o f Menthois . Th e mos t formidabl e defense , th e nests o f machin e guns , 
th e best organize d positions, th e artiller y barrage s mos t crushing , coul d no t sto p them . 
Thes e best regiment s hav e gon e throug h al l wit h disdai n o f deat h an d thank s t o thei r 
courag e devotedness, th e "Re d Hand " Divisio n ha s durin g nin e har d day s o f battl e 
bee n ahea d i n th e victoriou s advanc e o f th e Fourt h (French ) Army . 
Officers and non-commissioned officers and privates of the 371st and 372nd 
Regiments Infantry, U. S., I respectfully salute your glorious dead and I bow down before 
you r standards , whic h b y th e sid e o f th e 333r d R . I. , le d u s t o victory . 
Dea r Friend s fro m America , whe n yo u hav e crosse d bac k ove r th e ocean , don' t 
forge t th e "Re d Hand " Division . Ou r fraternit y o f arm s ha s bee n soake d i n th e bloo d 
o f th e brave . Thos e bond s wil l b e indestructible . 
Kee p a faithfu l remembranc e t o you r General , so prou d t o hav e commande d you , 
an d remembe r tha t his thankfu l affectio n is gaine d t o yo u forever . 
(Signed ) Genera l Goybet , Commandin g th e 157t h (French ) Division , Infantry . 
Colone l Tupes , i n addressin g th e regiment , congratulate d the m o n th e achieve ­
ment s an d expresse d his satisfactio n wit h thei r conduct . H e aske d th e me n t o tak e 
a jus t prid e i n thei r accomplishment s an d thei r spiri t o f loyalty . 
Ca n this b e surpasse d fo r eccentricity ? 
Th e seve n week s a t Grange s wer e pleasan t an d profitabl e socially . Lecture s wer e 
give n t o th e me n b y Frenc h officers, outdoo r recreatio n wa s provide d an d th e civilia n 
populatio n opene d thei r hearts an d thei r home s t o th e Negr o heroes. Lik e previou s 
attempts, th e efforts o f th e whit e officers t o preven t th e minglin g o f Negroe s wit h th e 
Frenc h girl s o f th e villag e wer e futile . Ever y ma n wa s take n o n his merits . Th e 
mayo r o f Grange s gav e th e regimen t a n enthusiasti c farewell . 
O n Januar y 1, 1919 , th e regimen t entraine d fo r L e Man s (Sarthe) . Afte r com ­
plyin g wit h th e red-tap e preparator y t o embarkatio n an d th e delousin g process i t wen t 
t o Brest , arrivin g ther e Januar y 13 , 1919 . TH E HISTORY OF TH E BLAC K MA N 77 
TH E 370T H 
UP t o this poin t th e anti-Negr o propagand a is clea r an d fairl y consisten t an d un ­
opposed . Genera l Headquarter s ha d no t onl y witnesse d instruction s i n Negr o 
prejudic e t o th e French , bu t had , also , consente d t o wholesal e removal s o f officers 
amon g th e engineers an d infantry , o n th e mai n groun d o f color . Eve n th e French , 
i n a t least on e case , ha d bee n persuade d tha t Negr o officers wer e th e caus e o f certai n 
inefficiencie s i n Negr o units. 
Undoubtedl y th e crue l losse s o f th e 369t h Regimen t wer e du e i n par t t o th e assumptio n o f th e Frenc h a t first tha t th e America n Negroe s wer e lik e th e Senegalese ; 
thes e half-civilize d troop s coul d no t i n th e tim e give n the m b e traine d i n moder n machin e 
warfare , an d the y wer e rushe d a t th e enem y almos t wit h nake d hands. Th e resultin g 
slaughte r wa s horrible . Ou r troop s tel l o f grea t blac k field s o f star k an d crimso n dea d 
afte r som e o f thes e superhuma n onrushes. 
I t wa s thi s kin d o f fightin g tha t th e Frenc h expecte d o f th e blac k American s a t 
first an d som e whit e America n officers di d no t greatl y car e so lon g a s whit e me n go t 
th e glory . Th e Frenc h easil y misunderstoo d th e situatio n a t first an d assume d tha t 
th e Negr o officers wer e t o blame , especiall y a s this wa s continuall y suggeste d t o the m 
b y th e Americans . 
I t wa s anothe r story , however , whe n th e 370t h Regimen t came . Thi s wa s th e 
famous-8t h Illinois , an d i t ha d a ful l quot a o f Negr o officers, fro m Colone l down . I t 
ha d see n servic e o n th e Mexica n Border ; i t wen t t o Houston , Tex. , afte r th e Thirtee n 
ha d die d fo r Freedom ; an d i t wa s treate d wit h wholesom e respect . I t wa s sen t t o 
Newpor t News , Va. , fo r embarkation ; onc e Colone l Denniso n refuse d t o embar k his 
troop s an d marche d the m bac k t o cam p becaus e h e learne d the y wer e t o b e "Jim -
Crowed " o n th e wa y over . 
Th e regimen t arrive d a t Brest , Apri l 22 , an d wa s assigne d t o th e 72n d Frenc h 
Division , remainin g nea r Belfor t unti l Jun e 17 . The n i t wen t wit h th e 34t h Frenc h 
THE COLONEL AND OFFICERS OF TH E 370th U. S. I. WIT H CAPTAIN BOUTTE AND DR. DU BOIS IN CAMP AT L E MANS, FRANCE. 7 8 TH E CRISIS 
Divisio n int o th e front-line , a t St . Mihiel , fo r a mont h an d late r wit h th e 36t h Frenc h 
Divisio n int o th e Argonne , wher e the y fought . The y wer e give n a shor t perio d o f rest 
an d the n the y wen t int o th e front-line , a t Soissons, wit h th e 59t h Frenc h Division . 
I n Septembe r an d Octobe r the y wer e fightin g again . 
O n Septembe r 15 , i n th e Vauxaillio n area , the y capture d Mt . Dessinge s an d th e 
adjacen t wood s afte r sever e fighting . The y hel d a secto r alon e afterwar d o n th e Cana l 
L'Ois e e t Aisn e an d whe n attacked , repulse d th e German s an d move d forward , gainin g 
th e prais e o f th e Frenc h General . O n Octobe r 24 , th e regimen t wen t int o th e front ­
lin e again , nea r Gran d Lup , an d performe d excellen t service ; th e Armistic e foun d par t 
o f th e regimen t across th e Belgia n frontier . 
Th e genera l conduc t o f th e regimen t wa s excellent . N o cas e o f rap e wa s reporte d 
an d onl y on e murder . Th e regimen t receive d sixtee n Distinguishe d Servic e Crosse s 
an d seventy-fiv e Croix de Guerre, besid e compan y citations. 
Whe n a t first th e regimen t di d no t adop t th e tactic s o f "shock " troops, th e whit e 
American s agai n too k thei r cu e an d inspire d a speec h fro m th e Frenc h General , whic h 
th e colore d me n coul d no t understand . I t wa s no t long , however , befor e th e Frenc h 
Genera l publicl y apologize d fo r his first an d hast y criticis m an d afterwar d h e repeatedl y 
commende d bot h officers an d me n fo r thei r bravery , intelligenc e an d daring . Thi s 
regimen t receive d mor e citation s tha n an y othe r America n regimen t fo r braver y o n 
th e field o f battle . Ther e was , o f course , th e fly i n th e ointment,—th e effort t o sub ­
stitut e whit e officers wa s stron g an d continuous, notwithstandin g th e fac t tha t man y 
o f th e blac k officers o f this regimen t wer e amon g th e mos t efficien t i n th e America n 
Army . 
Genera l Headquarter s b y this tim e had begu n t o chang e its attitud e an d cur b 
th e Bourbons . I t announce d tha t i t wa s no t th e polic y o f th e America n Arm y t o 
mak e wholesal e removal s simpl y o n accoun t o f colo r an d i t allowe d th e citation s fo r 
braver y o f Negr o troop s t o b e approved . 
Nevertheless , th e pressur e continued . Firs t th e colore d Colonel , th e rankin g 
Negr o office r i n France , wa s sen t home . Th e reaso n fo r this is no t clear . A t an y 
rat e Colone l Denniso n wa s replace d b y a whit e Colonel , wh o afterwar d accepte d a 
Croix de Guerre fo r a n exploi t whic h th e Negr o officers t o a ma n declar e wa s actuall y 
performe d b y a Negr o office r whil e h e wa s sittin g snugl y i n his tent . Th e me n o f 
th e regimen t openl y jeere d him , cryin g out : "Blu e Eye s ain' t ou r Colonel ; Duncan' s 
ou r Colonel! " referrin g t o th e colore d Lieutenant-Colonel . Bu t th e whit e Colone l wa s 
diplomatic ; h e le t th e colore d officers ru n th e regiment , pose d a s th e "Moses " o f th e 
colore d rac e (t o th e ope n amusemen t o f th e Negroes ) an d quietl y trie d t o induc t 
whit e officers. " I canno t understan d wh y the y sen t this whit e Lieutenant, " h e sai d 
plaintivel y t o a colore d officer. Th e office r a t tha t momen t ha d i n his pocke t a cop y 
o f th e Colonel's telegra m askin g Genera l Headquarter s fo r whit e officers. Bu t th e 
Armistic e cam e befor e th e Colone l succeede d i n gettin g bu t tw o whit e officers,—his 
brothe r a s Majo r (withou t a battalion ) an d on e Lieutenant . 
Th e organizatio n tha t ranke d al l Americ a i n distinctio n remained , therefore , a 
Negr o organization , fo r th e whit e Colone l wa s onl y "commanding " an d Denniso n 
wa s stil l titula r head . 
TH E 92N D DIVISIO N 
SO muc h fo r th e 93r d Division . Its troop s fough t magnificentl y in the Champagne, 
th e Argonn e an d elsewher e an d wer e give n unstinte d prais e b y th e French and 
eve n commendatio n b y th e Americans . The y fough t well , too , despit e th e colo r o f their 
officers—371st Regimen t under , white , th e 369t h an d 372n d Regiment s under white 
an d colored , an d th e 370t h Regimen t unde r colored wer e equall y brave , except that 
th e 370t h Regimen t mad e th e mos t conspicuou s record . 
On e migh t conclud e unde r ordinar y circumstance s tha t i t wa s a matte r of efficienc y i n officers an d no t o f race , but , unfortunately , th e efficien t colored officer had 
almos t n o chanc e eve n t o tr y excep t i n th e 370t h Regimen t an d i n th e Champagne 
battl e wit h th e 372n d Regiment . Wit h a fai r chanc e ther e is no doub t that he could TH E HISTORY OF TH E BLAC K MA N 79 
hav e le d ever y on e o f thes e regiment s jus t a s wel l a s th e whit e officers. I t must , too , 
b e remembere d tha t al l th e non -commissione d officers i n al l thes e regiment s wer e 
Negroes . 
Th e stor m cente r o f th e Negr o troop s wa s th e 92n d Division . Th e brigadin g o f 
th e 93r d Divisio n wit h th e Frenc h mad e wholesal e attac k an d depreciatio n difficult , 
sinc e i t wa s continuall y annulle d b y th e generou s appreciatio n o f th e French . Th e 
92n d Division , however , wa s planne d a s a complet e Negr o division , manne d b y Negr o 
compan y officers. Everythin g depended , then , o n th e Genera l an d field officers a s t o 
ho w fai r this experimen t shoul d be . 
Fro m th e ver y first ther e wa s ope n an d cover t oppositio n an d trouble . Instea d o f 
putting . Colone l Youn g a t th e head , th e whit e Genera l Ballou , wa s chose n an d sur ­
rounde d b y souther n whit e officers wh o despise d "nigger " officers. 
Genera l Ballo u himsel f wa s well-meaning , bu t weak , vacillating , withou t grea t 
abilit y an d afrai d o f souther n criticism . H e wa s morbidl y impresse d b y th e horro r 
o f thi s "experiment " an d proceede d fro m th e first t o kil l th e moral e o f his troop s b y 
orders an d speeches. H e sough t t o mak e his Negr o officers fee l persona l responsibilit y 
fo r th e Housto n outbreak ; h e trie d t o accus e the m indirectl y o f Germa n propaganda ; 
h e virtuall y ordere d the m t o submi t t o certai n persona l humiliation s an d discrim ­
ination s withou t protest . Thus , befor e th e 92n d Divisio n wa s full y formed , Genera l 
Ballo u ha d sprea d hatre d an d distrus t amon g his officers an d men . "Tha t ol d Ballo u 
stuff! " becam e a by -wor d i n th e divisio n fo r anti-Negr o propaganda . Ballo u wa s finall y 
dismisse d fro m his comman d fo r "tactica l inefficiency. " 
Th e mai n difficulty , however , la y i n a curiou s misapprehensio n i n whit e me n o f 
th e meanin g an d metho d o f rac e contac t i n America . The y sough t desperatel y t o 
reproduc e i n th e Negr o divisio n an d i n Franc e th e racia l restriction s o f America , o n 
th e theor y tha t an y ne w freedo m woul d "spoil " th e blacks . Bu t the y di d no t under ­
stan d th e fac t tha t me n o f th e type s wh o becam e Negr o officers protec t themselve s 
fro m continuou s insul t an d discriminatio n b y makin g an d movin g i n a worl d o f thei r 
own ; the y associat e sociall y wher e the y ar e mor e tha n welcome ; the y liv e fo r th e mos t 
par t besid e neighbor s wh o lik e them ; the y atten d schools wher e the y ar e no t insulted ; 
an d the y wor k wher e thei r wor k is appreciated . O f course , ever y onc e i n a whil e the y 
hav e t o unit e t o resen t encroachment s upo n thei r world — ne w discrimination s i n la w 
an d custom ; bu t this is occasiona l an d no t continuous. 
Th e worl d whic h Genera l Ballo u an d his field officers trie d t o re-creat e fo r Negr o 
officers wa s a worl d o f continuou s dail y insul t an d discriminatio n t o a n exten t tha t 
non e ha d eve r experienced , an d the y di d this i n a countr y wher e th e discriminatio n 
wa s artificia l an d entirel y unnecessary , arousin g th e livelies t astonishmen t an d mys ­
tification . 
Fo r instance , whe n th e Headquarter s Compan y o f th e 92n d Divisio n saile d fo r 
Brest , elaborat e quarter s i n th e best hote l wer e reserve d fo r whit e officers, an d un ­
finishe d barracks , withou t bed s an d i n th e col d an d mud , wer e assigne d Negr o officers. 
Th e colore d officers wen t t o thei r quarter s an d the n returne d t o th e city . The y foun d 
tha t th e whit e Americans , unabl e t o mak e themselve s understoo d i n French , ha d no t 
bee n give n thei r reservation , bu t ha d gon e t o anothe r an d poore r hotel . Th e blac k 
officers immediatel y explaine d an d too k th e fine reservations. 
A s n o Negroe s ha d bee n traine d i n artillery , i t wa s claime d immediatel y tha t non e 
wer e competent . Nevertheless , som e wer e finally foun d t o qualify . The n i t wa s claime d 
tha t technicall y traine d private s wer e impossibl e t o find. Ther e wer e plent y to b e 
ha d i f the y coul d b e gathere d fro m th e variou s camps. Permissio n t o d o this wa s 
lon g refused , bu t afte r endless othe r delay s an d troubles, th e Fiel d Artiller y finall y 
cam e int o bein g wit h a fe w colore d officers. Befor e th e artiller y wa s ready , th e 
divisio n mobilize d a t Cam p Upton , betwee n Ma y 2 8 an d Jun e 4, an d wa s embarke d 
b y th e tent h o f Jun e fo r France . 
Th e entir e 92n d Divisio n arrive d a t Bres t b y Jun e 20 . A wee k late r th e whol e 
divisio n wen t t o Bourbonne-les-Bains , wher e i t staye d i n trainin g unti l Augus t 6. 
Her e a determine d effort a t wholesal e replacemen t o f th e colore d officers too k plac e 80 TH E CRISIS 
Fift y whit e Lieutenant s wer e sen t t o th e cam p t o replac e Negr o officers. "Efficiency " 
board s bega n t o wee d ou t colore d men . 
Withou t doub t ther e wa s amon g colore d a s amon g whit e America n officers muc h 
inefficiency , du e t o lac k o f adaptability , trainin g an d th e hurr y o f preparation . Bu t 
i n th e cas e o f th e Negr o officers repeatedl y th e rac e questio n cam e t o th e for e an d 
permissio n wa s aske d t o remov e the m becaus e the y wer e colored , whil e th e inefficienc y 
charg e wa s a wholesal e on e agains t thei r "rac e an d nature. " 
Genera l Headquarter s b y this time , however , ha d settle d dow n t o a polic y o f 
requirin g individual , rathe r tha n wholesale , accusation , an d whil e this mad e a dif ­
ference , ye t i n th e arm y n o office r ca n hol d his positio n lon g i f his superior s fo r an y 
reaso n wis h t o ge t ri d o f him . While , then , man y o f th e waitin g whit e Lieutenant s 
wen t away , th e colore d officers bega n t o be systematicall y reduce d i n number . ' 
O n Augus t 6 th e divisio n entere d th e front-lin e trenche s i n th e Vosge s secto r 
an d staye d her e unti l Septembe r 20 . I t wa s a quie t sector, wit h onl y a n occasiona l 
Germa n rai d to repel . Abou t Septembe r 20 , th e divisio n bega n t o mov e t o th e Argonne , 
wher e th e grea t America n driv e t o cu t off th e German s wa s t o tak e place . Th e col ­
ore d troop s wer e no t t o ente r th e front-lines , a s Genera l Pershin g himsel f afterwar d 
said , a s the y wer e entirel y unequippe d fo r front-lin e service . Nevertheless , th e 368t h 
Regiment , whic h arrive d i n th e Argonn e Septembe r 24 , wa s suddenl y sen t int o battl e 
o n th e front-lin e o n th e mornin g o f Septembe r 26 . A s thi s is a typica l instanc e o f th e 
difficultie s o f Negr o officers an d troops, i t deserve s recita l i n detail . 
I t is th e stor y o f th e failur e o f whit e field officers t o d o thei r dut y an d th e par ­
tiall y successfu l an d long-continue d effort o f compan y officers an d me n t o d o thei r 
dut y despit e this. Tha t ther e wa s inexperienc e an d incompetenc y amon g th e colore d 
officers is probable , bu t i t wa s no t confine d t o them ; i n thei r cas e th e greate r respon ­
sibilit y la y elsewhere , fo r i t wa s th e plai n dut y o f th e field officers: First , t o se e tha t 
thei r me n wer e equippe d fo r battle ; second , t o hav e th e plan s clearl y explained , a t 
least , ste p b y step , t o th e compan y officers; third , t o maintai n liaiso n betwee n bat ­
talion s an d betwee n th e regimen t an d th e Frenc h an d othe r America n units . 
Her e follow s th e stor y a s i t wa s tol d t o m e poin t b y poin t b y thos e wh o wer e 
actuall y o n th e spot . The y wer e earnest , abl e men , mostl y Lieutenant s an d Captains , 
an d on e coul d no t doub t ther e i n th e dim , smoke-fille d tents abou t L e Mans , thei r abso ­
lut e conscientiousness an d frankness . 
TH E 368T H 
THE 368t h Regimen t wen t int o th e Argonn e Septembe r 2 4 an d wa s pu t int o th e driv e 
o n th e mornin g o f Septembe r 26 . Its dut y wa s "comba t liaison, " wit h th e Frenc h 
37t h Divisio n an d th e 77t h (white ) Divisio n o f Americans . Th e regimen t a s a whol e 
wa s no t equippe d fo r battl e i n th e front-line . It ha d n o artiller y suppor t unti l th e 
sixt h da y o f th e battle ; i t ha d n o grenades, n o trenc h fires, trombones, o r signa l flares, 
n o airplan e panels fo r signalin g an d n o shears fo r Germa n wire . Th e wire-cuttin g 
shears give n the m wer e absolutel y useless wit h th e heav y Germa n barbe d wir e an d 
the y wer e abl e t o borro w onl y sixtee n larg e shears, whic h ha d t o serv e th e whol e 
attackin g battalion. * Finally , the y ha d n o map s an d wer e a t n o tim e give n definit e 
objectives. 
Th e Secon d Battalio n o f th e 368t h Regimen t entere d battl e o n th e mornin g 
o f Septembe r 26 , wit h Majo r Else r i n command ; al l th e compan y officers wer e colored ; 
* "O n advancing from the French trenches the morning of the twenty-sixth much wire was met with 
by organizations and owing to the fact that none had wirecutters, considerable disorganization resulted 
in the companies, especially in the matte* of liaison. " 
"A s it was almost dark at this time and having no liaison with any of the other units, I decided to 
withdraw until 1 could get in touch with the Commanding Officer, 368th Infantry. The enemy searched 
along the trails with their artillery during our withdrawal, but none of the shells fell near us;" it was 
pitch dark by this time and we had just reached the German's first trench. There was much confusion 
owing to the mass of wire we had to contend with in the dark before the companies readied the French 
trenches." 
"Company G spent the entire day of the twenty-sixth working its way through the wire entanglements 
Great difficulty was experienced in this work because of the lack of wirecutters." 
—Reports of Major M. A, Elser, TH E HISTORY O F TH E BLAC K MA N 8 1 
Compan y F wen t "ove r th e top " a t 5 :3 0 A . M. ; Compan y H , wit h whic h th e Majo r 
was , wen t "over " a t 12:3 0 noon ; advancin g fou r kilometers th e battalio n me t th e 
enemy's fire ; th e Machin e Gu n Compan y silence d th e fire ; Majo r Elser , wh o ha d 
halte d i n th e wood s t o collec t souvenirs fro m dea d Germa n bodies, immediatel y witn ­
dre w par t o f th e battalio n t o th e rea r i n singl e fil e abou t dar k withou t notifyin g th e 
rest o f th e battalion . Captai n Dabne y an d Lieutenan t Powel l o f th e Machin e Gu n 
Compan y le d th e rest o f th e me n ou t i n orde r abou t 10:0 0 P . M . Whe n th e broadsid e 
opene d o n Septembe r 26 , Majo r Else r stoo d wringin g his hand s an d crying : "Wha t 
shal l I do ! Wha t shal l I do! " A t nigh t b e deplore d th e occurrence , sai d i t wa s al l his 
fault , an d th e nex t mornin g Majo r Else r commende d th e Machin e Gu n Compan y fo r 
extricatin g th e deserte d par t o f th e battalion . Movin g forwar d agai n a t 11 A . M. , tw o 
companie s wen t "ove r th e top " a t 4 P . M . withou t liaison . Wit h th e rest o f th e battalio n again , thes e companie s wen t forwar d on e an d one-hal f kilometers . Majo r Else r 
staye d bac k wit h th e Post-of-Command . Enem y fire an d darknes s agai n stoppe d th e 
advancin g companie s an d Captai n Jone s fel l bac k 50 0 metre s an d sen t a messag e 
abou t 6 A . M . o n th e mornin g o f Septembe r 2 8 t o th e Majo r askin g fo r re-enforcements. 
Captai n Jone s staye d unde r snipers ' fire unti l abou t 3 P . M . an d whe n n o answe r t o 
his request cam e fro m th e Major , h e wen t "ove r th e top " agai n an d retrace d th e sam e 
50 0 metres. Heav y machin e gu n an d rifl e fir e agai n greete d him . H e too k refug e i n 
nearb y trenches, bu t his me n bega n t o drif t awa y i n confusion . Al l thi s tim e th e 
Majo r wa s i n th e rear . O n Septembe r 28 , however , Majo r Else r wa s relieve d o f th e 
comman d o f th e battalio n an d entere d th e hospita l fo r "psycho-neurosis, " o r "shell ­
shock,"— a phras e whic h ofte n covers a multitud e o f sins. Late r h e wa s promote d 
t o Lieutenant-Colone l an d transferre d t o a Labo r Battalion . 
Meantime , o n Septembe r 27 , a t 4:3 0 P . M. , th e Thir d Battalio n o f th e 368t h 
Infantr y move d forward . I t wa s commande d b y Majo r B . F . Norris , a whit e Ne w 
Yor k lawyer , a graduat e o f Plattsburg , an d unti l this battl e a Headquarter s Captai n 
wit h n o experienc e o n th e line . Thre e companie s o f th e battalio n advance d tw o an d 
one-hal f kilometre s an d abou t 6:3 0 P . M . wer e fired o n b y enem y machin e guns. Th e 
Major , wh o wa s i n suppor t wit h on e compan y an d a platoo n o f machin e guns, ordere d 
th e machin e gun s t o trenche s seventy-fiv e yard s i n th e rear . Th e Major' s orders wer e 
confusin g an d th e compan y a s wel l a s th e platoo n retreate d t o th e trenches, leavin g 
th e firing-line unsupported . Subjecte d t o heav y artillery , grenade , machin e gu n an d 
rifl e fire durin g th e whol e nigh t o f Septembe r 2 7 an d bein g withou t artiller y suppor t 
o r grenades, th e firing lin e brok e an d th e me n too k refug e i n th e trenc h wit h th e 
Major , wher e al l spen t a terribl e nigh t unde r rai n an d bombardment . Nex t morning , 
Septembe r 28 , a t 7:3 0 A . M. , th e firing-line wa s restore d an d a n advanc e ordered . 
Th e me n le d b y thei r colore d officers responded . The y swep t forwar d tw o an d one -
hal f kilometre s an d advance d beyon d bot h Frenc h an d American s o n th e left an d 
right . Thei r fiel d officers faile d t o kee p liaiso n wit h th e Frenc h an d America n whit e 
unit s an d eve n lost trac k o f thei r ow n Secon d Battalion , whic h wa s dribblin g awa y 
i n on e o f th e fron t trenches. Th e advancin g firing-line o f th e Thir d Battalio n me t 
a witherin g fire o f trenc h mortars , seventy-sevens, machin e guns, etc . I t stil l ha d 
n o artiller y suppor t an d bein g to o fa r i n advanc e receive d th e Germa n fire front , 
flan k an d rea r an d thi s the y endure d five hours. Th e lin e brok e a t 12:3 0 an d th e 
me n retreate d t o th e suppor t trench , wher e th e Majo r was . H e reprimande d th e 
colore d officers severely . The y reporte d th e intens e artiller y fire an d thei r lac k o f 
equipment , thei r ignoranc e o f objective s an d thei r lac k o f map s fo r whic h the y ha d 
asked . The y wer e ordere d t o re-for m an d tak e u p positions, whic h the y did . Man y 
contradictor y orders passe d t o th e Compan y Commander s durin g th e day : t o advance , 
t o halt , t o hold , t o withdraw , t o leav e wood s a s quickl y a s possible . Finally , a t 6:3C 
P . M. , the y wer e definitel y ordere d t o advance . The y advance d thre e kilometre s an d 
me t exactl y th e sam e condition s a s before,—heav y artiller y fire o n al l sides. Th e 
Compan y Commander s wer e unabl e t o hol d al l thei r me n an d th e Colone l ordere d 
th e Majo r t o withdra w his battalio n fro m th e line . Utte r confusio n resulted,—ther e 
wer e man y casualtie s an d man y wer e gassed . Majo r Norri s withdrew , leavin g a pla ­82 TH E CRISIS 
too n unde r Lieutenan t Den t o n th e lin e ignoran t o f th e comman d t o withdraw . The y 
escape d finally unaide d durin g th e night . 
Th e Chie f o f Staf f sai d i n his lette r t o Senato r McKellar : "On e o f ou r major s com ­
mandin g a battalio n said : 'Th e me n ar e ran k cowards , ther e is n o othe r word s fo r it. ' " 
A colore d office r writes : 
" I wa s th e onl y colore d perso n presen t whe n this wa s uttered : I t wa s o n th e 27t h 
o f last Septembe r i n th e secon d lin e trenche s o f Vienn e L e Chatea u i n ou r attac k i n th e 
Argonn e an d wa s uttere d b y Majo r B . F . Norris , commandin g th e 3r d Battalion . Majo r 
Norris , himself , wa s probabl y th e bigges t cowar d becaus e h e lef t hi s Battalio n ou t i n 
th e fron t line s an d cam e bac k t o th e Colonel's dugou t a nervou s wreck . I wa s ther e i n 
a bun k alongsid e o f th e wal l an d this majo r cam e an d lai d dow n besid e m e an d h e 
moane d an d groane d so terribl y al l nigh t tha t I couldn' t hardl y clos e m y eyes—h e 
jumpe d an d twiste d wors e tha n anythin g I hav e eve r see n i n m y life . H e wa s a ran k 
cowar d himsel f an d lef t his uni t o n som e triflin g pretex t an d remaine d bac k al l night. " 
Fro m Septembe r 26-2 9 th e Firs t Battalio n o f th e 368t h Infantry , unde r Majo r 
J . N . Merrill , wa s i n th e front-lin e Frenc h trenches. O n th e nigh t o f Septembe r 2 8 
i t prepare d t o advance , bu t afte r bein g kep t standin g unde r shell-fir e fo r tw o hour s 
it was ordered back to the trenches. A patrol was sent out to locate the Third 
Battalion, but being refused maps by the Colonel it was a long time on the quest and 
befor e i t returne d th e Firs t Battalio n wa s ordere d t o advance , o n th e mornin g o f 
Septembe r 29 . B y 1:0 0 P . M . the y ha d advance d on e mil e whe n the y wer e halte d t o 
find Majo r Merrill . Finall y Majo r Merril l wa s locate d afte r tw o hours ' search . A 
Frenc h Lieutenan t guide d the m t o position s i n a n ol d Germa n trench . Th e Majo r 
ordere d the m forwar d 60 0 yard s t o othe r deserte d Germa n trenches. Terrifi c shell -
fire me t the m here , an d ther e wer e man y casualties. The y staye d i n th e trenc h durin g 
th e nigh t o f Septembe r 2 9 an d a t noo n o n Septembe r 30 wer e ordere d t o advance . 
The y advance d thre e kilometre s throug h th e woods, throug h shel l an d machin e gu n 
fire an d artiller y barrage . The y du g i n an d staye d al l nigh t unde r fire. O n Octobe r 
1 th e Frenc h Artiller y cam e u p an d pu t ove r a barrage . Unfortunately , i t fel l shor t 
an d th e battalio n wa s caugh t betwee n th e Germa n an d Frenc h barrage s an d compelle d 
hastil y t o withdraw . 
Th e regimen t wa s soo n afte r relieve d b y a Frenc h uni t an d take n b y trai n t o th e 
Marbach e sector. Majo r Elser , o f th e Secon d Battalion , mad e n o charge s agains t his 
colore d officers an d verball y assume d responsibilit y fo r th e failur e o f his battalion . 
Ther e wa s fo r a tim e stron g tal k o f a cour t martia l fo r him . Majo r Merril l mad e n o 
charges ; bu t Majo r Norri s o n accoun t o f th e tw o break s i n th e lin e o f th e Thir d 
Battalio n o n Septembe r 28 ordere d five o f his colore d lin e officers court-martiale d fo r 
cowardice and abandonment of positions—a Captain, two First Lieutenants, and a 
Second Lieutenant were accused. Only one case,—that of the Second Lieutenant, had 
bee n decide d a t this writing . H e wa s foun d guilt y b y th e court-martial , bu t o n revie w 
o f his cas e b y Genera l Headquarter s h e wa s acquitte d an d restore d t o his command . 
Colone l Gree r i n th e lette r t o Senato r McKella r o n Decembe r 6, write s a s follows : 
"Fro m ther e w e wen t t o th e Argonn e an d i n th e offensiv e startin g ther e o n Septembe r 
26 , ha d on e regimen t i n th e line , attache d t o th e 38t h Frenc h Corps . The y faile d ther e 
i n al l thei r missions , lai d dow n an d sneake d t o th e rear , unti l the y wer e withdrawn. " 
Thi s is wha t Colone l Durand , th e Frenc h Genera l wh o wa s i n comman d i n this 
action , sai d i n a Frenc h Genera l Order : "L'Honneur de la prise de Binarville doit 
revenir au 368t h R. I. U. S." 
An d this is wha t Colone l Gree r himsel f issue d i n Genera l Orde r No . 38 , Headquar ­
ters 92n d Division , th e sam e da y h e wrot e his infamou s lette r t o this senator : "Th e 
Divisio n Commande r desire s t o commen d i n orde r th e meritoriou s conduc t o f Privat e 
Charle s E . Boykin , Compan y C , 326t h Fiel d Signa l Battalion . O n th e afternoo n o f 
Septembe r 26 , 1918 , whil e th e 368t h Infantr y wa s i n actio n i n th e Argonn e fores t th e 
Regimenta l Commande r move d forwar d t o establis h a P . C . an d cam e upo n a numbe r 
o f German s wh o fled t o th e wood s whic h wer e FOUN D T O B E ALIV E WIT H MA ­
CHIN E GUNS . Th e Commandin g Office r ordere d th e wood s searche d t o th e to p o f 
th e hill , th e office r i n charg e o f th e scoutin g (2n d Lieutenan t C . W . Carpenter ) calle d THE HISTORY OF THE BLACK MAN 83 
for volunteers and Private Boykin, a telephone linesman, offered his services and set 
out with the rest of the detail. While trying to flank an enemy machine gun another 
opened fire killing him instantly." 
This effort of the 368th Regiment was seized upon by Army gossip and widely 
heralded as a "failure" of Negro troops, and particularly of Negro officers. Yet the 
same sort of troops and many Negro officers in the Champagne and afterward in 
the Argonne under French leadership covered themselves with glory. The real failure 
in the initial Argonne drive was in American field strategy which was totally unequal 
to German methods and had to learn by bitter experience. It is worse than unfair 
to write off the first experience to the discredit of Negro troops and company officers 
who did all that was humanly possible under the circumstances. 
OTHE R UNIT S 
THE 365th, 366th and 367th Regiments did not enter the battle-line at all in the 
Argonne. The whole division after the withdrawal of the 368th Regiment was, 
beginning with September 29, transferred to the Metz sector, preparatory to the great 
drive on that fortress which was begun, rather needlessly, as the civilian would judge, 
on the day before the signing of the Armistice, November 10. 
According to plan, the 56th white American Division was on the left, the 92nd 
Division was in the center and the French Army was on the right. The 367th 
Regiment led the advance and forged ahead of the flanking units, the entire First Battalion 
being awarded the Croix de Guerre;—but this time wise field direction held them back, 
and for the first time they were supported by their own Negro Field Artillery. Beside 
the four Infantry Regiments the 92nd Division had the usual other units. 
The 325th Field Signal Battalion, attached to Division Headquarters, was composed 
of four companies organized at Camp Sherman. It had ten colored and twenty white 
officers. It was in France at Bourbonne-les-Bains and then went to the Vosges, where 
it was split into detachments and attached to regiments under the Chief Signal Officer. 
While at school at Gondricourt, July 13-August 18, it made one of the best records 
of any unit. Many of its men were cited for bravery. 
The 167th Field Artillery Brigade consisted of two regiments of Light Artillery 
(75s) trained at Camp Dix (the 349th and 350th) and one regiment of Heavy 
Artillery (the 351st) trained at Camp Meade, which used 155 howitzers. They experienced extraordinary difficulties in training. There can be no doubt but that deliberate effort was made to send up for examination in artillery not the best, but the 
poorest equipped candidates. Difficulty was encountered in getting colored men with 
the requisite technical training transferred to the artillery service. If the 
Commanding Officer in this case had been as prejudiced as in the case of the engineer and other 
units, there would have been no Negro Artillery. But Colonel Moore, although a Southerner, insisted on being fair to his men. The brigade landed in Brest June 26 and 
was trained at Montmorillon (Vienne). They were favorites in the town and were received into the social life on terms of perfect equality. There were five colored company 
officers and eight medical officers. The officers were sent to school at L a Cortine and 
the Colonel in charge of this French school said that the work of the colored artillery 
brigade was better at the end of two weeks than that of any other American unit that 
had attended the school. The brigade went into battle in the Metz drive and did its 
work without a hitch, despite the fact that it had no transport facilities for their guns 
and had to handle them largely by hand. 
The 317th Ammunition Train, which was attached to Division Headquarters, but 
was under the artillery in battle, was organized at Camp Funston in December, and 
had 1,333 officers and men, divided into two battalions, one motor and one horse, with 
seven companies. There were thirty-three colored and three white officers. The battalion landed in France June 27 and went to Montmorillon, and to the Artillery 
Training School at La Cortine, with the 167th Field Artillery. It arrived at Marbache 
October 18 and took part in the Metz drive. It had charge, also, of the Corps 
Ammunition dumps. During the drive all the officers were colored and Major Dean was 
in command. General Sherbourne, one of the few Commanding Officers fair to Negro 
troops, warmly commended the work of the artillery. No general court martial took 84 THE CRISIS 
place in the organization from the beginning and no efficiency boards sat. This 
was one of the very few units in which Negroes were promoted: four being made 
Captains, three First Lieutenants, eleven Second Lieutenants, and one a Major. 
Near the close of the war thirty-five Lieutenants commissioned at Camp Taylor 
arrived in France and were sent to school near Nantes. They were subjected to 
many indignities by the American officers and were compelled to enter the class-room 
after the whites; they were refused leaves to town; reprimanded for conversing with 
the women of the city, who were anxious to be kind and sympathetic to the obviously 
oppressed strangers. Notwithstanding all this the men made good records and joined 
their command after the Armistice. 
The 317th Engineers were assembled at Camp Sherman in December with 1,350 
officers and men. There were two battalions and all the officers were colored, except 
four field officers. The Commanding Officers, however, were from the first determined 
to get rid of the Negroes. On May 10 the colored Captains were relieved, and sent to 
the 365th and 366th Regiments. The regiment came to France in June and was trained 
near Bourbonne-les Bains until July 20. On July 22 all the remaining colored officers, 
except two Lieutenants, the chaplain and the medical officers, were relieved at the repeated requests of Colonel Brown, of Georgia, and others. The regiment went to the 
Vosges in August, and then to the Argonne, doing excellent technical work in building 
and construction. Al l but one company were attached to the Fourth French Army 
Corps until December 22; only Company E remained with the 92nd Division. 
The 366th Field Hospital was a colored unit with only two or three whites. It 
handled 10,000 cases before and during the Metz drive, four weeks, and was rated 
best in the American Expeditionary Force. Lieutenant Wright, the colored physician 
in charge, was promoted to a Captaincy. 
The final engagement immediately preceding the signing of the Armistice was 
fought in the Marbache sector, south of Metz, and was the most important event in 
which all the units of the 92nd Division actively participated. The division entered 
this sector October 7 and established headquarters in the village of Marbache, October 
10, 1918. The several regiments were stationed in the front lines of the Division 
sector, with supporting units and reserves in the rear. Almost immediately upon entering this sector active operations were begun; patrols and reconnoiteting parties 
were sent out from our lines; raiding parties were active and both sides found it 
necessary to be constantly on the alert. As the time for the advance of the whole 
Second Army grew nearer heavy shelling became more frequent, patrolling more 
active and raiding parties bolder. It was necessary to obtain all possible information 
regarding the enemy's movements and intentions before the advance began. There 
were many thrilling experiences in this sector during the four weeks preceding the 
final struggle. 
On the tenth day of November came the order announcing the great drive and 
outlining the position of the 92nd Division in the line. 
At 7 A . M . on the eleventh, the artillery broke loose with a terrific bombardment; 
this preparation lasted for a period of 42 minutes and was delivered upon the village 
of Bois Frehaut and the neighboring woods through which the infantry was to pass in 
its advance. In the meantime, the boys in the several companies composing the first 
assault line sprang from their trenches and with grim determination pushed themselves 
into "No Man's Land" and into the woods in the direction of the great German fortification, the city of Metz. The first objective of the 365th Infantry was Bois Frehaut 
(woods) three miles in depth and two miles in width. Barbed wire entanglements 
were everywhere and German machine guns were sputtering and large cannon were 
sending forth their messengers of death in all directions. The 365th Machine Gun 
Company, the 37-M M Platoon and our artillery and infantrymen repulsed this murderous attack and after two hours of desperate fighting Bois Frehaut was taken 
by the 365th and held by the Second Battalion of that organization until the bugle 
sounded the call to cease firing at 11 o'clock on the following morning. 
The attack was led by Company H under the command of Captain William W. 
Green with a detachment of Company A commanded by Lieutenant Gus Mathew THE HISTORY OF THE BLACK MAN 85 
Chicago with Company G and two other units in support. In fighting through the 
dense woods, made more difficult by large volumes of smoke from bursting shells, the 
attacking line in Company H became thinned and before many of the men arrived 
after the Company merged from the woods a flanking movement was attempted by 
the German machine gunners, but the timely arrival of Company G under the command of Lieutenant Walter Lyons saved Company H from this added danger. During 
this attack the Machine Gun Company of the 365th was active in covering the advancing infantry and kept the enemy on the run, thus making it impossible for them 
to deliver an effective fire against the men in the assault waive. The second assault 
waive was under the command of Captain Walter R. Sanders who was, also, second 
in command of the Second Battalion of the 365th Infantry. The second waive, under 
heavy shell fire and gas bombs from the artillery, moved up to occupy the position 
first held by the Second Battalion. While making this advance Lieutenant Walter 
Lowe, commanding Company A , was gassed, but he remained with his company, directing its movements until a short time before the order came to cease firing on the 
morning of the eleventh. 
While the 365th Infantry was fighting like real heroes the units in the other battalions were doing exactly the same thing. The first objective reached by the 366th was 
Bois-de-Boivotte. The units' in the first assault waive moved over the top at exactly 
seven o'clock on the morning of November 10. The artillery laid down a barrage for 
the advancing troops and protected their advance as far as possible, but the terrific 
bombardment with gas, shrapnel and machine gun fire from the German trenches 
made progress difficult as well as extremely dangerous. The troops, accustomed as they 
were by this time to bursting shells and gas bombs, ignored all personal danger and 
fought their way to their first objective with but few casualties. The fighting was 
furious during the early part of the day, but the organization was able to capture 
and hold much ground, varying from three to five kilometers in depth. 
The 367th Infantry occupied a position on the west side of the Mosselle River. Two 
companies of the Second Battalion were in the first assault waive with others in support and reserve. The fighting units reached and held their objective and although 
the fighting was brisk the 367th did not lose a single man. With the darkness came 
a cessation of intensive action, the troops were reorganized and plans formulated 
for a renewal of the attack early the next morning. 
In this general engagement the 92nd Division occupied a position a little southeast 
of the strong fortifications of Metz. The 165th French Division was on our right and 
the Seventh American Division was on our left and we kept in touch with both these 
divisions during the night and prepared for what subsequently proved to be the final 
struggle of the great world war the following morning. 
A t dawn the air was cool and damp; it was slightly cloudy, with a little fog in the 
atmosphere, just enough to give it a dull-gray color and to prevent the soldiers from 
seeing more than a few hundred yards in the direction of the enemy. 
The keen whistling noises made by the shells from our supporting artillery as they 
passed over our heads on their missions of death told us that the hour was 4:30 A . M. , 
for at that time the 351st Field Artillery Regiment began its advance upon Bois L a 
Cote and Champey. This fire was kept up continuously until 10:45. The 350th Field 
Artillery Regiment, also, renewed its attack upon the woods in the neighborhood of Bois 
Frehaut, but ceased firing at 10 o'clock A . M. , forty-five minutes earlier than the 351st. 
A t five o'clock the First Battalion of the 350th Field Artillery laid a rolling barrage 
across and just north of Bouxieres-sur-Froidmont in support of the advancing infantry. Many of the same units that engaged the enemy the day before were again 
struggling for additional gains in the direction of Metz. Several fresh companies 
were brought up from the support to join those who had so gallantly repulsed the 
enemy on Saturday and together made a supreme effort to deliver a blow that would 
silence the German guns and put the Huns to flight in disorder. The only thing that 
saved the Kaiser's army in this sector from a crushing defeat was the order to cease 
firing at 11 o'clock. 
A t one time during the morning engagement the 56th. Infantry (white) of the 7th 86 THE CRISIS 
Division, while advancing, ran into a strong barbed wire entanglement that had not been 
destroyed by artillery. Further advance was impossible and to retire under heavy 
fire from the German's big guns and merciless machine gun fire meant annihilation. 
Major Charles L. Appleton of the 367th Infantry, seeing the desperate situation into 
which the 56th Infantry had worked itself, manoeuvered several platoons to a position 
where they could hit the Germans from the flank and cover the retirement of the 56th. 
This timely act on the part of Major Appleton probably saved the 56th from complete 
destruction. 
When the bugle sounded the call to cease firing, Company H of the 365th Infantry 
held 800 yards of the battle-front, five kilometers of which was taken from the 
Germans under the heavy guns of Metz, and held against odds five to one under intense 
shell and machine gun fire. 
MRS. HELE N CURTI S AN D HE R SOLDIERS, A T CHAMBERY , FRANC E 
OTHE R AGENCIE S 
SO much for the 92d Division. It never had a fighting chance until the last day of 
the war. It was a centre of intrigue from the beginning and its weak and 
vacillating General spent most of his time placating the Negro haters on his staff 
and among his field officers, who wished nothing so much as the failure of the division 
as a fighting unit. How different a story if Charles Young had been let to lead his own! 
Of the assisting agencies the only one that paid any attention to Negro troops 
was the Young Men's Christian Association. The few who came to Red Cross hospitals were, with a few exceptions, not only "Jim-Crowed" but officers were put in 
wards with their men. The white Young Men's Christian Association secretaries 
usually refused to serve Negroes in any way. Very few colored secretaries were sent 
and an attempt was made at first to get rid of the best of these, on the ground that 
their beliefs on the manhood rights and human equality of Negroes were "seditious." 
Matters were greatly improved when a colored man was placed in general charge of THE HISTORY OF THE BLACK MAN 87 
the colored work. He was never, however, furnished enough men and only three women 
for his vast field until after the Armistice. 
On one subject the white Commanding Officers of all colored units showed more 
solicitude than on the organization and fighting efficiency of the troops,—that was 
the relations of the colored officers and men with the women of France. They began 
by officially stigmatizing the Negroes as rapists; they solemnly warned the troops in 
speeches and general orders not even to speak to women on the street; ordered the 
white military police to spy on the blacks and arrest them if they found them talking 
with French women. The white troops, taking their cue from all this senseless pother, 
spread tales and rumors among the peasants and villagers and sought to chastise 
Negroes and offending women. One officer, a high-minded gentleman, graduate and 
Phi Beta Kappa man of a leading American institution, was court-martialed for 
keeping company with a perfectly respectable girl of a family of standing in one of 
the towns where Negroes were quartered and while General Headquarters did not 
uphold the court-martial, it took occasion severely to reprimand the officer and remove 
him to a Labor Battalion. 
The result of all this a-do was simply unnecessary bitterness among Negroes and 
mystification among the French. The Negroes resented being publicly stigmatized by 
their own countrymen as unfit for association with decent people, but the French men 
and women much preferred the courtesy and bonhomie of the Negroes to the impudence 
and swagger of many of the whites. In practically every French town where the 
Negro troops stayed they left close and sympathetic friends among men, women and 
children. 
While the 92nd Division was in France there were fourteen trials for attacks on 
women, six of which were acquitted; of the other eight, three men were convicted of 
simple assault, leaving five possible cases of grave crime against women; of these, 
three cases are still undecided at this writing, one has been acquitted by the court, but 
the verdict has not been reviewed, and ON E man has been found guilty and hanged. 
It is only fair to add that this man belonged to a Labor Battalion and was sent to the 
division simply for trial. No other American division in France has a better record 
in this respect. 
TH E EN D 
THIS is a partial and preliminary statement of the part the Negro played in the 
Great War. There is much in the tale that is missing and some mistakes, 
to be corrected by fuller information and reference to documents. But the main outlines are clear. 
A nation with a great disease set out to rescue civilization; it took the disease 
with it in virulent form and that disease of race-hatred and prejudice hampered its 
actions and discredited its finest professions. 
No adequate excuse for America's actions can be offered: Grant that many of 
the dismissed and transferred colored officers were incompetent, there is no possible 
excuse for the persistent and studied harrowing of admittedly competent men, to which 
every black officer testifies with a bitterness unexampled in Negro American history; 
there was no excuse for the persistent refusal to promote Negroes, despite their records 
testified to even by the French; there was no excuse for systematically refusing Negro 
officers and soldiers a chance to see something of greater and more beautiful- France by 
curtailing their leaves and quartering them in the back districts. 
On the other hand, there is not a black soldier but who is glad he went,—-glad to 
fight for France, the only real white Democracy; glad to have a new, clear vision of 
the real, inner spirit of American prejudice. The day of camouflage is past. 
This history will be enlarged and expanded, embellished with maps and pictures 
and with the aid of an editorial board, consisting of the leading Negro American 
scholars and the most distinguished of the black soldiers who fought in France, will 
be issued by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and TH E 
CRISIS, in three volumes, in honor of the first great struggle of the modern. Negro 
race for liberty. National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored-People. 
The Tenth Anniversary Conference 
THE PLACE 
CLEVELAND , OHIO, has been chosen 
as the place for holding the Conference that 
marks the Tenth Anniversary of the 
National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People. Cleveland is one of 
America's most beautiful cities—with broad, spacious streets, handsome buildings, and a 
Great Lake to temper the summer heat and 
to afford delightful excursions. Niagara 
Falls is distant only a few hours' journey, 
so that visitors will have this added inducement to make the effort to celebrate our 
coming of ten years of age. Moreover it 
is a most hospitable town. We have been 
officially invited by the Mayor of Cleveland 
and by its Chamber of Commerce; and the 
Cleveland Branch, headed by Mr. F. E. 
Young, President; Mr. S. P. Keeble, 
Secretary, and Mr. Harry E. Davis, Chairman of 
the Conference Committee, will do everything in its power to make our stay a pleasant and profitable one. Al l we can ask is 
that the heavens may remain as unclouded 
as we believe our comradely coming together 
will prove to be. 
THE TIME 
June 21-29 has been chosen as the time 
for the Conference. June 21, Saturday, 
will be the day for registration, for the assignment of places of residence. The 
Conference will open Sunday afternoon with a 
Mass Meeting in St. John's A . M . E. Church. 
It will continue through the week, closing 
on Saturday evening with another Mass 
meeting on the subject of Anti-Lynching. 
MEMBERS AND DELEGATES 
Every branch is entitled to three delegates. Additional delegates are allowed for 
each branch having more than one thousand 
members, at the rate of one for every five 
hundred members. Al l members of the N . 
A . A . C. P. in regular standing are also entitled to become members of the Conference, 
and will receive full privileges. Al l visitors 
are cordially welcome to the sessions. 
A registration fee of fifty cents will be 
charged. This entitles the member to a 
badge, to the official program and the right 
to attend all meetings and entertainments. 
It will also entitle him to the July Branch 
Bulletin, which will be given, over to an 
account of the Conference. 
It is hoped that delegates and visitors 
will arrive on Saturday, June 21, and will 
register on that day and be assigned their 
places of residence. 
The Conference will begin Sunday, June 
22, at three P. M. , with a mass meeting at 
St. John's A . M . E . Church. The Mayor 
will open the meeting, and it is expected 
that one of Ohio's most prominent speakers 
will make an address. Mr. Moorfield Storey 
will preside. 
The day sessions of the Conference will 
be held in St. John's A . M . E . Church. 
They will begin at ten and will continue until twelve-thirty, to be resumed at two and 
to last until four, except those afternoons 
when some other plans are made for the 
Conference's guests. A luncheon will be 
served in the church or in the immediate 
vicinity that friends may meet one another 
for that social good time that is so delightful a part of all such gatherings. The program as thus far mapped out is tentative, 
and few names of speakers can be given 
since some of the men and women whom 
we most want and need to hear we are not 
as yet sure of. But we can promise our 
members that each subject under discussion will be treated by those especially qualified to utter their opinions and to relate 
their facts. The evening sessions will be 
held in different auditoriums and will be 
widely advertised. 
THE PROGRAM 
The program will cover the following subjects: 
88 N. A. A . C. P. 89 
THE NEGRO'S PART IN THE WAR 
Dr. W. E. B. Du Bois and Major 
Spingarn will speak. Colonel Young has been 
asked to preside. 
THE NEGRO AND THE VOTE 
The Civil Rights bills of Ohio, Michigan, 
Pennsylvania and other states will be discussed. Congressman Henry I. Emerson 
will speak on the ballot, and invitations have 
gone to a colored representative of the 
Legislature of West Virginia , and of the 
Legislature of Illinois. The representative 
from the Atlanta Branch will tell us of 
their members' recent use of their ballot. 
EDUCATION 
Under this subject will be considered the 
apportionment of funds for education in the 
South, and improvements in Public School 
facilities. We hope for a representative 
from Louisiana who will tell us of the bettering of conditions in that state, and from 
Charleston to recite the winning of the 
colored teacher's right to a place in the 
schools. The college Negro, the advance in 
education of the Talented Tenth, will be 
discussed. 
This subject, with social welfare work, 
will be continued in the evening when the 
meeting will be under the auspices of the 
Social Welfare Federation of Cleveland with 
its president, Mr. Sherman C. Kingsley, in 
the chair. 
THE NEGRO AND LABOR 
This will occupy all of one day and evening. Among the topics discussed will be: 
The Migration to the North. 
Scarcity of Southern Labor and Its 
Effects upon the Status of the Negro Laborer. 
The Situation in the Rural Districts. 
The Negro in Wa r Industries, with reports from those Branches that have made 
studies on this question. 
The Negro in Government Positions. 
The Negro Bureau of the Department of 
Labor. 
It is expected that the Chamber of 
Commerce of Cleveland will co-operate with 
the Conference on this subject. 
PUBLICITY 
Charles W. Chesnutt will preside. 
The Editor of the Cleveland Plain Dealer 
has been invited to speak. 
Dr. DuBois will tell of TH E CRISIS ; the 
N . A . A . C . P. will report on its publicity. 
It is hoped many representatives of the 
colored press will be present. 
BRANCH AFFAIRS 
Al l of one day will be devoted to Branch 
matters,—Finance, Membership, StateOrgani
many matters of importance that we are all 
desirous of threshing out. 
THE SPINGARN MEDAL 
The Spingarn Medal will be awarded on 
one of the evenings. 
BRANCH REPORTS 
The N . A . A . C. P. expects to have a large 
representation from its Branches and to 
give them a considerable part on its program. It plans, however, to have its delegates file their formal reports—of number 
of members, number of meetings, etc., with 
the Branch Director, and to speak at the 
conference along the line of the special subject under discussion. Only in this way 
can we have adequate treatment of the 
many topics laid out in our program. From 
the rural sections and from the cities will 
come that knowledge of conditions that we 
all seek, and that story of the fight to remedy them that will send us away with renewed courage. 
OTHER WAYS OF PROPAGANDA 
Besides these meetings of the Conference 
the Chairman of the Conference Committee 
has arranged to have our speakers give 
their message before many of Cleveland's 
prominent churches and organizations. Had 
it been earlier in the season, he would have 
been able to do more. As' it is, he is now 
assured of pulpits for Sunday morning 
services, one a Jewish Temple. The 
Chamber of Commerce, the City Club, and the 
Board of Governors of the Woman's 
Suffrage Party will listen to our representatives. It is his opinion that the way best 
to reach the white people is to get before 
their organizations and he means to take 
advantage of the influx to the city of this 
rare number of talented speakers to see 
that this is done. TH E ATLANT A NEGRO VOT E 
AMON G the many interesting accomplishments of our Branches this year, 
none is more significant than the 
Registration drive at Atlanta, Ga., and the resulting 
vote. Many intelligent, monied, colored men 
of Atlanta, finding that by means of the 
"educational test" clause, the "ownership of 
property" clause, above all by the "white 
primary" they were disqualified as voters, 
while white illiterates were able to register 
and vote, had failed to make any effort to 
register their will at the polls. But after the 
visit of Mr. Shillady and Mr. Johnson to 
Atlanta, in January, the N . A . A . C. P. 
Branch became very active, increased its 
membership by March to 1,700, and launched 
a Registration drive. Prior to February 
12, the Negroes had but 600 names on the 
Tax Collector's books. Within a month, 
more than a thousand names were registered, many people paying as much as fifteen, twenty and even twenty-five dollars 
in back taxes. The Branch succeeded in interesting the most prominent representatives 
from each religious denomination, the editors of the colored papers and the heads of 
fraternal organizations. One of the daily 
papers called attention to the heavy registration while it was in progress and said 
that it was for the bonds. The Branch, however, made no declaration until the night 
before the election when, in Bethel Church, 
packed to the doors, the people voted unanimously to go to the polls and vote against 
the bonds and against the extra taxation, 
thus serving notice upon the white people 
that after this they must reckon with the 
Negro when they are dealing with municipal 
affairs. 
Election day was an exciting time. By 
noon the white people saw how things were 
going and an S. 0. S. message went out 
from the City Hall all over the town to save 
the city from the menace of the Negro vote. 
Plants were asked to shut down and send 
their workers to the polls to vote against 
the Negro, and colored school teachers were 
instructed to go home and tell the Negroes 
to vote to increase their teachers' salaries. 
Nevertheless, when the count came, the bond 
issue was defeated and the white papers 
knew that it was done by the Negro vote. 
Of course, the cry went up that the 
Negroes had been used by white men. As The 
Georgian put it, "The Negroes—stupidly in 
the light of their own real interests, but led 
by shrewd white men ready to use them to 
the limit,—voted solidly against everything." An d again, "The tax restoration 
measure was overwhelmed by a combination 
of two extreme votes—the ignorant and 
stupid votes of the Negroes, on the one hand, 
and the votes of the wealthiest element, on 
the other." The following memorial, presented by the N . A . A . C. P. Branch to the 
Mayor, the Finance Committee and the 
Board of Education of Atlanta, shows that 
the Negroes were the most intelligent voters 
of all Atlanta's citizens. We give the memorial in its entirety: 
Apri l 3, 1919. In order that there may be no misunder­ standing of the position of Colored Citizens at this time in any matter that affects the growth and progress of the City of
Atlanta, the Atlanta Branch of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People makes this statement to the city of­ ficials and the city at large. 
We submit that no outside influence, either corporate or individual, was in any measure responsible for the solidarity of the Negro vote in the last election. It is untrue that white men visited Negro churches, ex­ cept maybe some small and unheard of ones, and urged Negroes to vote as they did. We deny the statement that the Georgia Railway & Power Company had any in­ fluence with the Negro voters or even at­ tempted to exercise it through any chan­ nels known to us. Colored men themselves are responsible for their own actions, which 
resulted from decisions arrived at after full, frank, and free discussions among 
themselves and with themselves. 
We set ourselves up as no preferred class. We ask no special favors and want no ex­ ceptions made for us. We regret the neces­ sity that compels us to assume any other attitude than that of a satisfied part of our composite citizenship. For the conditions which exist we plead "Not Guilty" and we feel that the white people of the South are responsible for whatever unrest and dis­ satisfaction may exist in our ranks. 
In particular, the Negroes of Atlanta have certain definite and long-standing 
grievances and complaints which we feel 
should no longer exist and which we believe it is time to make known. 
(1) For years the Public Schools of this City as they relate to our children have been a disgrace to any progressive com­ munity. Not only are the number of 
schools inadequate, but the physical condi­ tion of those in existence is worse than de­ plorable and constitutes a menace to the health and morals of our children, which 
90 N. A. A. C. P. 91 
in turn menaces the health and morals of 
the entire city. (2) We want every double session in the Public Schools abolished and a seat to each 
child entitled to one therein, a full day of 
instruction given instead of the half-day 
which is now prevalent in Negro schools. And the instruction should be carried 
through the eighth grade instead of stop­ ping short at the seventh grade, as exists now. 
(3) We believe that a laborer is worthy of his hire and that a teacher who is com­ petent and capable is deserving of a living 
wage instead of the .starvation pittance which the City metes out to its colored 
teachers. A teacher in a white school 
should receive salary in keeping with the work done, and the same grade of work in a colored school should receive the same grade of pay regardless of whether the teacher is white or black. 
(4) We are entitled to and we should 
receive at the hands of the City, High 
School facilities for our children. For many 
years Negroes have been deprived of their just rights by being denied facilities which are provided for all others except our peo­ ple. An d in this we mean no sham and no make-believe, but such High School facil­ ities for every colored child as will fit 
him and her to follow a useful calling in life, or as will fit them for even higher and more complete training. (5) The colored children of this City are entitled to and should have the same ad­ vantages of playgrounds and swimming- pools as all other children of this City. When such forms of recreation are denied 
to our children and are provided at the public expense for other children, our taxes are already increased and it is being done over our protest and without our consent. (6) For years we have been occasionally 
promised and continually denied Library 
facilities, notwithstanding a building has been repeatedly offered by Mr. Carnegie if 
the City would only furnish the lot and 
maintain the Library. In the meantime, branch Libraries have been established for white people in various parts of the City and a magnificent library is maintained. 
(7) The chief asset of any community is the health of its people. There is a woe­ ful lack of hospital facilities in this City 
for both races. Such facilities as do exist are hopelessly inadequate and inefficient, and this is true in a greater degree as it 
pertains to colored people. The exclusion of colored physicians from the City Hos­ pital is not only unjust and unfair, but it 
works a very great hardship on our people and is against the best health of this com­ munity. When a colored patient enters the City Hospital, his regular physician must 
be left behind and he must secure attention from a physician certainly less interested and -sometimes less skilled. This ban ought 
to be lifted and colored physicians should be permitted to follow their patients into the City Hospital. 
(8) In colored sections of the City there is a woeful neglect of .streets and sewers and sanitation, while certain sections are repaved and repaired, and the streets of 
white sections are improved, yet year after year little attention is given those sections where our people live. In most cases the streets are inadequately lighted, tending to make travel unsafe and offering inducement 
for crime. Garbage is infrequently removed and it is only providential that we have suffered no great epidemic or outbreak of 
disease. 
These things which we desire are not im­ moderate. They are not unjust. They are not unfair. They are ours, every one of 
them, and we are entitled to them because we are citizens as all other men are. When war was imminent and the peace of this nation was assailed, our young men gave their blood and their lives, that democracy 
might not perish from the face of the earth. We were not excepted then. When we were called, we went willingly and we served. Now that peace has returned we feel that our citizenship has not ended, but that 
the obligations of peace are as strong as those of war. 
The specific ends to which additional taxes are to be employed have not been made clear. If we are to support increased tax­ ation and bond issues, we desire to know, as every citizen has the right to know, just 
why such necessity exists and to what end such steps are taken. We feel that the things for which we ask are just as urgent and just as necessary as are other things included in the proposed bond issue. We, too, believe in bonds, but when they are issued, they should carry specific and un­ alterable provisions for a division of the funds so that the colored schools will be amply taken care of. 
The Negro wishes to move forward and not backward. We are willing to pay for these things. But when we increase our taxes for the purpose of getting what we want, we want to understand exactly all 
the terms of the bargain. And we are right. 
In the meantime, the Atlanta Branch, on May 1, numbered 2,020 and it intends to have 5,000 members to announce at the Cleveland Conference. We give the names of the Executive Committee, adding that 
the women did much of the hard and ex­ acting work, making the Registration cam­ paign and the drive for N . A . A . C. P. mem­ bers a success. The colored people of 
Atlanta are united as never before in their battle for their rights as citizens. 
Vice-President, T. K. GIBSON, Secretary, DR. L. C. CROGMAN , Treasurer, Miss CORA B. FINLEY . Executive Committee 
H . H . Pace, Rev. J. A . Hopkins, Prof. G. A . Towns, J. W. Dobbs, Dr. L. B. Palmer, C. R. Williams, Rev. R. H . Singleton, Mrs. Ludy 
Andrews, Mrs. C. B. Pittman TH E ANTI-LYNCHING CONFERENCE 
THE Conference was opened on Monday 
night, May 6, with a mass meeting in 
Carnegie Hall, at which the speakers were 
Brigadier-General John H . Sherburne who 
commanded the 167th Field Artillery of the 
02nd Division; ex-Governor Emmet O'Neal, 
of Alabama; Dr. Anna Howard Shaw, 
Honorary President of the National American 
Woman Suffrage Association; Hon. Charles 
Evans Hughes, former Justice of the 
United States Supreme Court; and James 
Weldon Johnson, Field Secretary of the 
National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People. 
"We have come here," said Mr. Hughes, 
"to do our utmost to create public sentiment in support of the most important duty 
of the citizens of the United States; and 
that duty is to enforce the guarantees of 
the Federal Constitution. In any community where the courts are open and the processes of justice are available, lynching is 
murder of the foulest sort." 
Continuing with a warning that mob violence was the path to sure destruction for 
a nation and its institutions, Mr. Hughes 
said: 
"Today in the City of New York our security is simply in the sentiment of law and 
order—and nothing else. And you cannot 
dethrone justice in the South and let lynching go unpunished there and expect to be 
secure in this great metropolis of New 
York. " 
Of the international aspects of lynching 
in the United States, Mr. Hughes said: 
"Very little can be done in the cause of 
international justice unless nations make 
every effort, and successfully prosecute the 
endeavor, to establish strong and secure 
the foundations of justice within their own 
borders. We can never properly appear as 
the exemplar of justice to the world as 
long as the black man because he is a black 
man, is denied justice within the United 
States." 
Dr. Anna Howard Shaw said that "when 
Mr. Hughes declared 'that this crime of 
lynching is a crime perpetrated against the 
colored race,'—that is the only point on 
which I would take issue with Mr. Hughes. 
That crime is not against the colored race. 
The crime is against the race that perpetrates the crime. I have no sympathy, and 
I would never waste a tear or any amount 
of suffering endured by any man, white or 
black, who perpetrates that criminal offense 
against womanhood. But when a body of 
men are not aroused by the horror of the 
crime—for I have no doubt that if the 
Master were here writing upon the sand, He 
would say, 'Let him who has never committed the offense cast the first stone.' " 
Mr. William Pickens insisted that "it 
is futile to deny the Negro the rights 
guaranteed him by the Constitution, to treat 
him as an inferior being, and then expect 
a mob to accord him equal treatment with 
that given other citizens. 
"If the black man were justified and supported by the law when he clearly and 
plainly acts in self-defense," said Mr. 
Pickens, "the colored man himself would 
break up about one-half of the mob violence in this country." 
A fund of $9,300 was pledged, of which 
the chief donors were two colored persons— 
Mme. C. J. Walker, $5,000 and Scott Bond 
$1,000. This places a total fund of nearly 
$14,000 in the hands of the N . A . A . C. P. 
The following resolutions were adopted 
by the Conference: 
Resolved: That in the opinion of the 
National Conference on Lynching an attempt should be made to secure Federal 
legislation against lynching; that the matter of the appointment of the committee for 
this purpose be left with the Chair; and 
that the committee have power to add to 
itself. 
Resolved: That the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People be 
requested to take steps to organize in each 
state a committee for the purpose of agitating and creating public opinion and taking the necessary steps to secure legislation 
against the practice of lynching. 
Resolved: That the Committee (The AntiLynching Committee of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People) be urged, in addition to the argument, agitation and publication already 
begun, to appeal for systematic contributions to open and to carry on an advertising 
campaign against lynching to awaken the 
national conscience and lead to the enforcement of the law. 
92 The Looking Glass 
LITERATURE 
JAME S WELDO N JOHNSO N i n his 
"Fift y Years and Othe r Poems" : 
Tha t Banne r whic h is now the type 
O f Victor y on field and flood— 
Remembe r its first crimso n stripe 
Wa s dyed b y Attacks' willin g blood. 
An d never yet has come the cry — 
Whe n this fair flag has been assailed— 
Fo r men to do, fo r men to die, 
Tha t have we faltered or have failed. 
We'v e helped to bea r it, rent and torn, 
Throug h man y a hot-breath'd battle 
breeze; 
Hel d i n our hands, i t has been borne 
An d planted fa r across the seas. 
The n should we speak but servile words, 
O r shall we han g our heads i n shame? 
Stan d back of new-come foreign hordes, 
An d fea r our heritage to claim? 
No ! stand erect and withou t fear, 
An d fo r our foes let this suffice— 
We'v e bought a rightfu l sonship here, 
An d we have more tha n pai d the price. 
* * * * 
Mar y Burril l has a one-act pla y of Negr o 
life in the April Liberator. Willis 
Richardson says of Miss Burrill's work: 
"Aftermath " is a one-act pla y of Negr o 
life , b y Mar y Burrill , appearin g i n the 
Liberator fo r April . Her e at last is the 
pleasant beginnin g of a thin g tha t we have 
lon g waite d for—the beginnin g of Negr o 
play s by Negr o playwrights. It is not only 
pleasant because it is a Negr o play , but i n 
it we have a nice piece of pure dramati c 
writing , whic h is anothe r one of the numerous proofs tha t the Negr o is fundamentall y 
artistic ; and i t make s one wonde r wha t field 
he wil l enter next. 
Th e pla y is replete, wit h two of the most 
importan t qualitie s tha t make good drama 
—interest and logic. Withou t these two 
qualitie s al l plays are uselessly written , 
withou t service and, therefore, necessarily 
bad. Her e Miss Burril l has produced an 
atmospher e tha t only a colored write r could 
produce an d he r pla y wil l ran k well wit h 
the three Negr o play s of Ridgel y Torrence . 
TH E CRISI S regrets tha t lack of space 
makes i t impossible to quote one or two of 
the strikin g passages of this pla y and hopes 
tha t Miss Burril l wil l not confine he r ver y 
rea l abilit y to this single expression. 
COLORED WOMEN IN INDUSTRY 
A NE W Da y fo r the Colored Woma n 
Worker " is the name of a pamphle t 
issued by a group of women of whic h Miss 
Nelli e Swartz , representing the Consumers' 
League , is chairman . This littl e monograp h 
deals wit h the industrie s i n whic h colored 
women are found i n Ne w Yor k City . The 
Philadelphia , Pa. , Public Ledger says: 
• It is pointed out i n this suggestive littl e 
pamphlet, to whic h the Ne w Yor k Evening 
Post on Frida y last devoted an editoria l 
a column long, tha t it is not strange i f the 
colored woma n has been backwar d i n demonstratin g he r value i n the indoor labor of 
factories. 
Afte r a race has been enslaved fo r two 
centuries and then industriall y boycotted 
fo r fifty years, is it reasonable to expect 
tha t i t wil l speedily make good at the 
workbench wit h those wh o have had no 
such handicaps ? 
Whe n one speaks up for "these now voiceless and defenseless women i n industry, " one 
is likel y to be told wit h a pityin g look: 
"Yo u don't know wha t you're talkin g about. 
Colored women i n domestic service nowadays expect just as bi g wages as whit e 
girls, and there's no limi t to their insolence 
or their inefficiency." 
O r else one is likel y to incu r some such 
mil d rebuke as this: 
"Ther e is plenty of industria l discontent 
today withou t you r goin g to wor k to stir 
up an y more. If the colored woma n isn't 
satisfied wit h the wages or the treatment 
she's getting, the remedy is at hand. Al l 
she has to do is to refuse to wor k and wal k 
out. Heave n knows they're doing tha t all 
the time, anyway . There's no sense of loyalt y to hold them. If whit e women get 
better pay, it's because they're wort h better 
pay. " 
N o doubt i n the kitchen or i n the factory 
the young, green, ignoran t colored woma n 
can be extremely 'exasperating and deplorably incompetent. 
But—giv e them fair-play . Give them 
time to live down and wor k off the effects 
of the bondage i n whic h our forefathers 
held them. Giv e them their chance to show 
wha t they can do. 
I n 60 per cent of the cases studied the 
worke r came from a n Atlanti c coast state 
south of Washington . 
O f 175 women, twenty-two had been graduated from norther n hig h schools or southern colleges. Whe n an equally large group 
of whit e women i n the same industrie s was 
questioned, it wa s found tha t none had graduated from hig h school or college. 
9 3 9 4 TH E
Th e cleanliness of the homes of the colored workin g wome n wa s a strikin g fact. 
"Afte r a nine-hour day i n the factor y or 
store, clean floors and dusted rooms meant 
workin g late into the night. 
"On e woul d have to wai t i n an employment bureau fo r man y days to hea r of 
even one request fo r a colored bookkeeper 
or stenographer. 
"Ye t a numbe r of women ha d been speciall y traine d as stenographers. 
- "Thes e finall y entered factories, doingunskilled , monotonous work—their spirits 
broken and hopes blasted because they had 
been obliged to forfeit their trainin g on 
account of race prejudice. " 
An d is tha t fair-play ? 
One teacher from the West Indies wa s 
found dustin g furnitur e i n a department 
store at $8 a week. 
"Just to think, " she said, " I wa s principa l of a school of 300 pupils fo r eight years, 
wit h five teachers unde r me, and all I can 
get i n this countr y is maid's work. " 
Th e wa r changed things. "Th e colored 
woman, " says this booklet, "made just as 
genuine a contributio n to the cause of 
democracy as he r whit e sister i n the munitions factor y or he r brothe r i n the trench. 
She released whit e wome n fo r more skilled 
wor k and she replaced colored men who 
went into service. 
"Th e America n people wil l have to go 
ver y fa r i n its treatment of the colored 
industria l woma n to square itself wit h tha t 
democrati c idea l of whic h it made so muc h 
durin g the war. " 
Th e Springfield, Mass., Republican gives 
a n interestin g digest: 
Th e Ne w Yor k study concerned 2,185 
workers i n 217 factories, chiefly i n the 
needle trade s and the toy, buttons, candy, 
leathe r goods, marabou, pape r boxes and 
bags, milliner y and flowers and feathers in ­
dustries. The typica l worke r wa s found to 
be a young, unmarrie d woman , probably 
southern born, wit h at least a gramma r 
school education, wh o began wor k i n he r 
teens and wa s enterin g "industry " withou t 
trade training , or previous "industrial " experience after five or six years of domestic 
service. Most of the wome n wer e employed on the simple r and roughe r processes 
and i n most cases worke d unde r less desirabl e conditions and fo r less pa y tha n 
whit e women, even when doin g the same 
work . Seventy-six pe r cent of the 2185 
workers were pai d from $8 to $12 a week— 
now regarded as below the necessary minimum—whil e a few received as littl e as $5 
a week and a few as muc h as $20. Wher e 
whit e and Negr o women worke d together 
the Negroe s generally fared better tha n 
whe n they were employed separately. 
It wa s not so easy to exploit them. O n the 
other hand, they seemed to do better wor k 
when unde r the direction of bosses or inspectors of their own race. The numbe r of 
Negr o women who wer e members of trade 
 CRISI S 
unions wa s found to be ver y small—less 
than 1 pe r cent. 
Those employers—an d there were man y 
exceptions—who admitted a decided preference fo r whit e workers, offered three prin ­
cipa l objections to Negr o workers—tha t 
they wer e slow, tha t they wer e unreliabl e 
and tha t it wa s difficult to get experienced 
ones. Bu t these faults ar e obviously of 
socia l rathe r tha n racia l significance. Th e 
Negr o women have been accustomed to leisurel y employment a t lon g but indefinite 
hours and ar e untraine d i n factor y work . 
The y have been neglected b y the trade 
unions and have been forced to take jobs 
whic h whit e workers have refused to take. 
Naturally , they have drifte d fro m one job 
to anothe r an d gaine d comparativel y littl e 
foothold anywhere . Bu t these are remediable conditions. Th e committee's suggestions seem to get to the heart of the matter. 
The y ar e tha t greate r emphasis be placed 
upon the trainin g of the colored gir l by 
more genera l education and mor e trade 
trainin g throug h apprenticeships an d trade 
schools; tha t ever y effort be made to stimulat e trade organizatio n amon g colored 
women ; tha t industria l leaders be developed amon g them; and tha t the colored 
woma n be generall y accepted i n industr y by 
the America n employe r and the publi c at 
large . Woman's place i n industr y and i n 
citizenship is being steadily strengthened. 
Th e fac t cuts across race lines. So does the 
justic e tha t is involved . 
THE SHIFTING BLACK BELT 
THE Departmen t of Labo r has recently 
issued a report of its investigations 
on the migratio n of Negroe s fro m the South 
in 1916 and 1917. The New York City 
Hotel Gazette summarizes: 
Investigations of Negr o migratio n to the 
Nort h durin g the war, just issued b y the 
Departmen t of Labor, indicat e tha t the tota l migratio n ma y have been as grea t as 
350,000, extendin g over a period of about 
18 months, durin g 1916 an d 1917. Tha t 
figure is fixed as the maximu m limit , an d 
150,000 as the minimu m limit , an d the estimat e of Jame s H . Dillard , wh o ha d 
charge of the inquiry , is 200,000. 
Th e movement ha d been unde r wa y fo r a 
lon g time before an y effort wa s made to 
determine the numbe r of Negroe s movin g 
North . Moreover, so man y left separately 
and unobserved tha t complete statistic s 
woul d have been impracticable . Th e investigato r i n Georgi a estimates tha t between 
35,000 an d 45,000 Negroe s left tha t state 
in 1916-17, and the number to leave 
Alabama during the same - time is estimated 
at 75,000. Stat e officials, however, made 
highe r estimates, placin g the numbe r to 
leave Georgi a at 50,000; Alabama , 90,000 
and Mississipp i 100,000. 
Lac k of labor i n the North , due to the 
cessation of immigration , wa s the principa l 
cause, the investigators agree. Amon g the 
causes operative i n the Sout h to induc e TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 9 5 
migratio n were genera l dissatisfaction wit h 
conditions, the ravage s of the boll-weevil, 
floods, change of crop system, low wages, 
poor housing, poor schools unsatisfactory 
crop settlements, roug h treatment, cruelty 
of the la w officers, unfairness i n court procedure, lynchings, desire to travel, labor 
agents, ai d from Negroe s i n the North , and 
the influence of the Negr o press. 
Th e movement of large numbers at the 
same time wa s due largel y to labor agents, 
but afte r these initia l group movements, 
Negroe s kept goin g Nort h i n small numbers, attracted by the letters from their 
friends who had already gone. Bette r 
wages were important. "Ever y Negr o who 
made good i n the North , started a new 
group on the way, " one of the investigators 
reported. 
* * * * 
Th e Ne w Orleans, La. , States continues: 
Th e investigators note, as a result of the 
migratio n and the need of labor i n the 
South, promisin g movements to improve relations between the races. One of the best 
of these, intended to remove causes of the 
migration , is the "communit y congress " 
plan , pu t unde r wa y i n Boliva r County, 
Miss. , and which , it is expected, eventually 
wil l extend al l over the South. 
Th e feature of the Boliva r pla n is a committee organization , includin g prominent 
whit e business men and agriculturists and 
prominent Negroe s i n each community. 
Committee s are chosen from the mai n body 
to consider special subjects—for example, 
labo r supply, and the genera l ai m is to emphasize the common interest of the races 
i n communit y development and i n provid ­
in g contact between racia l leaders i n way s 
designed to promote harmony , prosperity 
and good will . 
Th e migrator y movement was annoying, 
menacing, hurtful , whil e it lasted. Bu t it 
ha d its good side. 
Thousands of those who went Nort h are 
comin g back. The y didn't find there wha t 
they expected and they are convinced that, 
whil e lif e i n the South has some drawbacks, 
on the whole the Negr o is better understood 
and treated here tha n he is on the other 
side of the line . 
O n the other hand, as a result of the 
temporar y exodus, southern financial, business, industria l and agricultura l interests 
have ha d their interest i n the improvement 
of the conditions of labor and livin g of the 
colored populatio n quickened. No t all the 
causes referred to by the Federa l investigators as responsible fo r the migratio n can 
be immediatel y removed. Bu t there is a 
growin g disposition i n the South to mitigat e 
those whic h cannot be at once removed, and 
to do everythin g possible to promote the 
comfort and welfar e of the industrious and 
law-abidin g elements of the race. 
* * * * 
A good answe r to the above comes from 
the pen of Robert T. Schell, wh o says i n 
the Pittsburgh , Pa . Gazette-Times: 
Ther e was a gentleman i n Pittsburg h this 
week, I saw i n a Pittsburg h pape r of Marc h 
7. His purpose, as stated, is to persuade 
thousands of Negroe s who came from the 
South to go back. We came here to 
Pennsylvania by the thousands, two or more 
years ago, not simpl y to help make wa r 
munitions, but to better our condition i n 
every wa y possible. The gentleman, though 
from Georgia , represents severa l Southern 
States short of labor i n every line of service. 
W e are gla d to know we are wanted there 
again. Bu t before we even consider returning , we are reminded of the old tale 
of the "Fo x and the Rabbit. " Th e fo x 
wanted the rabbit to go home wit h him. Th e 
rabbit decided to go, but had his doubts 
about it meanin g any good fo r him. How ­
ever, he went wit h the fox to the mouth of 
his den. H e stopped and looked ver y carefull y to see the tracks, and on finding al l 
of them went i n and none came out,—he 
stopped there. So, now, when you come 
fo r us to go back South, and not say one 
wor d to us about lynchin g us fo r any cause 
and withou t any sort of trial , we, lik e the 
rabbit, stop righ t there. 
I am not i n favo r of crime , bu t I am i n 
favo r of crime committers havin g a fair and 
impartia l tria l by an unbiased judge and 
jury . W e are up here and for the most 
part are makin g good. Th e people up here, 
lik e the people i n the South, have found tha t 
we wil l work . If we don't like the wor k 
given us, we simpl y ask fo r a transfe r to 
some other part of the works. We don't 
pla n strikes or joi n i n and take any part 
wit h strikers. W e are here to do ou r bit 
wit h this people and to become a part of 
them and help to carr y into success everythin g possible fo r all the people. Don't 
worr y about us, fo r the most of us won't 
be back tha t wa y at all . 
NEGRO OFFICERS 
TOMPKIN S McILRAIN E says i n the 
Ne w Yor k Evening Post: 
Muc h is now being writte n and said i n 
praise of the Negr o officers. Whil e not 
wishin g to detrac t i n any wa y from the 
praise and gratitude due to our Negr o regiments, officers and men, i n the interest of 
the militar y service and of the Negr o himself, we must say that we are not yet satisfied by any reports tha t have come to our 
attention tha t Negroe s led by Negr o officers 
are fit to take their place against whit e 
troops i n modern warfare . 
Tha t exceptiona l Negroe s have done well 
as officers ma y be true, but we believe tha t 
it wil l be found tha t these are not Negroes, 
but chiefly mulattoes. 
Tha t a n officer must be an educated and 
a highl y mentall y disciplined man, the present wa r ha s demonstrated. Witness the 
failur e of the divisiona l officers' trainin g 
camps fo r the trainin g of men selected 
from the ranks. The necessary numbe r of 
suitable candidates could not be obtained 
because a sufficient numbe r of educated and 9 6 TH E CRISI S 
mentall y discipline d men wer e not to be 
found i n the ranks. 
The pure-blooded Negr o has not yet developed the capacity fo r the hig h degree of 
education and menta l discipline necessary to 
the officer, and is not to be judged by the 
performanc e of exceptiona l individuals, 
chiefly mulattoes. 
Thomas, i n his "America n Negro, " points 
out tha t whethe r a ma n is fundamentall y a 
Negr o o r a whit e ma n does not depend upon 
the color of his skin , but upon his menta l 
characteristics. Th e mulatto ma y be as 
black as the ace of spades and have whit e 
menta l characteristics. O n the other hand, 
he ma y have whit e ski n and thoroughl y negroi d characteristics. 
Tha t exceptiona l mulattoe s migh t make 
good officers ma y be true, but tha t is not 
to say tha t Negroe s i n genera l ar e capable 
of being officers. 
Mr . Mcllraine's remark s wer e inspire d by 
the letter writte n to the Edito r of the Ne w 
Yor k Evening Post b y Colone l Charle s 
Young . Colone l Youn g feels tha t the editoria l entitled "Th e Negr o Officer," published recently i n National Service With the 
International Military Digest, was, to put it 
mildly , ver y unjust to Negr o officers. H e 
says: 
Th e articl e entitled "Th e Negr o Officer," 
whic h has been deemed b y man y officers 
both whit e and black to have been unfair, 
stated tha t the leadership of Negr o troops 
by Negr o officers wa s a failure , and tha t 
there wa s nothin g to warran t the statement 
tha t Negr o troops led by Negr o officers 
could stand against wh it e troops led by 
whit e officers. 
The object of this repl y is not to be controversial, but simpl y to state a few facts 
tha t the Edito r has forgotten, some of 
which , perhaps, have not come to his 
knowledge . 
Th e Negr o people of the Unite d States 
demand to know whethe r the sweeping generalizatio n of lack of leadership and the 
capacity of the Negr o officer wa s derived by 
consultation of the records of the War 
Department, the press, both white and Negro, 
and the reports of impartial officers. 
Th e black officer feels tha t there wa s 
a prejudgment against him at the outset, 
and tha t nearl y every move tha t has been 
made was fo r the purpose of bolstering up 
this prejudgment and discreditin g him i n 
the eyes of the worl d and the men whom he 
wa s to lead and wil l lead i n the future . 
Considerin g the contention i n the articl e 
as to the mulatto's efficiency, the colored 
people of the Unite d States are asking : 
"Wha t is a Negro? " Accordin g to the editorial , an y ma n tha t evinces leadership and 
capacity as an officer, be he white , yellow, 
brown or black as the ace of spades, is a 
mulatto. Tha t being the case, and considerin g tha t nine-tenths of the Negr o Amer ­
icans are of mixe d blood, the remainin g portion are negligible , and the Negr o problem 
is
te
 solved as pertainin g onl y
nth. 
 to the oneRememberin g the multitud e of the Croix 
de Guerre and citations on the breasts of 
the returnin g Negr o officers (for the Negr o 
people fo r the purpose of achievement claim 
the mulattoe s i n their own racia l group ) 
and the Distinguishe d Servic e Crosses to 
boot, the Negr o officer is smiling , not discourage d wit h himself, and is stil l carryin g 
on for the flag, the countr y wher e he wa s 
born, and wher e the bones of his fathers are 
buried, and fo r the uplift an d leadership of 
his people fo r a mor e glorious Americanism . 
Histor y tells us tha t on the continent of 
America , Toussain t l'Ouverture , wit h a 
leadership tha t no ma n eve r surpassed and 
who routed the best troops of Napoleo n 
Bonaparte , wa s a pur e Negro , and a slave 
unti l after fifty years old. 
Majo r Marti n R. Delane y wa s a pur e 
Negro . "Pagan " and others tha t ca n be 
mentioned wer e pur e Negroes. 
Ex parte judgments wil l not go i n the 
futur e history, fo r the blac k ma n wil l not 
only act his history , bu t he wil l writ e it, 
and be it said tha t he knows histor y methods, and tha t wit h him they are not those 
whic h come fro m the hea t of prejudic e and 
a direc t and concerted attempt to discredit 
an y group of America n people. 
Unpatrioti c and unwarrante d statements 
do no good and lul l the countr y to sleep, and 
throw it off its guard , whil e the effects of 
these statements are causin g just ranklin g 
i n the breasts of the Negr o people. 
The Negr o officers kno w the psychology 
of their own race and also of the whit e 
race ; but i t is to be feared the latte r wil l 
never know the min d and motive forces of 
the Negro . 
LITERACY TESTS IN THE ARMY 
COLORE D readers of TH E CRISI S are especiall y urged to read the followin g 
articl e ver y carefully. Th e results of the 
psychologica l examination s i n the Arm y 
have not been ver y widel y disseminated as 
yet, but the charge has alread y begun to 
circulat e tha t the Negroe s as a grou p qualified much lowe r tha n whit e groups. N o attempt has been made to point out the discrepancy, inevitabl y arisin g b y contrastin g 
dissimila r groups. Thus, i f the Negr o artisan were contrasted wit h the whit e artisan , 
the Negr o farme r wit h the whit e farme r 
(even then the same distric t should be take n 
into account) and the Negr o college grad ­
uate wit h the whit e college graduate , a ver y 
different proportio n woul d have been found. 
This article, which appears in the 
Springfield, Mass., Union, gives as fair an interpretation of the results of the Literac y 
Tests as has been give n as yet. TH E LOOKIN G GLAS S 97 
Attentio n has been directed previously to 
the undesirabl e condition i n respect to il ­
literac y manifest i n connection wit h the 
draft examinations. The Departmen t of 
the Interior, whic h is conducting a campaig n i n behalf of more libera l education 
policies, has obtained from the Surgeon 
General's Office more specific dat a on tha t 
subject, draw n from statistica l reports from 
the variou s arm y trainin g camps throughout the country . I n the interest of psychologica l examinations, the men were classified i n two groups, denominated as Alpha 
and Beta, the usua l basis of separation bein g described as "abilit y to read and understand newspapers and writ e letters home, " 
though a t some of the camps a qualification 
of from fou r to six years' schooling wa s in ­
cluded. Twenty-eigh t stations were embraced b y the statistics, and the percentage 
of me n unde r the Beta head is found to 
range al l the wa y from 13.5 to 41.8 per 
cent., and the genera l average fo r 1,552,256 
men wa s 24.9 pe r cent. I n some cases the 
extent of illiterac y wa s largel y dependent 
on the proportio n of Negroes, whil e i n 
others there is bu t littl e relation between 
the two factors and the volume of illiterac y 
is largel y or wholl y among whites. Fo r 
example , a t Cam p Le e only 8.8 pe r cent, of 
the men wer e Negroe s and 28 pe r cent, were 
give n Beta classification, an d at Camp s 
Cady and Humphreys there were no 
Negroes and the Beta percentages were respectively 18.4 and 14. 
Whil e these figures do not purport to give 
any exact measure of illiteracy in the 
National Army, they show clearly that the 
proportio n o f those lackin g a n ordinar y 
common school education is altogether too 
larg e fo r the nationa l welfare . I n fact, the 
revelation is startlin g to those tha t have 
been accustomed to thin k tha t our educationa l advantages wer e of a hig h orde r and 
have faile d to take account of the flaws i n 
the system and the failur e to reach effectuall y the grea t numbers of foreigners not 
yet Americanize d i n an y respect. 
Th e question of how to remedy this conditio n and so remove a nationa l menace is 
one of the issues confrontin g the Sixty -
Sixt h Congress. One of the first steps to 
constructive reform, educationa l experts believe, lies i n an increase of teachers' salaries. Alon g wit h this, and as a means of 
realizin g tha t end, Federa l aid is being 
urge d i n Congress, i t being proposed to appropriat e $100,000,000 annuall y fo r the reduction of illiteracy , and also to create a 
Federa l Departmen t of Education , whose 
authorit y is yet to be clearl y defined. 
THE "WORK OR FIGHT" EDICT 
AN articl e b y Walte r F . Whit e i n the 
New Republic gives some interestin g 
example s of the wa y the "Wor k or Fight " 
law construed i n the South. I n man y places 
"work " meant labor by Negroe s for whites. 
Mr . Whit e says: 
I n a smal l town i n Alabama , sixteen mile s 
from Montgomery , the state capital, the 
mayo r of the town had a colored cook. This 
cook one Saturda y nigh t asked her employe r 
fo r a highe r wage. The mayo r refused, 
statin g tha t he had never pai d any more 
fo r a cook and wasn't goin g to do so now. 
Th e woma n thereupon quit, and, as the law 
provided, the mayo r took up he r employment car d whic h he himself had issued to 
her. Th e followin g mornin g a deputy sheriff 
appeared a t he r door and demanded tha t 
she show he r wor k card. Despit e he r explanation of the reason wh y she had no 
card, she was arrested and on Monda y 
mornin g was brought up fo r tria l in the 
Mayor's Court, before the mayor himself. 
She wa s found guilty , and fined $14.00, 
whic h fine wa s -paid by the Mayor, who 
then said to her, "G o on up to my house, 
work out the fine and stop you r foolishness." 
* * * 
Some days later, the wif e of a respectable 
colored ma n was sittin g on he r porch one 
afternoon parin g potatoes fo r supper, 
waitin g fo r he r husband to come home from 
his work . A n officer saw her, asked he r i f 
she was working , and on being told tha t 
he r duties a t home required al l of he r time 
and tha t he r husband earned enough to 
allow he r to stay at home, he arrested her 
fo r "vagrancy, " takin g he r to the county 
jail . Whe n her husband came home and 
was told of the arrest he immediately went 
to the jai l to provide bai l fo r his wife . This 
he could not do, as al l of the officials had 
gone home. His wif e wa s forced to remai n 
i n jai l al l night, and wa s released on bai l 
the followin g morning . This case was dismissed when brought to trial . 
* " * * 
I n Bainbridge , Decatu r County , Ga. , i n 
July , the Cit y Council passed an ordinanc e 
forcin g al l women (which meant all colored 
women), whethe r marrie d or not, whose 
duties wer e only those of their homes, to 
wor k at some particula r job. A n officer 
wa s sent to the homes of colored people 
who summoned the wive s of a numbe r of 
colored men to appea r i n court. Ther e they 
were charged wit h vagranc y and fined 
$15.00 each and told tha t takin g care of 
their homes wa s not enough wor k fo r them 
to be doing. On the followin g nigh t an 
indignatio n meeting of the colored citizens 
wa s held and the city authoritie s were told 
tha t unless this unjust and discriminator y 
law was repealed, the colored people would 
resist "to the last drop of blood i n their 
bodies." N o furthe r arrests were made. 
N o record could be found of any ablebodied whit e woma n being molested. The Outer Pocket 
Baltimore , Md . 
I A M especially pleased wit h the Ma y issue, whic h is of such vita l importanc e 
tha t every single colored person should have 
a copy, and I go so fa r as to say tha t TH E 
CRISI S ought to be i n the hands of every 
whit e man , especially i n the South where 
democracy is afraid to make itself visible. 
Yo u are certainl y to be congratulated 
upon the splendid wor k tha t yo u are doing. 
J . FRANKLI N JOHNSON . 
* * * 
Ne w Yor k City . 
Allo w me to thank you for those brave 
and courageous utterances quoted i n this 
morning's World tha t have called fort h such 
a loud protest from regions infernal . 
Doubtless the uppermost thought of the 
America n Negro—a s wa s tha t of the whit e 
man—a s they stood shoulder to shoulder i n 
the trenches of Prance , wa s vengeance fo r 
the raped and outraged Belgia n woman . 
Bu t unless his experiences there have opened his eyes to the condition of the woma n 
of his own race i n his own land , and wit h 
this awakenin g the inspiratio n to give his 
life—i f need be—as freely and as willingl y 
fo r the Jim-Crowed , maligned , raped and 
outraged woma n of his own race i n his own 
land, then are those experiences on the 
battlefield of Europ e of no avail . 
DAVI D B . PULTON . 
* * * 
Philadelphia , Pa . 
Thoug h late, a copy of the Ma y CRISI S 
came to han d yesterday. It is the greatest 
numbe r yet published, because i n the letter 
by the Frenc h Mission , but instigated b y 
the Americans, it shows clearl y wh y our 
race is so victimized . 
I would that it' could be read i n every 
church and congregatin g place for colored 
Americans, i n order tha t our friends and 
relative s migh t know wha t forces other 
than those physica l of the foe were arraye d 
against us. 
Havin g served wit h a Fiel d Hospita l i n 
the 92d Divisio n from beginnin g to end, I 
am able to appreciate wha t a good wor k 
you are goin g to accomplish by visitin g our 
John R. Hawkins, Washington, D. C, Divisio n and others abroad. 
Continue your goo Acting-Secretary d work—al l sensibl of e 
and non-cringin g American s admir e you r attitude, and support you. 
DEHAVE N HINKSON , M.D . 
Chicago , 111. 
Hav e wire d Postmaste r General, as requested. Hav e passed telegram on to others. I cannot adequately express m y disgusted resentment at such actions of posta l 
authorities. 
JUDG E EDWAR D O . BROWN . 
Ft . Monroe , Va . 
Whe n I read you r amazin g breach of in ­
ternationa l courtesy i n printin g whil e wa r 
is unsettled Frenc h arm y document, I 
thought you were beyond limit . O f course 
no one wil l expect our arm y to overlook 
such an attack on our respect fo r mutua l 
obligations between associated nations. 
GEORG E FOSTE R PEABODY . 
Omaha , Neb. 
If pressur e cannot be brough t to bear 
sufficiently stron g to have Ma y CRISI S admitted to mail , reprin t edition, and send by 
express to centra l points fo r distributio n 
by hand. I shall gladl y undertake personally to see to the deliver y of copies to 
Omah a subscribers and, also, see tha t copies 
get into the hands of others. 
REV . JOH N ALBER T WILLIAMS . 
* * * 
Xenia , Ohio. 
I have read of the grea t cause yo u have 
been promotin g and of the terribl e exposures you have made relativ e to our treatment i n France , and I congratulat e yo u 
upon the most honest and uprigh t position 
of defense you have take n fo r the thousands 
of black soldiers wh o fough t i n France . 
Eve n though TH E CRISI S be suppressed i n 
the mails of this government, you r cause fo r 
justic e is bound to win . 
OSCA R W . PRICE . 
* * * 
Detroit, Mich . 
Last evening the Rev. R. W . Bagnall , 
representative of the N . A . A . C. P . i n 
this district, informe d me tha t the posta l 
authoritie s wer e holdin g up the Ma y issue 
of TH E CRISIS . O n receivin g this informa ­
tion, I at once telegraphed to Professo r 
the Commission on AfterWa r Problems of the A . M . E . Church , to 
interrogat e Postmaste r Genera l Burleso n 
as to, the reason fo r holdin g TH E CRISIS , 
98 TH E OUTE R POCKE T 9 9 
and i f need be to file a protest i n the name 
of the above mentioned Commission . 
A s a race, ou r problems seem to be multiplyin g and our situation growin g mor e 
perplexing . Presen t conditions demand a 
co-ordination of efforts. 
BISHO P C . S . SMITH . 
» * * 
Ne w Haven , Conn . 
I have just been informed tha t Postmaste r 
Genera l Burleso n has ordered tha t no more 
CRISI S should be sent throug h the mails. I 
am so overwrought, I can hardl y write . I 
just read this month's CRISI S and I see 
plainl y wh y it is tabooed—the exposure of 
Wilson's tools. Well , it is so good this 
publicatio n came out. I am not a member 
of the N . A . A . C. P.—I wa s unti l you r 
slogan became "Afte r the War, " then I 
drew out. Bu t I wil l tell you how much I 
believe i n co-operation, whethe r I am a member or am convinced alon g al l lines or not— 
I am willin g i f yo u send you r magazine 
here next month by express to me wit h the 
addresses of al l the Ne w Have n subscribers, 
to delive r every one of them personally, i f 
I have to wal k fo r two or three days to 
do it. 
NELLI E BENT . 
* * * 
Kansa s City , Kan . 
I n answe r to you r telegram, we have had 
several send telegrams. Among them 
Congressman Little, who is a member of our 
branch . 
W e are on tip-toe wit h eagerness to see 
a copy. If it is released, it wil l be quite 
a boost fo r TH E CRISI S and the N . A . A . C. 
P . 
G. A . GREG G 
* * * 
Lorain , Ohio. 
Fo r the government to deny the CRISI S 
admission to the mails is to admit tha t "the 
pen is mightie r tha n the sword, " and tha t 
the pen of the insulted, unjustl y treated 
America n Negr o is the one most feared of 
all . 
Fo r this reason, TH E CRISI S is stil l more 
valuable , and as a token of fait h I am enclosin g m y renewa l to the year's subscription . 
ROS A M . MILLER . 
* * * 
Augusta , Ga . 
Yo u can depend upon me to render every 
assistance i n my powe r i n getting out your 
proposed Histor y of Colored soldiers, and 
i f lif e lasts, i n the sale of the book after 
i t is published. 
JUDSO N W . LYONS . 
* * * 
Pittsburg , Pa . 
I read the May , 1919 , CRISI S last evening . Sad and sorrowfu l as wer e the disclosures therein, it pleased me beyond m y 
abilit y to express. It shows tha t we had 
some one i n Franc e a t the righ t time wh o 
had a heart to feel the wrong s planned and 
thoughtfull y perpetrated upon us, as well 
as the abilit y and manhood to ferre t them 
out and to fearlessly expose them. 
P . J . CLYDE-RANDALL . 
* * * 
For t Monroe , Va . 
Ho w can I help? Hold-u p unjustifiable. 
MOORFIEL D STORE Y 
Richmond , Va . 
Figh t it out. W e are wit h you. 
ATTORNE Y J . THOMA S HEWI N 
* * * 
Topeka , Kans. 
You r telegram i n regar d to the holdin g 
up of the Ma y issue of TH E CRISI S was duly 
received. I cannot understand wh y this 
was done. I was glad to wire the 
Postmaster General last night, as you requested. 
SENATO R ARTHU R CAPPER . 
Washington , D . C. 
TH E MA Y CRISI S has i n a ver y pronounced 
wa y made the worl d and especially these 
Unite d States you r lastin g debtor. 
The editorials have the old-time rin g so 
familiar, illuminatin g and inspirin g to all 
intelligent Crisis readers. "Returning 
Soldiers" alone is worth many times the magazine's weigh t i n gold. 
P . R. KILLINGWORT H 
Detroit, Mich . 
I have had the branches of my distric t 
to get the churches and clubs of their communitie s to wir e the Postmaste r Genera l 
about TH E CRISIS . Fort y messages went 
from Detroit alone. 
If yo u do not get a release by Monda y 
and wil l send the Detroit supply by express, 
sending me the names of agents, their addresses, and the numbe r of copies they 
should receive, I wil l see tha t they ar e distributed and receipted for. 
REV . R. W . BAGNALL . The Horizon 
VINCENT 
SAUNDERS 
TH E WA R 
LIEUTENANT-COLONE L OTI S B . 
" DUNCAN , a Negro , has been commissioned a Colone l of Infantr y i n the Illinois 
Nationa l Guard , by Governo r Lowden , to 
ran k from Marc h 18, 1919. H e wa s a member of the 370th colored Infantr y overseas 
and wa s awarded the Croix de Guerre, wit h 
a divisiona l citatio n for bravery . 
{[ Th e Y . M . C. A . has sent eleven Negr o 
women overseas as canteen workers wit h 
the Arm y of Occupation. The y are Hele n 
Hagan , Rild a Phelps, Florenc e L . Thomas, 
Met a Evans, Ernestin e Suarez , Hatti e 
Craigwell , Lillia n W . Turner, Florenc e C. 
Williams, Harrie t S. Edwards, Alethe a E . 
Rochon and Laur a G. Williamson . 
d Th e South Carolin a Legislatur e has 
passed a bil l fo r the erection of a buildin g 
on the campus of the A . and M . College, 
Orangeburg , as a memoria l to the colored 
soldiers of tha t state, whic h when completed 
wil l cost at least $200,000. It wil l be the 
repository of books, manuscripts and other 
records of the wa r and i n addition wil l in ­
clude a library , rooms of the Y . M . and Y . 
W . C. A. , lecture and recreation rooms. 
Ther e is a unit of the R. O. T. C. at this 
college, under the authority of the War 
Department, with First Lieutenant S. A. Hull, 
Commandin g Officer. 
The Moto r Corps of colored women i n 
Ne w Yor k Cit y has been taken over by the 
Moto r Corps of Americ a and wil l be known 
as the Majo r Littl e Unit , wit h Captai n M . 
Watson Rudd. Mme. C. J. Walker is 
Chairman of the Executive Committee. 
fT Sergeant Bugle r Charle s Johnson, 367th 
Infantry , has returned to his elevator operatin g at the Yal e and Town e Plant , Hartford, Conn., the possessor of the Croix de 
Guerre, wit h palm. 
{[ Charle s W . Schwab, the steel magnate , 
on board a Unite d States transport loaned 
One Dolla r each to 154 Negr o soliders who 
were returnin g to Americ a "flat broke, " 
wit h the remark : "Yo u needn't pa y this 
back i f you don't wan t to. Suit yourself. " 
Th e loan has alread y been repai d b y 138 
of these men. 
j[ Orders made publi c b y Genera l March , 
' Chie f of Staff, include : Seventh Divisio n 
(Philippin e Islands, Alask a an d Mexica n 
Border) , unchanged except fo r additiona l 
Infantr y Brigad e attached. This is to be 
the 183rd Division , colored, an d wil l be 
composed of the 24th and 25th Regula r 
Regiments and the 350th Machine Gun 
Battalion of the 92nd Division. 
U Th e Colore d Protectiv e Associatio n has 
given a banquet at the Philadelphia 
Museum, whose use was given gratis, in honor 
of Negr o heroes returne d fro m overseas. A 
parade, headed b y a detail of policemen of 
the Traffic Squad and the Colored 
Battalion of the Pennsylvania Reserve Militia, 
preceded the banquet. Covers wer e lai d for 
2,500,—over 10,000 persons gathered. Dr . 
R. R. Wright , Jr. , is president of this organization . 
Q[ The Unite d States Arm y is seeking the 
enlistment of colored soldiers for the 
Cavalry, for service in Hawaii, the Philippines, 
Panam a and other sections tha t are yet to 
be determined. The men accepted fo r the 
colored cavalr y are sent to Presidio , at Sa n 
Francisco , fo r late r transportatio n to the 
Orient. The foreig n service pa y is twent y 
per cent, greate r tha n the base pay. 
{ J The record of the Virgini a Negr o i n the 
wa r is to be made an integra l part of the 
wa r histor y to be prepare d b y a commission 
appointed by Governo r Davis. Fathe r 
Charle s T. Hannigan , of Richmond , wil l direct the wor k of the Centra l Committe e of 
Negr o collaborators. 
A Certificat e of Incorporatio n has been 
filed in the Recorder's of Deed Office, 
Washington, D. C, for the Grand Army of 
Americans, an organizatio n of Negr o sol 
diers. The incorporators are Captain 
Samuel F. Sewell of the Regular Army; 
Lieutenant D. W. Jones; Serena S. Ivy, Aid to 
the Provost Marsha l General,; Lieutenan t 
Thomas H. R. Clarke of the Spanish 
American War, and William T. Ferguson. 
100 TH E HORIZO N 10 1 
MUSI C AN D AR T 
SMALL, MAYNARD and COMPANY, 
Boston,'Mass., announce the second printin g of Willia m Stanley Braithwaite's 
"Victory, " and a n Englis h edition of Mr . 
Braithwaite's "Golden Treasury of 
Magazine Verse." 
{ [ Melvill e Charlton , a Negr o musicia n of 
Ne w York , conducted Verdi's Gran d Oper a 
II Trovator e at the Gran d Ballroom of the 
Waldorf-Astoria , durin g April , unde r the 
auspices of the Verd i Club . The vocalists 
were members of the Boston Gran d Oper a 
Compan y and the instrumentalists were 
from the Ne w Yor k Symphon y Orchestra . 
{[ The second annual Intercollegiate 
Benefit concert by the combined choral and orchestra l forces of the six highe r institutions 
fo r Negr o education i n Atlanta , Ga. , was 
given this spring , the chie f feature of whic h 
was Coleridge-Taylor's "Hiawatha's 
Wedding Feast." An audience of 6,000 persons 
greeted the chorus of 510 voices. John 
Wesley Work, of Fisk University, was the tenor 
soloist, and Kempe r Harrel d wa s the conductor. 
{[ O n Apri l 27, at Baltimore , Md. , a symphony orchestra was organized by 
Lieutenant A. Jack Thomas, former bandmaster of 
the 368th Infantr y Band . Lieutenan t 
Thoma s is a graduat e of the Institut e of 
Musica l Ar t of Ne w Yor k and is engaged i n 
teachin g at Baltimore . 
{ [ A t Cambridge , Mass. , on Apri l 18, J . 
Shelton Pollen , organist and choirmaster, 
produced D u Bois' "Th e Seven Last Word s 
of Christ " at St. Bartholomew's Church . 
Th e soloists wer e Miss Gertrude O'Neil , soprano ; M . George Ruffin, tenor; Willia m H . 
Richardson , baritone. 
Q Ell a France-Jones, soprano, and Miss 
Ev a B . Dykes, pianist, were heard i n a 
concert on Apri l 30 at Columbu s Avenu e 
A . M . E . Zio n Church , Boston, Mass. 
U Mau d Cuncy-Hare , pianist, and Willia m 
ll . Richardson , baritone , c f Boston Mass., 
were heard i n a join t concert on Apri l 29 
before a ver y large and appreciative audience at the Union Baptist Church 
Baltimore, Md. On May 1, Mrs. Hare and Mr. 
Richardson were presented at the 
Plainfield, N. J., High School Auditorium, for 
the benefit of the Good Samaritan and 
Orphanage, of New Jersey. 
§T Lyndo n Hoffma n Caldwell , a graduat e 
i n piano from Syracus e Universit y School 
of Music , is presenting a finely arranged 
program on a present concert tour. His 
numbers include pieces by Bach-Tausig , 
Rachmaninoff, McDowell , Chopin , Scriabine 
and Liszt . 
f[ O n Apri l 23, a benefit concert fo r colored soldiers was held at Washington , Pa . 
The artists were Mrs. Florence ColeTalbert, soprano; Mr. Clarence C. White, violinist; and Mr . T. Theodore Taylor, pianist. 
Mrs. L . C. Honesty was accompanist for 
Mrs. Talbert. 
A conference of Negr o musicians was 
held i n Washington , D . C , Ma y 1-3, i n connection wit h the annua l musi c festiva l at 
Dunba r Hig h School, for: the promotion 
of fellowship and fraternity , mutua l encouragement, friendl y rivalr y and helpful 
criticism; discussion of methods fo r the 
systematic education of the public as to the 
broader significance and true r appreciation 
of Negr o music ; discussion of ways and 
means of stimulatin g creative effort by creatin g a demand fo r the work s of Negr o 
composers, and, of placin g the music profession generally on a more profitable basis. 
MEETING S 
A MEETIN G of twenty-three lodges of 
colored Masons, representing sixteen 
towns in West Virginia, held at 
Huntington, culminated in the organization of a 
state order to be known as the Most 
Worshipped Prince Hall Grand Lodge, A. F. 
and A . M . 
f[ One thousand delegates were i n attendance at the fifty-first annua l session of the 
Louisian a Baptist Freedmen's Association , 
whic h recently convened i n Ne w Orleans. 
The Interstate Denta l Associatio n wil l 
meet July 9-11, at Bay Shore Hotel, 
Buckroe Beach, Va. 
INDUSTR Y ' 
LOCA L 543 of the Chauffeurs' Union . 
Rochester, N. Y., has admitted 
Negroes to its membership. 
U Jame s Johnson, a Negr o alumnus of 
Brow n University , employed as production 
clerk in the United States Armory, 
Springfield, Mass. has been for over a year a regula r write r fo r the Armory, issued i n the 
interest of the 7,000 employees. 
([ Gertrude Scott, a colored gir l i n Ne w 
Yor k City , has been appointed stenographer 
i n the Boar d of Estimate . Miss Scott stood 
thir d on an eligible list of over five hundred 
applicants. 102 TH E
{[ Investigation of the deportation of 
Negro laborers from Coatsville, Pa., to the 
South has been ordered by the Unite d States 
Departmen t of Labo r wit h Charle s T. Fury , 
Commissione r of Conciliation , assigned to 
conduct the inquiry . 
§T I n Mississippi , durin g last year, twentyseven Negr o agents organized 500 clubs, 
wit h 10,000 Negr o women and 15,000 Negr o 
girls as members. Th e women conserved 
370,977 quarts of fruits and vegetables, 
and 15,000 chickens wer e raised i n homes 
whic h formerl y were withou t poultry. 
Eac h club maintaine d a n all-yea r garden. 
d Dr. Bradford Knapp, Chief of the 
Agricultural Extension Work in the South for 
the United States Department of 
Agriculture, announces the appointment of three 
Negr o Fiel d Representatives: Messrs. T. 
M . Campbell fo r Alabama , Georgia , Florida , 
Mississippi , Tennessee; T. B . Pierc e for 
Virginia, Maryland, West Virginia, 
Kentucky, North and South Carolina; and E. L. 
Blackshear, for Texas, Oklahoma, 
Louisiana, Arkansas. This work is connected 
wit h the State Agricultura l College and the 
Negr o Lan d Gran t Colleges. 
{[ The Air Nitrates Corporation at 
Sheffield, Ala., has presented James A. Jackson, 
a colored man, with a gold medal and 
Certificate of Especial Merit for his sanitary 
work . Fiv e silve r medals were given at 
the same time to members of the crew under Mr . Jackson's direction. Mr . Jackson's 
meda l is one of three given to colored men 
out of one hundred distributed among 29,000 
officers and employees at this plant. 
C The Young Women's Christian 
Association in three months has organized four 
clubs of Negro women in industry in 
Philadelphia, Pa., with 460 members. 
EDUCATIO N 
PROFESSO R J. A . MITCHELL , a 
teacher of Englis h and Frenc h at 
Southern University , Scotlandville , La. , conducts a Departmen t of Negr o Educatio n i n 
Southern School Work whic h supplies in ­
formatio n of the schools fo r Negroe s i n 
Louisiana . 
G Th e 1919 session of the South Carolin a 
Legislatur e made a tota l appropriatio n of 
$83,709.62 fo r the A . and M . College at 
Orangeburg . Besides this sum the institution receives from the Federa l Government 
a yearl y appropriatio n of $42,250. The recent appropriatio n includes $25,000 for the 
 CRISI S 
erection of a modern hospital, whic h makes 
a tota l of five new building s give n this 
college i n three years. » 
G Th e Cit y Counci l at Dublin , Ga. , has let 
the contrac t fo r the erection of a new Negr o 
school buildin g to be completed b y the fal l 
term, replacin g the school tha t wa s burned 
over a yea r ago. 
(I Amon g appropriation s of the Genera l 
Educatio n Board , founded by Joh n D . 
Rockefeller, are Meharr y Medica l College, 
$150,000; Fis k University , $12,500; Lan e 
College, $7,000; Manassa s Industria l School, 
$2,000; Pennsylvani a Norma l & Industria l 
School, $6,000; Spelma n Seminary , $5,000; 
St. Augustine School, $2,000; Virginia 
Normal and Industrial Institute, $500; Home 
Makers' Clu b Wor k i n the South, $43,575; 
Summe r Schools fo r Negr o Teachers, $29,­
950. 
C Meharr y Medica l College has, also, been 
given $150,000 by the Carnegi e Foundation ; 
connected wit h this appropriatio n is the 
condition tha t the Freedmen's Ai d Society 
of the Methodist Episcopa l Churc h and the 
trustees and friends of the college rais e an 
additiona l $200,000 as a n endowment. Tw o 
hundred and fifty graduate s of Meharr y 
served i n the Medica l Corps of the Unite d 
States Arm y durin g the war. 
C Th e Stat e Departmen t of Educatio n at 
Ne w Orleans, La. , wit h the co-operation of 
the General Education Board and the 
Parish School Boards will operate thirty-five 
trainin g schools fo r Negr o teachers, beginnin g the earl y part of Jun e and continuin g 
twelve weeks, towar d the end of additiona l 
teachers, longe r terms, increased salarie s 
and more adequate school buildings. 
C Th e Ne w Jersey Legislatur e appropriated to the Manua l Trainin g and Industria l 
School at Bordentown , N . J. , fo r the fiscal 
yea r beginnin g Jul y 1, 1919, the sum of 
$130,105. This is the largest appropria ­
tion the school has ever received. O f this 
amount $58,800 wa s fo r permanen t improve ­
ments and additions. 
C Mr . A . E . Leslie , Principa l of Johnso n 
Academy , Orlando , Fla. , has been grante d 
patent rights fo r an educationa l device to 
facilitat e the teachin g of mathematics. 
C. Th e Laur a Spelma n Memoria l Building , 
devoted to home economics, and the Bessie 
Stron g Nurses' Home at Spelma n Seminary , 
Atlanta , Ga. , have been opened fo r service 
i n honor of the wif e and daughter, respectively, of Joh n D . Rockefelle r whose muni­TH E HORIZON 100 
ficence has chiefly been the maintenanc e of 
this school. 
C The thir d annua l debating contest of 
the East Virgini a Triangl e has been held. 
Hampto n and St. Pau l were defeated by 
Virgini a Norma l and Industria l Institute, 
whic h made the Institute tripl e victors. Th e 
question discussed wa s "Resolved, Tha t the 
Unite d States Government retai n control of 
the chie f railwa y lines " wit h the victors on 
the affirmative side. 
POLITICS 
AT Cass County , Mich. , Willia m Bradley , 
Frank Wilson and M. T. Hitis, 
Negroes, have been elected Justice of the Peace, 
Highwa y Commissione r and Supervisor, 
over whit e Democrati c opponents. 
G At the Jubilee Convention of the 
National American Woman Suffrage 
Association when the recommendation that the Association continue to support and endorse 
the Federa l Amendmen t whic h hasbee n 
pendin g before Congress fo r fort y years 
came up, Miss Laura M. Clay, from 
Kentucky, proposed that certain sections be 
amended wit h particula r reference to those 
parts tha t woul d permit the enfranchisement of Negr o women i n the South. Wit h 
three delegates votin g "no " the convention 
voted to support the amendment i n the orig ­
ina l form, but authorized the Congressiona l 
Committe e to formulat e changes i n the 
wording . This wa s said to be the first time 
i n fort y years tha t the amendment did not 
receive complete endorsement. A resolutio n wa s adopted providin g fo r the centennia l celebration of the birthda y of Susa n 
B . Anthon y durin g February , 1920. 
C I n Chicago, 111., Mayo r Willia m Hal e 
Thompson , Republican , wa s re-elected by a 
plurality of 17,600 votes over his 
Democratic opponent. His plurality in the "black 
belt " wa s 11,402 votes. 
C Isaac Nutter, a Negro of Atlantic 
County, Trenton, N. J., announces that he will 
be a candidate fo r Republica n nominatio n 
to the Assembl y this year. Mr . Nutte r is 
a brothe r of Assemblyma n Nutter, of the 
West Virgini a Legislature . 
TH E CHURC H 
THE Rev . J . M . Cornell , pastor of St. 
John's A. M. E. Zion Church, 
Bethlehem, Pa., has accepted honorary membership i n the Chambe r of Commerce . H e is, 
also, a membe r of the local Executiv e Coun ­
ci l of the Bo y Scouts of Americ a and of 
the Ministeria l Association . 
C The Presbyteria n Churc h i n the Unite d 
States has appropriated $400,000 as a part 
of its Ne w Er a Program, for the education and welfar e of Negroes. The June 
issue of the New Era Magazine wil l record 
the remarkabl e showin g made by the Negr o 
Presbyterie s of the South i n the church's 
Ne w Er a Victor y Fun d Campaign . 
C Mothe r A . M . E . Zio n Church , Ne w Yor k 
City , reports fo r the yea r Marc h 11, 1918, 
to Marc h 31, 1919: receipts, $42,854.10; expenses, $41,870.64, leavin g a balance i n the 
treasur y of $983.46; liabilities, $39,034.76; 
assets, $134,000; budget of expenses 1919-
20 annually, $18,060.06; monthly, $1,505; 
weekly, $376.25. The Rev. J. W . Brow n is 
pastor of this church. 
PERSONA L 
THE Rev. Willia m N . Morton , Pasto r of 
Messia h Baptist Church , Bridgeport, 
Conn., is dead. H e was born i n Caroline 
County, Va. , i n 1865, and was a graduat e 
of Waylan d Seminary , Howar d Universit y 
and Virgini a Union . He was a member of 
the Boar d of Managers of the Connecticut 
Baptist State Convention, an organization 
of whit e ministers. 
C Jacob Bartley , a Negr o 114 years old, is 
dead a t Crysta l Springs, Miss. H e was the 
fathe r of twenty-four children. A t Ketona , 
Ala. , Da n Lathan , a Negr o 117 years old, 
is dead. A Negr o woma n aged 115 years, 
Marceline Brady, died recently in New 
Orleans, La., at the Lafon Old Folks' Home. 
(I Alfre d I. Plato , fo r fort y years a deacon 
of Talcott Street Congregationa l Church , 
Hartford , Conn., was presented a silve r 
lovin g cup on his seventy-first birthday. 
Mr . Plat o recently resigned the treasuryship of this church , after twenty-five years' 
service. 
d Th e meda l "Awarde d fo r Humanity " has 
been presented to Horac e Tanner, a Negr o 
of Roxbury , Mass., by the Society fo r the 
Preventio n of Cruelt y to Animals, for entanglin g a strin g hig h up i n a tree, whic h 
released a strugglin g pigeon at the ris k of 
his own life . 
C Gurle y Brewer, fo r more than fifteen 
years a widel y known Negr o Republica n 
politicia n i n Indianapolis, Ind., is dead at 
the age of fifty-three. I n 1900 he wa s a 
Deput y State Historia n and a few weeks 
before his death he had been made Deput y 
State Oi l Inspector. 104 TH E CRISIS 
G Negroe s i n Detroit, Mich. , on Marc h 15, 
celebrated the fiftieth anniversar y of the 
Masoni c life of Jame s Francis Rickards. 
G Second Lieutenant Norwood C. 
Fairfax, of Eaglerock, Va., attached to the 368th 
Infantry , on the completion of an Arm y 
course in the First Corps School at 
Gondricourt, France, was rated "excellent." He 
went "ove r the top " September 28 and 
made the supreme sacrifice. 
C The followin g bequests have recently 
been made : Th e sum of $1,000 each to the 
Home fo r Age d Colored Wome n and the 
Home for Colored Childre n at Providence , 
R. I., b y the wil l of Sara h E . Dyer ; $1,000 
each to the Colored Orpha n Asylu m Home 
for Aged Colored Women, Home for 
Colored Girls and the Colored Young Women's 
Christia n Association , Cincinnati , Ohio, by 
the late Mrs. Bessie Laidlaw, wife of 
Robert Laidlaw who was at one time a member of the Boar d of Publi c Service ; Norris 
Baer, late president of the Kaufman n and 
Bae r Company, Pittsburgh , Pa. , bequeaths 
$5,000 i n trust to endow a scholarship, the 
income of the fund to be pai d quarterl y to 
the beneficiary, who is to be selected annuall y by the Rabb i of the Rode f Shalom 
Congregation. An y worth y youn g man , regardless of race, creed or color, ma y be 
appointed beneficiary of this scholarship. 
Th e late Davi d Lubin , of Ne w York , bequeaths $1,000 to start a fund for a 
National Academy of Music for Negroes; and 
Christophe r L . Painter, of Pittsburgh , Pa. , 
wills $7,500 to the Home for Colored 
Children at Lexington, Ky. 
G Rev. and Mrs. Richar d Randolp h Ball , 
of Hartford , Conn., on Marc h 28, celebrated 
the twenty-fifth anniversar y of their marriage , wit h five sons i n attendance. Their 
weddin g took place at Chatham, Ontario . 
Rev. Bal l has been pastor of the A . M . E . 
Zion Churc h i n Hartfor d for seven years. 
G Jame s Reese Europe , Lieutenan t of the 
369th Regimen t Band , whose fame as the 
leader of "jazz " musi c had become international, was kille d i n Boston, Mass., by 
a member of his band. 
C George Bell , the gian t Negr o i n the Chu -
Chi n Chow production, Is dead. H e wa s 
sixty-five years old. 
G Joseph S. Cotter, Jr. , the youn g Negr o 
poet of Louisville , Ky. , is dead at the age 
of twenty-thre e years. H e had recently 
completed a book of thirty-five sonnets, 
"Ou t of the Shadows, " for publication. 
G Mar y Church-Terrel l has left the States 
as a representative at the Internationa l 
Congress of Women , to be held Ma y 5, i n 
Berne , Switzerland . She is the onl y Negr o 
delegate. I n 1904 Mrs. Terrel l wa s a delegate to the International Congress of 
Women held in Berlin, where she addressed the 
convention i n Germa n and Frenc h speech. 
SOCIAL PROGRES S 
THROUG H the efforts of the Educationa l 
Club , Inc., of Jericho , N . J. , there 
were elected to the Boar d of Education , 
David Dorsey, Biard Jones and Percy 
Clifton, all Negroes, against four white opponents. This organization , also, has effected 
the eliminatio n of the color line a t the bagloadin g plan t at Washingto n Park , and has 
as a membe r of its Executiv e Committe e a 
Negro , George Dorsey. 
C A t Charleston , W . Va. , the prohibitio n 
against the exhibitio n of the "Birt h of a 
Nation " and simila r picture s and plays 
durin g the period of the war, put into effect 
last summer by an order of the State 
Council of Defense, has been continued indefinitel y by the Legislatur e throug h the passing of a measure drafted by Mr. H. J. 
Capehart, one of the three Negro members of the 
Lowe r House . This legislature , also, has 
created the office of State Superviso r of 
Colored Schools, wit h a salar y of $2,400 per 
annum and $500 fo r travelin g expenses; an 
Advisory Board to the State Board of 
Education to be composed of two Negroes, the 
compensation of each to be $1,000 a yea r 
and $500 fo r travelin g expenses. 
G Samue l Dett, a Negr o at Niagar a Falls, 
N . Y. , has been grante d a verdic t of $392 
against the Arcad e Theatr e Company , because he was denied the privileg e of occupyin g seats whic h he had purchased fo r the 
lowe r floor. Attorne y Charle s E . Cromle y 
represented the plaintiff. 
G Negr o physicians and dentists of Rome , 
Ga., have formed the North Georgia 
Medical, Dental and Pharmaceutical Association. 
Dr . C. I. Cai n is president. 
G Dr . W . R. Brow n a Negr o at Salem, Va. , 
has been appointed Assistan t Boar d of 
Healt h Officer, wit h a salary , i n the interest of health conditions of the colored people. 
G Th e Texa s Publi c Healt h Associatio n has 
added to its field, force a Negr o lecturer, 
Mr . F . Rivers Barnswell , fo r servic e among 
Negroes. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 105 
-DA Y OL D CHICKS -
Lak e Vie w Far m 
Pure Breeds — Guaranteed Stock — Vigorous Health 
The public having been convinced of the folly of buying 
indifferent eggs which may or may not hatch, and getting 
chicks, if at all, of unknown Mongrel breeds upon which no 
dependence can be placed either as to laying or food qualities, have begun to resort to exclusive hatcheries where 
day old chicks may be secured with pedigrees. During the 
month of April, last, we received orders for more than 
10,000 chicks. 
So great has become the demand on Lakeview Farm 
for its selected pedigreed stock that it has become absolutely 
necessary to enlarge its- plant by incorporating the business. 
STOC K IN TH E LAKEVIE W FAR M CORPORA ­
TIO N will be on sale for 60 days only from June 1st to 
August 1st at $10.00 a share, fully paid and non-assessable. 
The stock is offered at this price in order to enable the 
small investor to share in a profitable enterprise, in fact it 
is placed within reach of all. 
Write for free booklet giving views of the Farm and 
plant and full particulars. 
Writing for booklet will in no way obligate you, but it 
will give you information that will surprise and benefit. 
Address : 
LAKEVIEW POULTRY FAR M CO. 
CLEMENTON , N. J. Box 176 106 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Perhaps there is a deserving young man or woman 
in your community who 
needs A CHANCE 
If so, perhaps Tuskege e Institut e offers 
the very opportunit y whic h he wants. 
Tuskege e is not onl y a school. It is an 
INSTITUTIO N an d an INFLUENCE . 
It helps the worth y student to help him ­
self. 
... . Locatio n unsurpassed for healthfulness. 
Fort y trades and industries for youn g me n and women . 
Excellen t Literar y and Norma l Course . 
Smith-Hughe s Vocationa l Course s for advanced students. 
Home Economics Agriculture Industries 
Tuskege e Institute is no place for sluggards. Fro m risin g bel l to taps, there is a 
full program—drills, class-room, shop, farm, etc. Perhap s YOU R bo y needs just 
the sort of trainin g whic h Tuskege e offers. Writ e for catalog an d information . 
ROBER T R . MOTON , Principal , Tuskege e Institute , Alabama 
A college that has its students devote 
one-half their time to actual, useful work 
is so in line with common sense that 
we are amazed that the idea had to he 
put in execution by an ex-slave as a lifesaver for his disenfranchised race. Our 
great discoveries are always accidents: 
we work for one thing and get another. 
I expect that the day will come, and ere 
long, when the great universities of the 
world will have to put the Tuskegee Idea 
into execution in order to save themselves from being distanced by the Colored Race. 
—Elbert Hubbard, in 
" A Little Journey to Tuskegee." 
STATE OF NEW JERSEY 
Manual Training and Industrial School 
FOR COLORED YOUT H 
BORDENTOWN , N. J . 
A high institution for the training of colored youth. Excellent 
equipment, thorough instruction, wholesome surroundings. Academic 
training for all students. 
Courses in carpentry, agriculture and trades for boys. 
Courses in domestic science and domestic art for girls. 
A new trades building, thoroughly equipped. 
New girls' dormitory thoroughly and modernly equipped. 
Summer Courses for students July 1—August 17, 1919. 
Terms reasonable. 
Fall term begins September 10, 1919. 
For information address 
W. R. VALENTINE , Principal 
Mention THE CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 107 
"JUST TH E PLAC E FOR YOUR GIRL" 
Daytona Normal and Industrial Institute for Negro Girls, Daytonav Fla . 
Beautiful location, ideal home life, fine, modern equipment. 
Courses include Kindergarten, Primary, Grammar, High, Normal, Vocational. 
Nurse Training at McLeod Hospital a specialty. Terms reasonable. 
Send for Catalog. 
MAR Y McLEO D BETHUNE , - - Principal. 
TALLADEGA COLLEGE 
TALLADEGA , ALABAM A 
Founded in 1867, for the training of Negro Leaders. 
Beautiful and healthful location. First class equipment.. 
A Theological Seminary. College courses leading to the A . B. degree — Classics, 
Science, Education, Social Service, Music. Manual training for both sexes. Large 
attention given to debating and public speaking. Nurse Training. Agriculture. 
Graduates enter professional courses in the best Northern Universities. Alabama 
grants first grade teachers' certificates to graduates in Education. 
The product of the College noted for fine character and efficient service. 
Rev. FREDERIC K A. SUMNER , President. 
, ST. MARY' S SCHOOL A n Episcopal boarding school for girls, under the VIRGINIA UNION UNIVERSITY direction of the sisters of St. Mary. Address: TH E SISTER-1N-CHARGE, 6138 Germantown Avenue, LOCATE D IN RICHMOND, VA. Philadelphia, Pa. Good courses offered in College, Theological 
and High School Departments. New year 
opens September 20th. For information address the President. HAL E INFIRMARY AND NURSE TRAINING 
SCHOOL, 325 Lake Street, Montgomery, Ala . Offers to High School graduates and young women of higher education and good moral character, between the ages of 18 and 35, a 
The Lincoln Hospital and Home three years' course in the profession of nurs­ ing. For further information apply to the 
TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES Superintendent enclosing a stamp. 
in the city of New York 
STENOGRAPHER S WANTE D offers -to young colored women a three All Races years' course of instruction in nursing. Prepare in the best school of its kind in the State. 
Capacity of hospital—420 beds. Subjects Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping, English, Pen­ Post Graduate Course of six months to manship, Civil Service Training, and SPANISH . graduates of accredited schools. COMMERCIA L CLAS S Lenox Community Center—at For information apply to: 
PUBLIC SCHOOL 89 Superintendent of Nurses Lenox Avenue and 135th St., New York City. Open All Year—Four Evenings Weekly. Lincol n Hospita l and Hom e Fitz W . Mottley, President. 
Ne w Yor k Cit y 
The Stenographers' Institute 1227 S. 17th St., Philadelphia, Pa. 
Yo u can be a success in the 
RECONSTRUCTIO N PERIO D My cour«« in PcnmiDihip" Bookkeeping, and Shorthand if you know through the mail will prepare you (or the poaitioo worth 
while. Write for information. Phonography Typewriting Bookeeping 
EDWAR D T, DUNCAN, President A. D . Nolley, M . Pen., 519 Michigan Ave., Buffalo N.Y . Mention TH E CRISIS . 108 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Southern Aid Society 
of Virginia 
Incorporated 
25th Annual Report (Condensed) 
The Southern Aid Society of Va., Inc., was chartered at Richmond, 
Va., February, 1893, to engage in Industrial Sick Benefit Insurance, 
insuring against Sickness, Accident and Death. The following report 
of business done during 1918 will show that the Acorn of 1893 has 
become the Giant Oak of 1919: 
Receipts 
Jan. 1, 1918 Cash Balance brought forward $88,317.79 
Dec. 31, 1918 Annual 
Income 548,835.64 
Gross Receipts for 
1918 $637.iS3-43 
Disbursements 
Dec. 31, 1918 Total Disbursed, including investments made during the year 534.496-73 
Cash Balance, Jan. 
1, 1919 $102,656.70 
Jan. 1, 1919 Total Assets $348,536.95 
Jan. 1, 1919 Total Liabilities including Capital 
Stock 48,676.57 
Jan. 1, 1919, Surplus Fund $299,860.38 
A record unsurpassed by any other Insurance Organization confining its 
business territory to one state. 
A few desirable agency openings in Virginia for intelligent and thrifty young 
men and women. 
SOUTHERN AID SOCIETY OF VA., Inc. 
527 N . SECON D ST. , RICHMOND , VA . 
OFFICER S AN D DIRECTOR S 
A. D. PRICE, Pres. 
EDW. STEWART. 1ft Vice Pres. 
-J , T. CARTER , 2nd V. P. and Att'y. 
B .A. CEPHAS, 3rd V. Pres. 
B. L. JORDAN, Sec.-Mgr. 
W. E. BAKER , Tress. 
A. WASHINGTON 
W. E . RANDOLPH 
CHAS . W . JACKSON . 
W. A. JORDAN, Asst. Secy, -Mgr. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 109 
North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Co. Home Office, DURHAM, N. CAROLINA 
Strongest Old Line Negro 
Life Insurance Company in the World 
Insurance in Force - $16,096,722.00 
Assets nearly One-Half Million dollars. Owns $160,000.00 In Liberty Bonds. 
The following Editorial appeared in the "Durham (Daily) Herald," May 10, 1918: 
A SUBSTANTIAL ENTERPRISE 
(Editorial) 
The North Carolina Mutual and Provident Association, a business enterprise 
owned, controlled and actively managed by colored men of Durham, has developed 
into an important asset of the city during its nineteen years of existence. It 
is no idle boast nor advertising motto that this company is the/ "largest and 
strongest Negro insurance company in the world." It is just that and more. 
It is managed along the most modern lines a* 1 is a business which not only 
the colored people may be proud of, but one which also deserves a high place 
among the new insurance companies of the* southern states. 
Income 1918 - $819,771.09 
Amount Paid in Claims Since Organization $2,082,887.61 
Your Chance to Buy Stable Life Insurance from $500 to $5,000. 
POLICIES WIT H AL L MODERN PROVISIONS, INCLUDING A PERMANEN T DISABILITY 
CLAUSE. 
John Merrick, President A. M. Moore, M.D., Sec'y and Treas, C. C. Spaulding, Vice-President and General Manager J. M, Avery, Assistant Gen'l Manager E. R. Merrick, Ass't Seo'y. 
$50 $50 $50 $50 $50 $50 $50 
$50 pe r week and more , can be made selling the 
Grea t Pictoria l Histor y of the Negr o i n the Great 
Worl d War . Th e grandest and most unique collection on the marke t of over 120 true pictures of 
officers and men, battle scenes and events, brilliant descriptions of the Colore d Heroe s Goin g 
Ove r the To p and workin g behind the lines. 
Man y elegant Wa r Poems, and a brilliant Historical Sketch of the Great Worl d War , writte n by 
Hon . E . A . Johnson , author of the Grea t Histor y 
of the Negr o Race and Histor y of the Negr o Soldiers in the Spanish America n War. A book every 
home should have and keep i n memor y of the 
deeds of our soldiers and heroes wh o died i n 
France . Hon. E . A. Johnson, 
Writer of the Introduction. 
Agents wante d everywhere . Fo r agents terms address: 
TH E TOUISSANT PICTORIAL CO., Inc. 451 Lenox Ave., New York City, N . Y . 
Pric e for singl e copy by mai l prepaid, $2.25 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 110 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Twelve Songs Sent Postpaid on Receipt of $1.00 
FOR 30 DAY S ONL Y (Mention The Crisis) 
1. " A GOO D MA N IS HAR D T O FIND. " 
2. " I' M DYIN G WIT H TH E WORRIE D BLUES. " 
3. " I WAN T T O LOV E YO U AL L TH E TIME. " 
4. "YOUNG , BLAC K JOE. " 
5. " SWEE T CHILD. " 
6. " OH , DEAT H WHER E I S TH Y STING. " 
7. "REMEMBE R AN D B E CAREFU L EVER Y DAY. " 
8. " I WON' T STO P LOVIN G YOU. " 
9. "SYMPATHIZIN G MOON. " 
10. "THEY'R E HUNTIN G A HUSBAN D FO R HELEN. " 
11. " N O MATTE R WHA T YO U DO. " 
12. "LONESOME , SAL. " 
Ou r musi c may be ha d whereve r musi c is sold. 
" A GOO D MA N IS HAR D T O FIND, " 
Ma y be had at al l the Woolworth , Kresge , Kress, McCrory , Kraft & Willne r stores. 
" A GOO D MA N IS HAR D T O FIND, " 
Ma y be had on Columbia. Victor, Emerson, Pathe, ^Eolian, Okeh, Edison, Gennett and 
other records. Als o on Q. R. S., Imperial, Rythmodik , U . S., Standard and other 
playe r rolls. Als o for bands and orchestras. 
Fo r W . C. Handy's BLUE S and other late music, write, 
PAC Eand HAND Y MUSIC CO. , Inc. (Home of the Blues) 
1547 Broadwa y (Gaiety Theatr e Bldg.), Ne w York , N . Y . 
WANTE D —1000 AGENT S To handle Scott's History of "The American Negro's Part in the Worl d War,"—prepared by Emmett J. Scott, Special Assistant to the Secretary of War, and collaborating agencies that assure authenticity and full detail, including the organi­ zation and training of Negro military units, and a complete record of their service in Camps and on Battlefields; the work of civic auxiliaries, etc., etc. No scissors and paste pot "inserts," but a History freshly written from first to last page. Dr. Scott has had the co-operation of the following collaborators: 
CARTE R G. WOODSON, Director of Research, Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, Incorporated; 
RALP H W. TYLER , Accredited Representative of the Com­ mittee on Public Information, who accompanied the Colored troops to the War Fronts in France; 
WILLIAM ANTHON Y AERY , Publication Secretary, Hamp­ ton Normal and Agricultural Institute; 
MONROE N. WORK, Director, Division of Records and Research, Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; 
MRS. ALICE DUNBAR NELSON (formerly Mrs. Paul Law­ rence Dunbar), a leader in mobilizing the colored women of the Country for War Work under tho auspices of the Women's Committee, Council of National Defense; 
MISS EV A D. BOWLES , Executive Secretary in charge of the Colored work of the Young Women's Christian Asso­ ciation ; 
Emmett J. Scott, LIEUT. T. T THOMPSON, Historian, who accompanied the 
A.M. , L.L.D. famous 92d Division, U. S, A,, to France, 
Thousands of Dollars wil l he made handling this History—600 pages, including 150 illustra­ tions, enormous sales: $8.00 to $10,00 a day being earned. Send 25c for Prospectus and full infor­ mation to 
TH E SERVIC E PUBLISHIN G COMPAN Y P. 0. DRAWE R 1821, WASHINGTON, D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 111 
FLORENC E COLE-TALBER T 
Soprano "She has one of the belt voices that God has given her race."—Los Angeles Times. "Specia l praise must be given Mrs. Florence Tal ­ bert who beside her natural gift has already reached a high plane of professional aocuraoy."—Herman De ­ vrles in Chicago American. Engagements accepted for Concerts. Recitals, Oratorio. 659 28th Street Detroit, Mloh . 
Clarence Cameron White 
VIOLINIST 
"Critics are one in their 
high estimate of the splendid 
attainments of Clarenc e 
Cameron White and his Concert appearance in your city 
means the musical event of 
the season." For terms and dates address 
616 COLUMBUS AVENUE BOSTON, MASS . 
CLEOT A COLLIN S LYRI C SOPRANO 
"Miss Collins possesses a voice of wonderful quality 
which she manages with admirable taste and skill . He r 
personal charm and beauty enhanced the pleasure enjoyed 
from the really excellent program presented. The audience 
of music lovers In attendance were enthusiastic In their 
appreciation of the talented young lady."—Newar k Dall y 
News. ENGAGEMENT S ACCEPTE D 
103 W. 143d St. New York City. 
LUL A ROBINSON-JONES 
Soprano 
Available for Concerts 
Telephone 6393 Moroiogiide 
126 W. 134th Street New York City 
INVINCIBLE CONCERT CO. 
High Class Entertainers 
Churches Schools Lodges Y. M . C. A.'S 
For dates and terms write: 
1910 E . 24th Street, Kansas City, Mo . 
Roland W . Hayes 
Phonograp h Record s 
NOW READ Y AN D ON SAL E {Order by Number) No. I. Swing Low. Sweet Chariot II.>0 
Negro Spiritual, by Harry T. Burleigh. No. 2. Vejtl L a Olubba (Pu t on Your Sraook).. 42.00 Arioso from Pagllacd . Orchestral Accompaniment, Leoncavallo. 
No. 8. Twllllh t f 1.00 
By Katherlne A . Glen. No. 7. By and By H s i 
By Harr y T. Burleigh. 
AGENTS BOSTON . Mau. , A . X Jackson & Co., 130 Boylston hi. BOSTON , Mass.. Harol d Whltham, 1781 Washington St. 
BOSTON , Mass., Hicks. Laney & Eaton. 708 Tre ­ mont St. 
BOSTON , Mass., R. A . Dlnsmore, 1221 Tremont SL CAMBRIDGE , Mass., Mrs. O. W. NoWell. 800 Mai n St. SPRINGFIELD . Mass.. J. W. Adams, 150 Eastern Ale . WOBURN , Mass., Edwar d Caldwell, 388 Mai n St. DETROIT , Mich. , Mls a Qraco L . May , 253 Woodland Ave. 
MONTGOMERY , Ala. , Wm . G . Porter, 368 Margaret St. 
TUS K EG EE . Ala. . Arthu r Logan, Tuskegee Institute. BIRMINGHAM , Ala. , Miss E . O. Wyatt, 1310 Ave ­ nue H . 
JACKSONVILLE , Fla. . 3. 11. Boblnson, Jr., 1924 East St. 
BALTIMORE , Md. , W. H . Roberts. 235 N . Amit y Bt. PORTLAND . Ore., Mrs. E . D . Cannady. 401 Buchanan Bldg . 
PHILADELPHIA , Pa. , Mrs. Margaret Corbett, 1041 Balnbridge St. 
SA N FRANCISCO , Cel. , Harr y O. Johnson. Security Savings Bank. OAKLAND . Cal. . Mrs. A . M . Smith, 494 Moss Ave. 
CHARLESTON , S. C , E . B . Lawrence. 470 Kin g B t NORFOLK , Va. , Miss B . C. Smith, 822 Avenue A . 
PITTSBURGH , Pa. , Mrs. Chas. II. Trusty. 820 Ana ­ heim St. WASHINGTON , D. C Dr. C. Sumner Wormley. 997 Florid a Ave. 
SPRINGFIELD , III., Miss Alic e E . Williams, Bo x 131. Chatham. 111. MAOISONVILLE , Ky. . J. A . Watson, 117 Mai n St. LOUISVILLE , Ky. , Mrs. H . W. Jordan, 822 W . Wal ­ nut St. 
LOUISVILLE , Ky. , Columbi a Phonograph Co. PROVIDENCE , R. I., Miss Fiorin a M . Williams. 297 Thayer St. 
NE W YOR K CITY , N . Y. , Dr. Harr y C. Blue , 563 Lenox Ave. 
MONTCLAIR , N . J., James D . Williams, 7 Walnu t PI. 
COLLINGSWOOD , N . J., Mr . K . If. Taylor, 501 Par k Ave. WACO , Texas. Miss Lul a Mayes, 1127 N . 7th SL MERIDIAN . Mtss., L . L . Foster. 1207 26th BL INDIANAPOLIS , Ind.. W. H . Roberts, 601 West S L WILMINGTON , Del. , Mrs. Elizabeth D . Banton, 924 French St. 
GREENVILLE . S. C . Mr . James R. Kennedy. 630 Pendleton St. 
CHARLESTON , W. Va. , Mr . Edwar d C. Lewis. Bo x 1204. 
WILL I A MS B RIDGE , N . Y. , Mr . Robert H . O. Young, 743 E . 218th SL DETROIT . Mloh. , Mr . W. Arnol d Hooper. 647 SL Antolne S L 
TULSA . Okla. , Mr . Harrison M . Maglll , 3051*4 N . Hartford Ave. 
ATHENS . Ga. , Dr. Charles Walton, 1211*4 Clayton S L DAYTON , O.. Mr. R. D . McGregor. 100 Pontiac St. CHICAGO , III., Mr . Davi d Mitchell, 6428 Eberhard Ave. 
PARKERSBURG , W . Va. . Mrs. James E . Edmondson, 591 5th St. 
ST. LOUIS , Mo. , Mr . Claborno Riddle , 4208 W . Cote Brilllante . 
NE W YOR K CITY . The Pace & Handy Muslo Co.. 
Inc., 1547 Broadway. 
STAMFORD , Conn., Mr. Emmett Lewis, Bo x 277. 
Reliable and energetic Agents wanted in 
cities not here mentioned. 
Roland W. Hayes,
Oratorio, Opera,
Continental Tour,
dates, etc please
Roland 
3 WARWICK ST. 
 Tenor. Recitals, Concerts, 
 Booking
 season
 write. 
W .
 engagements for 
 1919, For terms, 
 Hayes 
BOSTON, MASS. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 112 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
KELL Y MILLER' S 
Race Statesmanship 
Exhibited in Two Great Pamphlets 
1. "Th e Negr o i n the Ne w Re ­
construction. " Considered the most 
powerful plea that has yet come from 
the author's pen. 10 cents. 
2. "Th e Disgrac e of Democracy. " 
Pronounce d _in Europ e and Americ a 
as one of the most strikin g literary 
documents produced by the Worl d 
War. 10 cents. 
Agents wanted everywhere . Rate s 
to agents 5 cents a copy. Ad d 10% 
to bil l to cove r postage. 
Address 
KELL Y MILLE R 
Howard University Washington, D. C. 
Inform yourself as to 
TH E EXODU S OF TH E 
NEGROES 
By reading * 
Dr. Carter G . Woodson's 
A CENTURY O F NEGRO 
MIGRATION 
220 Pages Price SI. 10 
This boo k is unique i n that it is the 
first and onl y scientific treatise in 
this field. It undertakes to explain 
wh y the Negroe s have migrated, 
wher e they have gone and wha t they 
have done. 
Agents wanted everywhere. 
Send all orders to the author 
1216 You Street, N. W. 
Washington, D. C . 
Mention
Agents wanted everywhere to supply the big 
demand for our high grad Calling Cards. 
Most fashionable styles of cards for ladies 
or gentlemen, 100 for 50 cents. No extra 
charge for address. Light, pleasant and very 
profitable spare time work. Outfit furnished. 
Prompt and dependable service. All orders 
sent postpaid. Write for samples and terms. 
Address: The House of Chowning 
Indianapolis, Ind. 
Teachers A state supervisor ofschools 
writes us: "Wil l you kindly 
furnish mc a large list of teachers for our schools 
for the next year? I can have them appointed at once. 
We need them for all types of schools, but primarily 
for rural schools." 
We also have immediate calls for teachers of auto mechanics, carpentry, painting, agriculture, Spanish and French Th . e Colored Teachers' Bureau TH E MUTUA L TEACHERS ' AGENC Y 1403Wil New York Avenue Washington, D. C. l Help Yo u Get a Better Paying Position. 
REGISTER NOW REASONABLE TERMS 
Address: Colored Teachers' Bureau 
Box 22, Wilberforce, 0. 
"An Art Treasure at Home" 
Wm . Edouar d Scott offers a rare 
opportunit y to have a rare art treasure in you r home . Sen d a photo ­
graph of yourself or you r son or you r 
brothe r wh o is "ove r there" an d he 
wil l paint a beautiful portrait of him ; 
one that wil l retain colo r for one 
hundred years. Absolut e lightness. 
Guaranteed bot h in colo r an d form 
and beautifully framed to hang. 
PRICE S 
8 x 10 $25.00 
16 x 20 50.00 
24 x 30 100.00 
Terms: One-half down , balanc e o n receipt of portrait, if absolutely satisfactory. 
Mr . Scott is a graduate of the Ar t 
Institute, Chicago , Julia n Academy , 
Paris, Franc e and the Beau x Arts, 
Paris. H e also studied three years 
wit h H . O . Tanne r an d has exhibited 
in the Roya l Academy , London , Eng ­
land, Salon, Paris and i n most of the 
large Ar t Gallerie s of the Unite d 
States. 
Address: 
0Eberhart Ave., William E. Scott, 643
Chicago, III. 
Telephone—Wentworth 8810 
1124 N, Senate Ave., Indianapolis, Ind. 
 TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 113 
WHICH OF THESE SUITS DO YOU WANT? Here's the Biggest Tailoring Offer ever made. Stylish perfect-fitting suits SEN D made to your individual measure, of the season's choicest silk decorated SEN D 
NO weaves, silk-stripe fabrics, gold-mixed worsteds, and imported dress cloths, NO 
MONE Y guaranteed to please you completely, or Money Back. Write for free MONE Y 
samples to-day, and pick the one you like best, at: 
8 95 85 48 95 90 1 2 1 5 2 1 2 5 
DRESS UP AN D MAK E BIG MONEY If you care to see the BIGGEST VALUES IN TAILORING, if you 
care to see the choicest up-to-date patterns, if you care to make a 
big: saving-, write us to-day, and we will send you, entirely free, 
our fine tailoring book with cloth samples of imported and domestic weaves in those rich, stylish patterns, now worn by dressy 
men and young men. Don't think of placing an order for new 
clothes anywhere before you see this book of surprising tailoring 
values. 
YO U SAV E from 30 to 50 PER CENT That's what your saving amounts to when you order 
clothes of us. And ours is genuine hand-tailoring expertly-done, beautiful work. Every garment tailored 
strictly to individual measure, and guaranteed to satisfy 
and please you completely, or full purchase price cheerfully returned. "We "Will Not Keep One Penny Of Your 
Money, Unless You Are "WELL-PLEASED, thus leaving it 
to each customer to judge whether the clothes ordered 
of us are the best-wearing, the most satisfactory garments 
yon ever wore. 
NO EXTR A CHARGES-POSTAG E 
PAID When you order of us you pay No Extra Charges of any kind. Whether you prefer a conservative, or a fancy novelty style, the price is always the same. No matter how tall or stout you are, there are No Extra Charges of any kind, and every order is sent postage paid. 
-
THIS BEAUTIFU L PLATED GOLD PIN FRE E To make certain you will tell others about us, we will give you absolutely FREE , with your first order, this handsome Gold-plated PIN. There is no advertising on this Pin. You will be proud to wear it. Your friends will ask you what this beautiful emblem stands for—and this will remind you to recommend OUR STYLISH TAILORING to them. 
CASH PROFITS FOR SPARE-TIME WORK 
Together with our free samples, we will send you also full information of how you can earn, a lot of extra money by sending orders for your relatives and friends. You will be surprised what a real money-making opportunity this means to you, even if you can spare only a few hours for this work. Orders come easy when you can show tailoring values like ours. The big saving can be seen at a glance. Some of our agents make from $25,00 to $50.00 a week, others as high as $75.00. Mr. Will J, Davis, of North Carolina writes: "Orders are easy to get. I made $16.69 in three hours." That's nice money for three hours' work, and we have thousands of similar letters, all telling the same pleasing, satisfying story. You will find the work easy and pleasant, no experience needed, nothing at all to learn, nothing to study. Send 
us your name send it to-day—now—while the whole matter is fresh in your mind, and get 
complete book of fashions with free cloth samples and full information. Address 
CHICAG O TAILOR S ASSOCIATIO N 
515-521 So . Frankli n Stree t Dept . M-57 2 Chicag o 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 114 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
Atlanta University 
Studie s o f th e Negr o Problem s 
20 Monograph! Sold Separately 
Address 
ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y CONFERENC E ATLANT A UNIVERSIT Y •• ATLANTA , GA . 
TH E NEGR O IN AMERICA N HISTOR Y Contain s 296 Pages, 35 Chapters, Historica l 
an d Biographical , 1 7 Ful l Pag e Illustration s 
Printe d o n Fin e Antiqu e Book , Boun d i n Ful l 
Gree n Extr a Cloth , Gol d Titl e o n Fron t Cove r 
an d Shel f Back . Price , ne t $1.25 . Postag e 
Prepai d $1.40 . Orde r throug h an y bookselle r 
o r direc t fro m th e author. Addres s 
JOH N W. CROMWEL L 
1439 Swann St. Washington, D. C . 
ELECTRICA L ENGINEER 
Graduate of prominent technical college and 
thoroughly experienced, open for engagement. 
Youn g man with excellent technical training 
and executive ability. Bo x 47H, in care of 
TH E CRISIS , 70 Fift h Avenue, Ne w Yor k City. 
BUSTS O F 
Booker T. Washington, 
Fred Douglass , Paul 
Lawrenc e Dunbar , 
Bishop Richard Allen. 
$1.5 0 each . Th e 4 busts lo r $5.0 0 
Agent s wanted . Sen d a t once . 
The Isaac Hathaway Art 
Company 
718 S. HICKOR Y STREE T 
PIN E BLUFF , ARK . 
PATRIOTI C PAGEAN T 
by Mm e E. Azatia Hackley 
Th e Wel l Know n Promote r of Communit y 
Entertainments 
Fo r Churches, Philanthropi c or beneficial Societies, 
Schools, or, as a source of incom e to director s with 
or without Musica l Knowledge . 
Th e greatest an d surest money makin g entertainment 
before the public . 
Quick , easy, inexpensive, artistic , ful l of action, 
satisfying, flexible, educationa l an d it never fails 
as the greatest of financial successes. 
Anyon e who can walk, ol d or young , ma y participate , 
an d the Pagean t Part y ma y numbe r one hundre d o r 
one thousand, accordin g to the seating capacity. 
Th e Patrioti c Pageant ma y be given as a Victor y 
Pageant, a Pagean t of Nations, a Queen's Pagean t 
or a Queen's Masque . 
Th e first book earned over $759 for a churc h In a 
smal l town an d was conducted by a n inexperienced 
woma n with no musica l ability. 
Giv e a Patrioti c Pagean t for your Church , you r Da y 
Nursery , your Ol d Folk's Home , your N . A. A, C . 
P. . your T . W . C . A., or your School. Var y the 
idea unti l you wear it to shreds an d stil l money 
wil l come to your cause. Ge t the Pagean t habit. 
It pays. 
Patrioti c Pagean t Book , complet e instructions, $3.00, 
an d 10c for postage. P. O. orde r only. 
LANGSTO N and BRASCHER , Sol e Agents 
3129 So . Stat e Stree t Chicago , Illinois 
HOTEL DALE 
CAP E MAY , N. J . 
Comfort and Elegance without Extravagance 
Thi s Magnificen t Hotel , Locate d i n 
th e Hear t o f th e Mos t Beautifu l 
Seashor e Resor t i n th e World , 
is replete wit h every modern improvement, 
superlative i n construction, appointments, service and refined patronage. Orchestra daily, 
garage, bath houses, tennis, etc., on premises. 
Special attention given to ladies and children. 
Send for booklet. 
E . W. DALE , Owner 
HOTE L WASHINGTO N 
First-Class Service for First-Class People 
3427 Sout h Par k Avenue , Chicago , III. 
Open June 20th. Closed September 10th 
THE OCEAN HOUSE 
Sea Isle City, N . J . 
This hotel is right on the ocean front. It has wide porches, large conservatory dining room where one has a beautiful view of the ocean while dining. Every room opens on the ocean. Special rates for July. Mrs. Lucy Lee, proprietor, 5 Plain St., Elmhurst, L, I. Address after June 1st, Ocean House, Sea Isle City, N. J. Bell telephone con­ nection. 
NEGRO We want to help you. We are interested in your welfare. We want 
you to make this the most successful BUSINESS and profitable year in the history of
your business. Would you like to attract more trade and increase your MEN sales 100 % by using certain approved business methods!' If this 
proposition interests you, please address 
THE INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE 
P. O. Box 82, Uptown Station, Pittsburgh, Pa. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 115 
Colored Dolls for 
Your Children Teach your children pride of race and appreciation of race. Early impressions are lasting. These beautifully dressed, unbreakable, 
brown skin dolls designed and made by colored 
girls in a factory owned and controlled entirely 
by colored people. These are not the old time, 
black face, red Up aunt jemima colored dolls 
but dolls well made and truly representative of 
the race in hair and features. 
1 6 inches with long flowing curls, beautifully dressed 93.5 0 
16 inches with marcel wave, nicely 
dressed 3.0 0 
16 inches Buster Brown style hair, very 
neat 2.5 0 
Soldier boy in full uniform 1.5 0 
So far as we know this is the only Negro 
doll factory in the world. 
BERR Yand ROSS, Inc. Factory: 36-38 W. 13Sth bt. 
NEW YOR K CIT Y 
E . 8. Boulin, President, 
Dr. E . Rawlina, Vice President, 
Counsellor P. Ifleld, General Manager, 
8, Held, Business & Bales Manager. 
AGENTS WANTE D WRITE FOB TEEMS 
Only those who mean business need write us. 
Earn $35.to $IOO WEEKLY 
AL L OR SPAR E TIM E 
Tub 
Guaranteed 
For Ten Years 
Ton—yourself-ca n positivel y mak e 135 t o WOO a week. I want men , hustling , energetic , ambitiou s fellows, anjiou s to mak e money , wh o ar e willin g t o workwit h me . No t lo r me . but wit h me . Ar e yo u tha t kind ? I wan t yo u t o advertise , sell an d aDDoin t loca l agents fo r th e biraest. most sensationa l eel le r I n IS wrs-th e fiOBTNSON FOIDIN G BAT H TUB . Ben.™­ •tratln c Tu b Furnished . Here's a n absolutely new inventio n -nothin g lik e it . Make s instan t appeal. Sells easily. Give s nver y hom e a modern , np-to-dnte bathroom In an y part or tne house. N o plumbing , n o water-works needed. Fold s i n smal l rol l hand y a umbrella . Self-emptying , positively nnleakable . B
Absolutel y gnarantee d fo r 10 years. TSemember. full y 10 pe r oent o f home s hav e n o bat h rooms. 
Sensational Sales Successes Tw o Bale s a da y mean s 1300 a month . Breeze , o f Idaho , mad e WOO profit i n 30days. Eev . Ott o Bcholze , Mo. , got *1600 t o date. Bnrkholder . Mont, , orders »0T2 i n 17 days. Hamlinton . o f Wy o .mad e $60 first tw o da's. Hnndredelik e that. Pleasant, permanent , fascinatin g work . Writ e a post card . Le t m e writeyo u a lon g letter. N o experienc e needed, n o capital . Yourcredltisgoodi f yo n mea n business. Bu t yo u mart be ambitions, yo n must wan t t o mak e money. Tha t 8 all . Writ e !~p ^tCBx d now. . I wan t t o pay yo u S35 to HOO every week, • H.S. Robinson.'Pres. The Robinson Cabinet Mf *VCo. 4974 Factories Building Toledo. Ohio 
HIGH GRADE AGENTS 
WANTED ­
MEN AND WOMEN 
To sell Lots in most attractive 
Townsite, under new Development plan, for only 
$49.50 
O N VER Y EAS Y TERM S 
PROPOSITIO N I S ALREAD Y GO ­
IN G BI G and people all over the 
country are securing the lots. Ou r 
representatives are earning BI G 
MONE Y and YO U can do the same. 
This is a very attractive offer for the 
buyers as wel l as the agents. 
Send for Circular and Full 
Particulars at Once! 
TH E SWAN-ARENSO N REALT Y 
and DEVELOPMEN T CO. 
19 S. La Salle Street, CHICAGO, ILL. 
SPEN D YOU R VACATIO N A T 
Beautiful Idlewild The most wonderfully ideal spot where young and old tast aside fur the time all the cares and worries of their strenuous, nerve-racking routine Uvea and romp and play once more as children and enjoy to the full nature in all her wondrous glory. The waters of the lake and surrounding trout streams are fairly teeming with game fish of the best varieties. 
D o you enjoy bathing, boating, fishing, hunting? 
D o you enjoy roaming through the woods picking 
wild flowers and wild berries? 
D o you want a place to go where you can buil d up 
your health, vitality, energy and business efficiency? 
Do you enjoy mingling with the active, thinking, 
progressive people of the day—people who do things? 
D o you believe i n progress and do you want to 
have a part In one of the most progressive more- . 
ments of the time? Surelyl 
Then you wil l be interested In, and want to 
own a lot of your own in Beautiful Idlewild, 
Michigan. If you act at once you can secure a beautiful let for only $30.00 each; 
$6.00 cash; $1.00 per week. When your 
payments are completed the lot wil l be 
transferred to you by an absolute 
warranty deed with abstract showing clear title. 
Good live energetic 
agents wanted 
Idlewild Resort 
Company 1110 Hartford Bldg 
So. Dearborn St. 
Chicago. IU. 
Mention TH E CRISIS . 116 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
FEE T 
SORE and TENDER 
Antiseptic Foot Powder, relieving excessive perspiration and 
uftenslvr odors. 
Price 50 cents. By Mal l 60 cents. 
DR. WILLIAM J . CARTER , Foo t Specialist 
167 West 136th St.. New York City. 
Mrs . M . WATSO N RUDD , 
154 Wes t 131st St . Ne w Yor k Cit y 
ha s place d upo n the marke t he r ne w 
ROS E NINO N NUFEE T POWDE R It is especiall y recommende d fo r soldiers, clerks, railroa d an d factor y employees, dancers an d al l person s 
wh o ar e require d to stan d or wal k to an y extent . 
Arenti 'Wanted—Write for particulars. 
PRINTIN G at 
POPULAR 
PRICES 
100 Good Letterheads, Envelopes, Cards, billheads or statements. $1 
500, $2.25; 1,000, $3.50; s.ooo, $14.75. Cash 
wit h order. Money Back Guarantee. 
ye MISSIO N PRIN T SHOP 
SAM H . READING, ye Printer 
611 N. 43rd Street PHILADELPHIA 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . TH E 117 CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
STORIES of JESU S 
TH E CHRIS T 
B Y FRAN K HARRI S 
INCLUDING 
JESU S 
By GEORG E BERNAR D SHAW 
27c postpaid anywhere 
PEARSO N LIBRAR Y 
39 Union Square New York City 
Telephone,Baring 7794 
ISADOR E MARTI N 
Real Estate and Insurance 
Notary Public Mortgage! 
6 North 42nd Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 
Patents secured on easy terms Writ e for particulars. 
JOS. H . STEWART , Attorney-at-Law, 
494 Louisian a Ave., N . W-, Washington , D . C . 
_ , . f Centra l 104- W Telephones: {M a i n 6 1 
HARR Y E . DAVI S ATTORNEY-AT-LAW NOTARY PUBLIC 
1607 Williamso n Builidn g Cleveland , Ohi o 
Genera l Practic e Notar y Publi c 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
818 Metropolita n Lif e Buildin g 
Minneapoli s Minn . 
BROW N S. SMIT H ATTORNEY- AT-LAW 
Offices: Suit e 80 2 Syke s Bloc k 
Nea r Thir d an d Hennepi n 
Minneapoli s Minn . 
Tel . 343 7 For t Hil l Cabl e Address, Epbe n 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR-AT-LAW 
34 Schoo l Stree t Bosto n Mass. 
Telephon e Connectio n 
W . Ashbi e Hawkin s Georg e W . F . McMeche n 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N ATTORNEY-AT-LAW 
21 East Saratog a Stree t Baltimore , Md . 
Badges, Banners, Lodge Regalia 
For all Lodge and Church Societies 
CENTRA L REGALIA CO. 
JOS . L . JONES , Pro. . 
N . E . Cor. 8th and Plum Sts., Cincinnati, Ohio 
WANTE D 
Agents for TH E CRISIS. Dignified Work 
70 Fifth Avenue, New York 
Statemen t o f the Ownership , Management , Circula ­
tion , etc., require d by the Ac t o f Congress o f August 
34, 1912, o f TH E CRISIS , publishe d monthl y at 70 
Fift h Avenue , Ne w York , N . Y. , fo r Apri l 1, 1919. 
Stat e o f Ne w York , fts 
Count y o f Ne w York , 
Befor e me , a Notar y Publi c i n an d fo r the Stat e 
an d count y aforesaid , personall y appeare d Augustu s 
Granvill e Dill , who , havin g been dul y swor n accor d 
in g to law , depose s an d says that he is the Business 
Manage r o f TH E CRISIS , an d that the followin g is 
to the best o f his knowledg e an d belief, a tru e statemen t o f the ownership , management , etc., o f the 
aforesai d publicatio n fo r the dat e show n i n the abov e 
caption , require d by the Ac t o f Augus t 24, 1912, embodie d i n sectio n 443, Federa l Law s an d Regulations. 
Publisher , Th e Nationa l Associatio n fo r the Ad ­
vancemen t o f Colore d People , 70 Fift h Ave. , Ne w 
Yor k City ; Editor , W . E . Burghard t DuBois , 70 Fift h 
Ave. , Ne w Yor k City ; Managin g Editor , W . E . Burg ­
hard t DuBois , 70 Fift h Ave. , Ne w Yor k City ; Busi ­
ness Manager , Augustu s Granvill e Dill , 70 Fift h Ave. , 
Ne w Yor k City ; Owners : Th e Nationa l Associatio n 
fo r the Advancemen t o f Colore d People , a corporatio n 
wit h n o stock ; Membershi p ove r 48,000 ; Moorfiel d 
Storey , President ; Joh n H . Shillady , Secretary ; Oswal d Garriso n Villard , Treasurer ; Mar y Whit e Oving ­
ton , Chairma n o f Boar d o f Directors. 
Know n bondholders, mortgagee s an d othe r securit y 
holders holdin g 1 pe r cent, o r mor e o f tota l amoun t 
" o f bonds, mortgages, o r othe r securities: None . 
A . G . DILL , Business Manager . 
Swor n to an d subscribe d befor e me this 1st da y 
o f April , 1919. 
FRAN K M .TURNER , Notar y Public . 
Notar y Publi c Queen s County , No . 2302. 
Certificat e filed i n Ne w Yor k County , No . 188 ; 
Ne w Yor k Reg . No . 10127. 
(M y commissio n expire s Marc h 30, 1920.J 
Would you like to know why the Negro and Caucasian 
are mixing in spite of prejudice ? Then, read 
" A s Natur e Leads, " by J . A . Itogers, author of " Fro m 
Superma n to Aran. " Undoubtedl y the most fearless analysis 
of the Negro-Caueasia n situation by any author . Th e writer 
penetrates to the very hear t of the subject an d in a style 
bubblin g with vigor he puts in the clearest language thoughts 
of your innermost consciousness. Arguments supported by the 
world 's greatest scientists and philosophers. Kasil y read. 
A book yo u will read an d re-read an d give to your friends. 
Price , $1.25; by mail, $1.35. 
Hayes Book Store, 3640 State Street. Chicago , III. 
Young's Book Exchange . 135 W . 135th St., New Yor k City . 
R. G . Moore . 2535 Georgi a Ave. , N.W. , Washington , D . C . 
Agents wanted. Writ e Hayes Book Store . 
Send us a pictur e of your relative, 
sweetheart or of yourself an d let us 
pu t it on one of our Phot o Pillo w Tops. 
GUARANTEED LIKENESS . Thes e 
Phot o Pillo w Top s can bo washed an d 
ironed without injury. Tel l us your 
birt h month. Specia l attention given 
to returned heroes. Postage paid . You r 
phot o returned unharmed . Send your 
orde r today. Quality , sateen, $1.74; 
silk, $2.99. 
TH E TALBER T PRES S SERVICE , 
299 Walnu t Street, Buffalo , N . Y . 
WARNIN G The CRISIS urges its readers and patrons 
to pay no money for subscriptions to strangers. Only recognized agents of the CRISIS 
are authorized to take subscriptions and so 
we cannot be held responsible for the misrepresentations of unauthorized solicitors. 
The CRISIS does not employ any person 
to solicit "write-ups" for its pages and any 
soliciting of this sort should be disregarded 
and denounced. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . 118 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISER 
KELLY MILLER'S HISTORY OF 
THE NEGRO IN THE WORLD WAR 
New Book Published May 24th, 1919 
TH E KELL Y MILLE R HISTOR Y O F TH E WORL D WA R is al l that the titl e ca n possibl y mean . 
Th e autho r takes u p the Grea t Conflict , followin g it step by step throug h the thirt y excellen t chapters, 
includin g the Term s of the Armistice , an d Genera l Pershing's ful l report o the Wa r Department , an d 
give s us the onl y condense d Histor y of the Grea t Wa r tha t is fair to tht Negr o Race . 
Th e Negro's Wa r fo r Democratization—H e brace s Himsel f an d Claim s to be the Champio n o f 
Democracy—Enters the Aren a of Combat! Th e Germa n Indigent—Th e Sout h Sensitive—Th e Nort h 
Quizzical—Th e Whol e Worl d Hesitant . 
700 Pases, 
50 Pages of Negro Soldiers, 50 
Pages of other appropriate and Interesting pictures. 
TH E NEGR O I N 
TH E NAV Y 
Mor e tha n fifty pages of the 
Boo k devote d to the ACHIEVE ­
MENT S O F TH E NEGR O I N 
TH E AMERICA N NAVY — 
Guardin g the Trans-Atlanti c Rout e 
to France — Battlin g the Submarin e Peril—Th e Best Sailors 
i n an y Nav y i n the World—Mak ­
in g a Nav y i n Thre e Month s from 
Negr o Stevedore s an d Laborers — 
Wonderfu l Accomplishments o f 
Ou r Negr o Yeome n an d Yeo -
women . 
Prof . Kell y Miller , Author , Howar d University , Washington . D . C 
Dean Miller t Picture II x 14 Given With the book, or Picture Mailed for 25c 
AGENTS WANTED 
Th e Boo k is a RECOR D BREAKER ! 
Sen d 25 cents fo r a prospectus—It wil l be the 
best investmen t yo u eve r made—Gras p the Opportunit y of Makin g Mone y faster than yo u have 
eve r done before ! 
Ou r agents are sendin g us thousand s of orders 
weekly—Ther e wil l be A MILLIO N copies of the 
book sold durin g the nex t six month s an d A 
MILLIO N DOLLAR S profit made by agents—Ar e 
yo u goin g to get you r share ? Man y Agents are 
leavin g hig h salarie d position s to canvass! 
W e wil l quot e yo u agent's price s thr.t wil l surprise you — Ou r agents conside r a da y lost whe n 
they fail to make at least $10—Ge t i n touc h wit h 
us an d let us tell yo u about OUT * libera l terms, 
larg e profits and free book offers. 
Th e Negr o Turn s the Tid e at Chatea u Thierry — 
H e Help s Hur l Bac k the Horde s o f the Hun — 
Win s Hi s Plac e an d Righ t to a Voic e i n the Af ­
fairs o f Mankin d against Prejudice , Ridicule , Rac e 
Hatre d an d almost Insurmountabl e Obstacles! 
Kell y Miller , Dea n o f Howar d University , residin g i n Washington , D . C , the frien d of Gov ­
ernmen t officials i n the Nationa l Capital , is the 
best prepare d Negr o to give a complet e recor d o f 
wha t the soldiers an d sailors o f his rac e have accomplishe d i n the Worl d Wa r fo r Huma n Rights. 
It is the most satisfactor y an d impartia l Wa r 
Histor y ye t written . 
Th e book is boun d i n durabl e cloth , wit h substantia l head hand , pric e $2.50. I n Ful l Keroto l 
Morocc o (simila r to cut) $3.25. Cop y maile d to 
an y address upo n receipt of the price . Satisfac ­
tio n guarantee d o r mone y refunded . 
AUSTI N JENKIN S CO . 
523 9th St., WASHINGTON , D . C . 
(Address the nearer office) 
443 Sout h Dearborn St., Chicago , 111. 
The Largest Publishers of special books for Negroes. 
Mentio n TH E CRISIS . A Selected List of Books 
These prices do not include postage. Postage extra. 
HAZEL . (Mar y White Ovington) $1.0 0 
TH E HEAR T OF A WOMA N AN D OTHE R POEMS . (Georgia Douglas 
Johnson) 1.25 
NORRI S WRIGH T CUNE Y (Maud Cuney Hare) 1.50 
TH E LIF E AN D TIME S O F BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (B. F . Riley) 1.50 
A NARRATIV E OF TH E NEGRO . (Leila Amos Pendleton) 1.50 
SOUL S OF BLAC K FOLK . (W. E . B. DuBois) 1.25 
A CENTUR Y OF NEGR O MIGRATION . (Carter G. Woodson) 1.10 
RAC E ADJUSTMENT . (Kelly Miller) 2.0 0 
HISTOR Y OF TH E NEGRO . (B. G. Brawley) 1.25 
TH E NEGR O MIGRAN T I N PITTSBURGH . (Abraham Epstein).. . .50 
GRANN Y MAUME E AN D OTHE R PLAY S FOR A NEGR O THEATRE . 
(Ridgely Torrence) 1.50 
HAL F A MAN . (Mary White Ovington) 1.00 
AFTERMAT H OF SLAVERY . (William Sinclair) 1.50 
M Y LIF E AN D WORK . (Bishop Alexander Walters) 1.50 
TH E NEGR O I N LITERATUR E AN D ART . (B. G. Brawley) 1.35 
FIFT Y YEAR S AN D OTHE R POEMS . (James Weldon Johnson).. 1.25 
JOH N BROWN . (W. E . B. D U Bois) 1.50 
NEGR O I N AMERICA N HISTORY . (J. W. Cromwell) 1.25 
PRINC E HAL L AN D HI S FOLLOWERS . (George W. Crawford). . 1.00 
TH E HAITIA N REVOLUTION . (T. G. Steward) 1.25 
NEGR O CULTUR E I N WES T AFRICA . (George W. Ellis) 2.0 0 
TH E NEGRO . (W . E . B. D U Bois) 7 5 
TH E EDUCATIO N OF TH E NEGR O PRIO R TO 1861 . (Carter G. 
Woodson) 2.0 0 
FACT S OF RECONSTRUCTION . (John R. Lynch) 1.50 
LIF E AN D LETTER S OF COLERIDGE-TAYLOR . (W . C. BerwickSayers) 2.2 5 
POEM S OF PAU L LAURENC E DUNBA R 2.2 5 
AFRO-AMERICA N FOLKSONGS . (H. E . Krehbiel) 2.0 0 
OU T OF TH E HOUS E OF BONDAGE . (Kelly Miller) 1.50 
BOOKE R T. WASHINGTON . (Emmett J. Scott and Lyman 
Beecher Stowe) 2.0 0 
Address, TH E CRISIS , : : : : : 70 Fifth Avenue, New York Kashmir 
FOR HAIR AN D SKIN 
"BETTE R THA N TH E BEST " 
Kashmir Whitener and 
Cleanser 
Kashmir Hair Beautifier 
Kashmir Cream Balm — 
The New Liquid Cold Cream 
Kashmir Liquid Powder 
Kashmir Vanishing Cream 
Kashmir Cold Cream 
Kashmir Cream Powder 
Kashmir Dandruff Remedy 
Kashmir Rouge 
Kashmir Shampoo 
50c EACH ; 8c POSTAG E EACH . 
For sale at Drug Stores and Beauty Shops everywhere. Ask your 
druggist or beauty specialist. They will get it for you. 
Write for our free 
Beauty Book. 
Kashmir Chemical Co., 
Dept. K, 312 So. Clark St., 
Chicago, Ill. 