THE CRISI
Ten Cenfs 
A Copy 
June 
1913 A Trip to Waltonia 
"The Proposed Colored Colony of Character 
and Culture —And Some Impressions 
By ALBON L. HOLSEY 
"Realizing that the home-loving 
colored citizens of this section have 
in many instances been defrauded and 
discriminated against, and for that 
reason are more or less skeptical 
about real estate propositions, we not 
only invite, but urge every prospec ­
tive purchaser of lots in Waltonia to 
make a most rigid investigation of our 
property, titles and business methods. " 
In this frank manner Mr. Furlow 
addressed me concerning Waltonia, 
the colored colony which is being 
promoted by the Rosalind Realty Co., 
and extended me an invitation to visit 
the place. 
The trip to Potter, N. J., where 
Waltonia is located, was about fortyfive minutes from Hudson Terminal. 
The day was ideal and my first impulse, when stepping from the train, 
was to take a deep breath of the pure 
air and then a romp up the "big 
road" as I used to do "down home. " 
Within a stone's throw of the station a clear, sparkling brooklet winds 
its way among grass-covered knolls 
and shade trees. A nearby spring 
completes Nature's suggestion that 
this part of Waltonia would make a 
splendid park and playground for 
children—and, by the way, I now recall that a park is included in the 
plans of the promoters. 
W e followed the "big road" up a 
gradual incline for about three 
hundred yards until a stretch of table 
land opened before us which, with the 
exception of one depression, was as 
smooth as a parlor floor, high and dry, 
with splendid natural drainage and a 
pleasing view of the surrounding 
country. 
"Gentlemen," said Mr. Bradshaw, 
our genial guide, "this is Waltonia. " 
He then pointed to lots purchased by 
Dr. W . 11. nrnoks. Mr. J. W . Rose, 
Dr. Sterling, Rev. Timms and many 
others whose names I do not recall. 
He showed us the water main which 
passes through the center of the proposed colon y and where the electric 
and telephone wires pass, assuring 
future residents of Waltoni a all the 
comforts of city life. 
One thing that impressed me about 
Waltonia, aside from the natural 
beauty which surrounds it, was its 
proximity to such cities as Plainfield, 
Rahway and Xewark, affording social 
intercourse with a well-to-do, prosperous class of colored people in these 
cities and nearby shopping and theatre 
centers. 
Thousands of people wh o live in 
Plainfield work in New Yor k City 
and make the two trips daily on com ­
muters' tickets. Residents of Waltonia may travel on these commuters' 
tickets to New Yor k at a net cost of 
25 1/3 cents per round trip. 
In their prospectus I find the following interesting paragraph: 
"And to that end we propos e 
to sell our lots upon easy terms, 
with moderate monthly payments, 
without interest or taxes, and when 
fully paid for to furnish a deed 
guaranteed by the Middlesex Title 
Guarantee and Trust Co., of New 
Brunswick, N. J., and when desired 
we will lend our assistance toward 
securing the cheapest mone y for 
building purposes to be had in the 
city." 
Henc e with such a program in con ­
nection with the property they own , 
affording as it does the foundation 
for a splendid city, there is no reason 
why Waltonia should not gro w and 
flourish like the proverbial "green bay 
tree," especially as it is the only one 
of New York's hundred or mor e 
suburbs inviting colored residents, 
and any colored home seeker or investor will do well to look into the 
matter carefully before investing or 
locating elsewhere. 
Address for literature: 
ROSALIN D REALT Y CO. , Inc. 
2 7 WILLIA M STREE T NE W YOR K 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS 
A RECOR D O F TH E DARKE R RACE S 
PUBLISHED BY THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED 
PEOPLE. AT 26 VESEY STREET. NEW YORK CITY 
Conducted by W . E. Burghardt Du Bois 
Contents for June, 1913 
COVE R PICTURE. By Vincent Ellsworth Saunders. 
Page 
CARTOON . By Lorenzo W . Harris 80 
ARTICLES 
PLACIDO . Poet and Martyr. By Jose Clarana 82 
A N OAT H OF AFRO-AMERICA N YOUTH . By Kelly Miller 92 
DEPARTMENTS 
ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 59 
ME N OF TH E MONT H 72 
OPINIO N 74 
EDITORIA L 78 
NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FOR TH E ADVANCEMEN T OF 
COLORE D PEOPLE 85 
WHA T T O REA D 92 
TE N CENTS A COPY ; ON E DOLLA R A YEA R 
FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS TWENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTRA 
RENEWALS: When a subscription blank is attached to this page a renewal of your 
subscription is desired. The date of the expiration of your subscription will be found on the 
wrapper. 
CHANGE OF ADDRESS: The address of a subscriber can be changed as often as desired. 
In ordering a change of address, both the old and the new address must be given. Two weeks' 
notice is required. 
MANUSCRIPTS and drawings relating to colored people are desired. They must be accompanied by return postage. If found unavailable they will be returned. 
Entered as Second-class Matter in the Post Office at New York, N. Y. SUMMER SESSION AT WILBERFORCE UNIVERSITY 
Under such prominent educators as Dr. W. E. B. Du Bois, Prof. Kelley Miller, Dr. L. B. Moore, Prof. G. N. Grisham, Edwina B 
Kruse, Jennie C. Lee, Dudley W. Woodward and a number of other well-known instructors. Courses in Psychology, Education, Ethics, 
History, Methods, Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics, Music, Art, Physical Culture, • Household Sciences and Industries. June 23 to 
August 1, 1913. EARL E. FINCH, Director Summer Session 
W. S. SCARBOROUGH, President Wilberforce, Ohio TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 57 
Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
State summer school for colored 
teachers. Fourteent h annual 
session begins June 23 , 1913 , and 
continues five weeks. Board, 
lodging and fees for the session, 
$14 .00 . Limited accommodations. 
Send $1 .0 0 in advance and reserve room. Fo r catalo g or 
further information address : 
STAT E SUMME R SCHOO L 
Agricultura l and 
Mechanical College 
GREENSBORO , N . C . 
"In the Heart of the Healthy Hills" 
The Agricultural and 
Mechanical College 
NORMAL , ALABAM A 
Makes a special effort to meet the needs of 
young people who must work out their own salvation. It gives breadwinners a chance to go to 
school and so puts a nrst-claSB English education and 
a trade within the reach of every young person of 
push and purpose. 
Board, lodging and washing cost $9 per month. 
An entrance fee of $10 covers medicine, .hospital 
care and doctor's bill for the year. 
School opens the first Monday in October and 
closes the last Thursday in May. 
WALTE R S. BUCHANAN , President 
Send your boy South—the land of Opportunity. 
The Prairie View State Normal and Industrial 
College of Texas. E. L Blackshear, Principal. W. 
C. Rollins, Treasurer. Largest State institution for 
colored youth in the United States. Excellent 
literary, scientific and industrial advantages. Expenses low—ideal climate—new buildings. 
For particulars address: 
H. J. MASON, Secretary 
Prairie View Waller County, Texas 
ST. MARY'S SCHOOL 
An Episcopal boarding and day school 
for girls, under the direction of the Sisters 
of St. Mary. Address: 
TH E SISTER-IN-CHARGE 
611 N. 43d St. W . Philadelphia, Pa. I 
Fisk Universit y 
NASHVILLE, TENN. 
Founded 1866 H. H. Wright, Dean 
Thorough Literary, Scientific, Educational and Social Science Courses. Pioneer 
in Negro music. Special study in Negro 
history. 
Ideal and sanitary buildings and grounds. 
Well-equipped Science building. 
Christian home life. 
High standards of independent manhood 
and womanhood. 
Atlanta University 
Is beautifully located in the City of Atlanta, Ga. 
The courses of study include High School, Normal School and College, with manual training 
and domestic science. Among the teachers are 
graduates of Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth, Smith 
and Wellesley. Forty-two years of successful 
work have been completed. Students come from 
all parts of the . South. Graduates are almost 
universally successful. 
For further information address 
President EDWAR D T. 
ATLANTA, GA. 
WAR E 
Knoxville College 
Beautiful Situation. Healthful Location. 
The Best Moral and Spiritual Environment. 
A Splendid Intellectual Atmosphere. 
Noted for Honest and Thorough Work. 
Offers full courses in the following departments: 
College, Normal, High School, Grammar School and 
Industrial. 
Good water, steam heat, electric lights, good 
drainage. Expenses very reasonable. 
Opportunity for Self-help. 
Fall Term Begins September, 1913. 
For information address 
President R. W . McGRANAHA N 
KNOXVILLE, TENN. 
Virginia Union University 
RICHMOND , VA. 
A College Department, of high standards and 
modern curriculum. 
A Theological Department, with all subjects 
generally required in the best theological seminaries. 
An Academy, with manual training, giving a 
preparation for life or for college. 
The positive moral and religious aim of the 
school, its high standards of entrance and of class 
work, its fine new buildings and well-equipped 
laboratories and library prepare a faithful student 
for a life of wide usefulness. 
GEORG E RICE HOVEY , President 
Mention TH E CRISTS. 58 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
WANT A JOB? 
Sleeping-car Porter s 
wanted for summer and 
permanent service. N o 
experience necessary. 
Writ e to-day for full 
information. 
AMERICA N SERVIC E SCHOO L 
Instruction Department 
80 Fifth Avenue - - - New York City 
CALLIN G CARDS 
One dozen neatly written calling cards, plain 
or fancy, 15c ; with 
handsome aluminum 
card case, 30c. postpaid. 
Comi c cards, 20c. per 
dozen. Memorial cards, 
20c. per dozen. Orders 
carefully executed on 
day received. 
WM . I. THOMA S 
Penman 
2720 West Lake Street 
Chicago, 111. 
OF INTEREST TO 
VOCAL STUDENTS 
Tone Placing and 
Voice Development 
Practical method of singing for 
daily practice, based upon artistic 
principle's, together with a carefully prepared number of exercises. 
From "Musical Courier," N. T.: 
A very practical little book is 
"Tone Placing and Voice Development," by Pedro T. Tinsley. It 
contains some very excellent material and vocal 
exercises, and should be in the hands of all vocal 
students. 
WOEDS OF APPRECIATION 
I offer you the heartiest possible endorsement 
of your work, which I believe to be the most complete course of the kind that has ever come 
under my notice.—Glenn Dillard Gunn, Chicago 
' 'Tribune.'' 
From "Music News," Chicago, 111.: Accordingly 
his "Practical Method of Singing" is a most con 
cise and practical little manual, containing many 
valuable vocal exercises. It cannot fail to be 
helpful to all ambitious vocal students. 
CANNOT FAIL OF GOOD RESULTS 
The work is especially commendable because it 
treats in a clear and systematic manner all the vital 
points so essential to the student, making it easy 
for him to advance to the highest point of 
development.—Geo. I. Holt, Des Moines, Iowa. 
PRIC E $1.00 
Address the publisher: 
PEDRO T. TINSLEY 
6448 Drexe l Avenu e CHICAGO, ILL. 
Swell, Nifty Suit 
FREE! 
Get in Quick !SSft3?<S 
offering ever made. Be our salesmanager in your town—$250 a 
month. Enough coin to fill your 
pockets. Nifty suits for you to 
wear—ALL FEEE. Make $60 to 
$75 a week selling our nifty 
suits. It's easy I Orders turned 
over to you. No experience, no 
money necessary. 
W E PA Y EXPRES S 
ON EVERYTHING 
Tou pay nothing — absolutely 
nothing. EVERYTHING guaranteed, too. 
Write-Hurry 
card right away for this great 
free offer. Never anything like It. 
Get our book of beautiful samples 
and full particulars—all free. 
You assume no obligations whatever, so write at once. 
America n Woole n Mills Co . 
Dept. 551 Chicago , Ul . 
Reddick's World's Greatest 
Polishing Mitt 
FOR POLISHING ALL METALS, SIGNS, PIANOS, 
FURNITURE, GUNS, HARNESS, AUTOMOBILE 
BODIES, LAMPS, HARDWOOD FLOORS^ ETC. 
Fully Protects the Hand Saves Time and Labor 
An incomparable duster. A combination shoe 
polisher. Can be used with or without oil or polish. 
Made of special 
tanne d lamb's 
wool on the hide, 
thoroughly cleaned 
and combed of 
all grit. Will 
not scratch the 
finest surface. 
Adopted by the Pullman Company for porters' 
use on the best trains and used in the best hotels, 
office buildings, theatres, garages, furniture houses; 
on dining cars, ocean liners, yachts and thousands 
of households because it's the best practical polishing device on earth. 
By mail postpaid 25c. each (stamps or currency). 
A splendid proposition for agents. Write to-day 
for particulars. 
J. E. REDDICK 
1028 South 17th Street Philadelphia, Pa. 
Jt^ WANTE D -m i 
Agents to handle TH E CRISIS in 
all sections of the country. Splendid 
opportunity for money-making and 
dignified employment. 
Address j 
TH E CRISIS 
26 Vesey Street - - New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS. THE CRISIS 
Vol. 6—No. 2 JUNE , 1913 Whole No. 32 
EDUCATION . 
I WEN T to school in the South six months 
o f the year and spent three of the 
months in preparation for the closing exercises," said Mr. Joseph C. Manning, o f 
Alabama, at the recent conference of the 
National Association for the Advancement 
o f Colored Peopl e in Philadelphia. Mr. 
Manning has reason to be thankful for small 
mercies. H e is white. Black children in 
Alabama are not able to say what he has 
said. Fo r instance, in Wilco x County, there 
was expended in 1910 $9,339.70 for the 
education o f 10,758 Negro children and 
$30,612.75 fo r that o f 2,000 white children. 
These figures sjiow a per capita expenditure 
o f 82 cents for the Negro child and $15.50 
fo r the white. 
In consequence o f this condition o f affairs 
the conference on rural industrial schools 
fo r Negroes, which took place in April in 
New York , resolved to make a uniform 
organized effort to collect money in the 
North fo r the support o f these schools instead o f the haphazard rivalry which has 
heretofore existed. The conference also decided to attempt to equalize the standard 
o f these schools. The conference is to 
assemble in November, and the following 
officers were elected: 
William H . Holtzelaw, TJtica Institute, 
president; Leslie P. Hill, Manassas, Va., 
secretary-treasurer; Miss Emma Wilson, 
Myersville, S. C , vice-president. 
<II Fisk University, Nashville, Tenn., is in 
urgent need o f $104,000 to meet the requirements of the General Education Board in the 
raising o f $500,000 for its work. Contributions o f $1 or more are requested and 
may be sent to the director o f the university. 
1 The New Orleans school board has vacancies fo r fifty colored teachers to replace the 
white teachers in colored schools. Persons 
desiring information about examinations for 
these positions should communicate with 
Guillaume College, 407 Pythian Temple. 
<I Efforts are on foot to establish a Negro 
industrial school in Dallas, Tex. 
*I The colored school children of Cumberland County, N. C , have contributed the 
largest single amount by school children to 
the fund for a monument to the late Governor Ayeoek. 
1$ Dr. I. Garland Penn, corresponding secretary of the Freedmen's Ai d Society, has 
organized a campaign to raise $500,000 for 
Negro education at institutions in the South. 
Dr. Elmer E. Brown, former United States 
Commissioner of Education and present 
chancellor of New Yor k University, urges 
Federal aid for Negro education. He says: 
"Soone r or later it will become clear that 
here is-a national need o f such magnitude 
that it can be met only by the aid of national 
resources." 
d A new school for colored children in 
South Chattanooga, Tenn., is to cost $15,000. 
*J The John F. Slater Fund expended during the past year $7,375 in aid of Negro 
education in South Carolina. 
ALONG THE COLOR LINE 6 0 TH E CRISIS 
*I The Howar d University catalog shows a 
total registration of 14,090 students, representing 37 States and 9 foreign countries. 
These students are distributed as follows: 
Academy, 380; the college of arts and 
sciences, 303; school of medicine, 291 ; the 
teachers' college, 175 ; the commercial college, 110; school o f theology, 108; conservatory of music, 88 ; library school, 2 ; 
correspondence students, 37. 
*I The summer school for teachers at Lane 
College, Jackson, Tenn., will be open until 
July 5. 
*& Meridian Academy, Meridian, Miss., has 
collected and contributed $900 toward the 
jubilee educational fund of the Freedmen's 
Ai d Society. 
*I Dr. Charles A . Lewis, of Philadelphia, advocates a course in the study of tuberculosis 
in all Negro schools. 
<I The school board o f Eichmond, Va., has 
asked of the common" council an appropriation o f $100,000 for the erection of two new 
schools for colored children. 
•5 The United German Societies o f 'Washington, D. C. have, not without opposition, decided to exclude pupils of the colored 
high schools from competing for prizes which 
these societies offer to the best students o f 
German. Dr. Voelckner, speaking in 
favor o f including the colored students, said 
that the early settlers of Germantown, Pa., 
were the first people in America to place 
themselves on record as being opposed to 
slavery. Speaking for exclusion, Herman 
Lechner said that the white workingman was 
in danger of being supplanted by the colored 
workingman and that he did not believe in 
too much education for colored people. 
*I The grand jur y o f Clarke County, Ga., in 
which is situated the Georgia State University, at Athens, in a report favoring compulsory education makes the following 
presentment: 
"Georgia now ranks as one o f the States 
having largest percentage o f illiteracy— 
especially among the whites—and we feel 
that this stigma should be removed as soon 
as possible by our legislators, who should 
find ways to furnish efficient schools and 
compel attendance upon same." 
*I The commencement sermon at Meharry 
Medical College, Nashville, Tenn., was delivered by Bishop C. H . Phillips. 
•I Eleven nurses were graduated from the 
Lincoln Hospital Training School at New 
York . 
POLITIC S 
A FREE government has no excuse except 
it secures the moral and material advancement of the governed.—Senator Moses 
E. Clapp, at the N. A . A . C. P. conference. 
^ A society calling itself the National Demo ­
cratic Fair Play Association has recently met 
in Washington. The president o f this society is somebody from Missouri, and the 
secretary is from somewhere in South Dakota, 
unknown honorable from Alabama. Ac ­
cording to a Washington newspaper, the 
slogan o f this association is, "Dow n with the 
civil service; give us the jobs. " But the 
society adds to this platform o f so-called 
"reform o f the civil-service system" a plan 
for getting other people's jobs by wa y o f 
"race segregation in government employ. " 
They announced a mass meeting to which 
they invited "everybody ; especially ladies 
and all of the departmental employees. " But 
a Washington correspondent informs us 
that this much-advertised gathering was a 
"distinct disappointment both to the promoters and to most o f the audience. With 
the Negro as a bait, there were not more 
than 150 persons present, although the evening was fine and the hall centrally located. 
Not a single Senator or Representative appeared. The nearest approach was an exCongressman from Colorado, and he did not 
say anything. It is the opinion o f the writer 
that the meeting was gotten up by a lot of 
disappointed office seekers from the South ' 
who want the civil-service bars let down 
long enough to let them in, especially the 
revocation of Mr. Taft's order placing 
fourth-class postmasterships upon the civilservice list. There was not a single man in 
the movement that I ever heard of before. " 
Hon . Kyl e B. Price, o f Alabama, read at 
the meeting a letter from "a Southern white 
woman, " who said that in one o f the government offices she had been compelled to take 
dictation from "a coal-black, woolly-headed 
Nigger. Then I felt," continues this writer, 
"that if a woman ever had just cause fo r 
ending her life, I had. I am a Southern 
woman. M y father was an officer in the 
Civil Wa r and my mother was a woman o f 
the greatest refinement." ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 61 
This association is concentrating its fire 
upon the Washington departments and the 
railroad mail service. It has placed the 
stamp o f its distinguished approval upon the 
following letter, which was gotten up by an 
obscure postal clerk in Arkansas and circulated extensively among his colleagues in his 
part o f the country; 
"ST . LOUIS , MO. , April 7, 1913. 
"T o the Hon. A . S. BURLESON, PostmasterGeneral. 
"Sir: We , the undersigned railway postal 
clerks, respectfully request you to look into 
the conditions confronting our branch of the 
service and especially in the South—conditions relating to the indiscriminate mixing 
o f Negro and white clerks in crews in all 
lines throughout the country. 
"W e feel assured that the service would be 
very much benefited and the standard o f 
efficiency raised if the races could be segregated, the Negroes placed on lines to themselves. In no other employment in the 
country are the races so promiscuously 
thrown together on equal footing as they are 
in the railway mail service. In the army 
Negro soldiers are assigned to separate regiments, whereas in our branch o f the service 
any working crew is likely to be half white 
and half black, and sometimes there is a 
Negro clerk in charge. 
"On long runs, where we are compelled 
to be together night and day, the conditions 
are sometimes disgusting and have caused 
many a good clerk to quit the service rather 
than stay and endure them. 
"Each car is provided with one wash 
basin and one toilet facility and every member o f the crew is compelled to use the same 
in common. On lines where it is necessary 
to sleep at night, clerks are thrown disgustingly close together by reason o f the 
small space that can be used for sleeping 
purposes. All these causes and many others 
are keeping the very best material out o f the 
service nowadays, while the influx o f 
Negroes into the service in some parts o f the 
country continues at a ratio o f three to one. 
"Some o f these Negroes are o f the very 
lowest element, even criminals among them. 
The most ignorant are easily coached to pass 
the examination by the many correspondence 
schools located throughout the country that 
make a specialty of preparing Negroes for 
civil-service examination. 
"W e will not go further into racial conditions surrounding our branch o f the service, but we humbly beg you to investigate 
conditions and to act upon your own judgment as to the best course to pursue in regard 
to them. W e are sure the Negroes cannot 
object to segregation—it is the best thing for 
them as well as ourselves. We , therefore, 
leave it with you, trusting you will believe 
we are acting for the sole purpose o f raising 
the standard o f the service and promoting 
our positions and selves in the eyes of our 
fellow men." 
In a letter to the Postmaster-General replying to this attack the (colored) Railway 
Postal Clerks' League says: 
"The indefinite charge of criminality and 
inefficiency which is made may be applied 
to any one of the Negro clerks, and is herewith most strenuously denied and resented. 
If there be criminal or illiterate Negroes in 
the service, the petitioners should prefer 
charges against the' civil-service commission 
and officers o f the railway mail serviee for 
admitting and allowing to remain such 
characters or make specific charges against 
the offending individuals. 
"In the December number of the Railway 
Post Office, a journal devoted to the interests 
o f the clerks, Mr. C. E. Ellis, of the K. C. & 
La Junta R. P. 0., boldly asks the clerks to 
join in asking the party in power to grant 
this request as a political issue. Mr. Ellis' 
letter is attached. W e do not understand that 
politics shall enter into the operation of the 
civil service, and political activity on the 
part o f civil-service employees is considered 
pernicious and offensive. 
"W e still hold, even in the face of this 
petition, an abiding faith in the American 
spirit—the spirit o f fair play. W e will not 
be led to believe that the great party now 
in power will aid such an unwarranted movement, nor will any o f those who shape its 
policies." 
In a protest addressed to Mr. Still P. 
Taft, superintendent of the railway mail 
service at St. Louis, the league makes the 
following defense: 
"All clerks enter the service through the 
same channel, and when the petitioners aver 
that criminal and illiterate Negroes are in the 
service they directly charge the officers in 
charge o f the entrance examinations with 
being a party to the employment o f unworthy characters. 62 TH E CRISIS 
"We ask for ourselves and all Negro 
clerks the 'equality of opportunity,' which is 
the slogan of this great American government to the peoples of all the earth. 
''The practicability of putting into operation the suggestions of this petition is a 
matter for your serious consideration. The 
injustice is patent on the slightest investigation. It is un-American, impolitic and proposed not, as the petitioners hold, for the 
good of the service, but to inflict an unwarranted humiliation upon a class of loyal 
citizens who are of a different race. We hold 
ourselves amenable to the authorities and 
we ask this authority to protect us from 
being harassed by clerks promulgating such 
petitions as this, which is being done preceding a State or national convention of 
clerks, some basing their candidacy for election as delegates on this petition. See Mr. 
Ellis' letter in March Railway Post Office. 
"We do not understand that politics shall 
enter into the operation of the civil service, 
but it "is boldly announced that the political 
leaders of the now controlling party be invoked to use their power to further this 
scheme of discrimination. See Mr. Ellis' 
letter of December. 1912. Railway Post 
Office. 
"We ask to be allowed peaceably to labor, 
receiving compensation for such, that we 
may provide for ourselves and our families 
without the ever-recurrent necessity of defending ourselves against such attacks, and 
this energy be devoted to perfecting ourselves in our chosen labor." 
The Negroes of Louisiana have been protesting against the reduction of the tariff on 
sugar. 
*I The Oklahoma legislature has defeated a 
bill requiring a voter to show a receipt as 
evidence that his poll tax has been paid before he could be allowed to vote. 
*I Of 14,000 colored people in Shreveport, 
La., only 39 are registered voters. "A t any 
rate," says the News Enterprise (colored), 
"on election day each of the thirty-nine 
colored men was challenged as he entered the 
polling place. He was told that his name 
was not on the pollbook and that he must 
go to the courthouse, get a certificate and 
attach it to his ballot. This was done, and 
when the votes were counted it was perfectly 
easy to inspect the thirty-nine colored votes. 
"An d yet Booker T. Washington, colored, 
said the voting law of Louisiana put a premium on character, property and education." 
«I The Gazette, of Alexandria, Va. , commenting on the fact that the Republican Federal 
government had been first to start the disfranchisement of the Negro by disfranchising 
all the people of Washington, D. C , is gleefully reminiscent of the scenes in and around 
this city during reconstruction days. We 
reproduce the following paragraphs from 
their editorial page without change of spelling or grammar: 
"Expenses had been paid and on the day set 
apart for voting in the national capitol it 
was difficult to secure colored help hereabouts. 
"Many aged darkeys of the 'Bob Ridley,' 
"Uncle Ned' and 'Old Black Joe' type, 
whose visions had never up to 1865 went 
beyond the farm, were voted i n blocks by 
the political characters that ruled the capital 
city at that time. 
"The Republican party soon realized that 
while they desired to issue crow rations to 
the southern people, they wanted to eliminate 
it from their menu. Hence the action 
alluded to by Mr. Dockery." 
<I Senator E . D. Smith, of South Dakota, has 
introduced a joint resolution in Congress 
for the repeal of the Fourteenth and 
Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitution. 
Senator L a Follette's bill, providing for the 
submission to the nation of a constitutional 
amendment if desired by the people or the 
legislatures of at least ten States, would, if 
passed, pave a way for Vardaman to attempt 
to accomplish the national disfranchisement 
of the Negro. 
SOCIAL UPLIFT . 
I WANT to refer to Mayor Blankenburg's 
truism, that a colored man who behaves 
himself is the equal of a white man. The 
twin truism is that a white man who does 
not behave himself is not the equal of the 
colored man who does.—Henry W . Wilbur, 
at the conference of the N . A . A . C. P. 
<J At Winston-Salem, N . C , the city hospital 
commission has completed arrangements for 
the erection of a hospital for colored people. 
*I The colored people of New Yor k are urging Governor Sulzer to sign a bill for a 
Negro militia regiment which has been 
passed unopposed by both branches of the 
legislature. ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 63 
succor to the unfortunate. A t Dayton seven 
lives were lost among the colored people, 
but the destruction o f property was very 
great. 
*J The American Giants, a colored baseball 
team o f Chicago, defeated a team of United 
States soldiers at Portland, Ore., 7 to 0. 
<I A white man o f Richmond, Va., calls attention to the fact that there is "absolutely 
no plac.e provided by this city or State" for 
the care o f a 17-year-old colored boy 
in his employ who is afflicted with 
tuberculosis. 
*J, Negro railroad men have formed a fraternal protective association. The association means to guard against attacks upon 
colored railroad employees, such as the fullcrew bills which have been recently introduced into the legislatures o f several States. 
The proposed Douglass Park for colored 
people in Memphis, Tenn., will not, perhaps, 
be purchased by the city because o f protests 
from white people that the opening of the 
park would mean the too frequent use by 
Negroes of the ear lines leading to the park. 
*I The -Oklahoma legislature failed to pass 
a bill for the establishment o f a reformatory 
for colored youth. 
*I Negroes o f Sedalia, Mo., are building a 
theatre. 
*l Colored people at Tulsa, Okla., -are trying 
to raise funds fo r a reading room. 
The legislature o f Missouri is considering a bill appropriating $130,000 for an 
institute for incorrigible Negro girls at 
Tipton. 
<J Oberlin is a suburb o f Raleigh, N. C , 
peopled by well-to-do colored folk. 
*I Muskogee, Okla., has a colored population 
of 10,000. Negroes own a clothing store with 
stock valued at $35,000, and a millinery and 
dry-goods store of similar proportions. There 
are fifty groceries, four drug stores, one 
jewelry shop, a bank, two insurance companies and numerous other commercial 
and financial enterprises. 
<J The United Negroes' Association is 
negotiating for the purchase of a farm between Wappinger's Falls and New Hamburgh, near Poughkeepsie, N. Y., to be used 
as a Negro orphanage. 
*I The New Yor k legislature has appropriated $25,000 to celebrate the half century o f 
emancipation. 
The sum of $10,345 has been raised by 
colored women o f Philadelphia for a branch 
o f the Y . W . C. A . for colored girls. 
*I The Pullman Company has contributed 
$10,000 to the erection o f a colored 
Y, M. C. A . in Chicago. 
<1 The National League on Urban Conditions 
Amon g Negroes has been incorporated in the 
State o f New York . Professor E. R. A . 
Seligman, Mrs. William H . Baldwin, Dr. 
Felix Adle r and William G. Willco x are 
among the directors. Mr. E. K. Jones remains executive secretary and Dr. George E. 
Haynes, of Fisk University, the national 
organizer. The new offices o f the league are 
at 110 West 40th Street, New Yor k City. 
«I At Milwaukee, Wis. , the Booke r T. Washington Men's Forum has been organized 
under the presidency o f Dr. K . D. Kammack. 
This society celebrated the fiftieth anniversary o f emancipation on Ma y 29 and 30. 
It successfully fought the marriage bill in 
Wisconsin. 
^ The colored citizens of Jacksonville, Fla., 
have begun the erection o f a hospital and 
training school for nurses. 
^ A woman's exchange has been established 
at Bethel Church, Atlanta, Ga. The purpose 
o f the exchange is to aid women to be selfsupporting by sewing, making preserves and 
doing such things as women alone can do. 
The exchange will place these products on 
sale and will also conduct an employment 
agency. 
Q The Wheatley Literary Club, a women's 
organization, has been established at Seattle, 
Wash. 
The new Odd Fellows building in Atlanta, 
Ga., has been dedicated. The building is 
six stories high, contains forty-two offices, 
six stores and six lodge rooms. The cost 
o f erection was $110,000. 
<I Colonel Moriarty, who had charge o f the 
flood relief work at Cairo, 111., said that his 
greatest-trouble-was to get white men to 
work and that colored men were willing and 
did,-all they could. A t Padueah, Ky. , Memphis, Tenn., Dayton, O., and other places, 
Negroes were ready and prompt in bringing <J The Carnegie library for colored people 
at Houston, Tex., has been opened. The 
building cost $15,230 and the site was bought 
for $1,500 by the Negroes. The city has 
appropriated $1,500 a year for the maintenance of the institution. 
64 TH E CRISIS ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 65 
SI Accordin g to a report by As a E. Martin, 
a white teacher of Kansas City, Mo., Negroes 
of that city own property valued at 
$1,900,000. One man owns almost one-tenth 
o f this. 
SI The board of supervisors of Noxubee 
County, Miss., offers prizes for corn crops 
grown by Negroes o f the county. Sixty 
men and forty boys have entered the contest. 
ECONOMICS. 
CEVENTY-FIV E Negro families have 
moved from Oklahoma to California 
because of prejudice in the former State. 
The party has several thousand dollars to 
invest in California lands. 
SI The Metropolitan Realty and Investment 
Company, o f Ocala, Fla., has just erected a 
$20,000 building. The company was organized three years ago and is capitalized at 
$20,000. • 
SI Southern cotton mills are beginning to 
employ Negro labor. Perhaps it would be 
just as well if they did not. 
SI In Delaware, factories making shirts, 
overalls and cheap cotton goods have recently 
employed Negro labor with success. 
SI The National Order of the Mosaic Temple 
of America has placed the contract for the 
erection o f a $45,000 building at Little Rock, 
Ark.' 
SI Colored men o f Chicago have organized 
a business association. 
SI There are in Philadelphia 1,080 Negroes 
who own property assessed at $2,801,275, 
and o f a market value o f $3,735,000. 
SI Colored ship carpenters o f Savannah, Ga., 
have been organized and chartered by the 
United Brotherhood o f Carpenters. 
SI The National Baptist Publishing Board, 
o f Nashville, Tenn., spends $30,000 a year 
for pape r alone. 
SI The Standard Life Insurance Company, of 
Atlanta, Ga., capitalized at $100,000, has in 
the two years o f its existence written policies 
amounting to $400,000. 
SI The People's Building and Loan Association, o f Hampton, Va., shows a total business 
o f $196,046 for the past year, an increase of 
$12,458 over 1911. 
SI Colored people o f Tacoma, Wash., own 
property assessed at $50,000. 
PERSONAL. 
T"\URIN G the past month the hand o f the 
Reaper has fallen heavy on colored 
folk. William J. White, the veteran editor of 
the Georgia Baptist, Jennie Dean, the 
founder o f Manassas Industrial School, and 
Dr. James E. Cabaniss, a successful young 
dentist of New Yor k City, have passed away. 
SI President Tancrede Auguste, o f Haiti, 
died a natural death after a tenure o f office 
dating only from last August. M. Auguste 
was one of the ablest men who have occupied 
the Haitian presidency in recent years. His 
successor is Michel Oreste. 
SI Memorial services were held by the colored 
people o f Washington fo r the late Senator 
John B. Henderson, the author o f the 
Thirteenth Amendment. 
SI Application has been made to the Carnegie 
Hero Fund for a medal for Georgia Cahvell. 
a Negro cook, who saved a five-year-old white 
child from drowning in an old cistern. 
SI A correspondent o f the Norfolk News 
urges a like reward for a Negro who saved 
a white woman from drowning. This writer 
says: " A white woman was miraculously 
rescued from death by a colored man in the 
presence o f a dozen white men, not one o f 
whom would risk his life in the attempt. 
But for his courage and promptness, the 
woman would undoubtedly have lost her 
life. The newspaper account o f that important and valuable feature o f the affair 
says: 'Sam Davis, a Negro driver, jumped 
into the water and swam with her to 
the wharf.' So far from having the slightest 
touch of laudable approval of Davis' act, the 
sentence reads almost as if the rescuer had 
committed some reprehensible act." 
SI Matilda Henson Ritchie, aged 81, and Mrs. 
Julia Henson Wheeler, aged 72, the 
daughters o f the Rev. Josiah Henson, the 
original of "Uncle Tom, " are living quietly 
at Flint, Mich. 
SI Mr. Louis G. Gregory, of Washington, 
D . C., delivered an address at the Bahai convention in New York. Several colored persons attended the sessions. 
SI Corporal Richardson, o f the 10th Cavalry, 
won a cup presented by Secretary o f Wa r 
Garrison, and a money prize for his exploits 
in the horse show at Fort Meyer, Va . The 
secretary made a brief speech commending 
Corporal Richardson for his excellent work. 66 TH E CRISIS 
*1 Mrs. Matilda Wynn , a colored laundress' 
of Glen Cove, L. I., has left an estate valued 
at $30,000. 
Fred. L. Hubbard, a colored man, has 
been appointed assistant general manager o f 
the Toronto street railways. 
^ Colored soldiers stationed along the 
boundary line between Arizona and Mexico 
have been having a hard time of it 
trying to avoid Mexican rebels without 
involving the United States in international 
difficulties. W e publish an order by Major 
Read, of the 9th Cavalry, in camp at Xaco , 
Ariz.: 
"The following is published for the information of this command: 
"The colonel of the regiment desires to 
express his appreciation o f the splendid manner in which the duty imposed upon Private 
Lionel Lewis, of Troo p A, 9th Cavalry, was 
performed while on patrol near the boundary 
line to the west o f Xaco , Ariz., on Wednesday, April 9, 1913. There can be no more 
delicate duty allotted to a soldier than that 
requiring discretion. forbearance and 
personal control, and it is most gratifying to 
the regimental commander to have had the 
opportunity of personally observing how 
most thoroughly this duty was performed. 
That no members o f the patrol returned the 
fire of those who. driven bv stress over the 
boundary line, fired at Private Lewis in their 
excitement is most gratifying, and shows 
how wholesome discipline tends to increase 
self-confidence under the most trying 
circumstances. 
"This incident is well worthy o f the traditions o f the regiment, and it is hoped that 
the example set by this patrol o f Troo p A , 
9th Cavalry, will be far reaching in its 
effect. 
"This order will be read to each organization at retreat this date." 
<J James H . Wolff, the only colored G. A . R. 
veteran who has been at the head o f the 
Massachusetts department, is dead. 
^ By special request o f the late J. Pierpont 
Morgan, Mr. Harr y Burleigh sang "Calvary" 
at the financier's funeral in Xe w Yor k City. 
<J Mr. Earl H . Murray, a brilliant student 
o f the Collegiate Institute, o f Chatham, Ont., 
and local agent for TH E CRISIS , has, on 
account o f ill health, been obliged to g o 
to Denver, Col. 
Q To the courage and goo d generalship o f 
Strayhorn and Pettiford, the janitors o f 
the Beaver Building, belongs the credit o f 
saving 300 lives from water and from fire 
during the recent catastrophe at Dayton, O. 
As the floods approached this structure, 
which had been built on ground reclaimed 
STRAYHORN AND PETTIFORD ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 67 
THE BEAVER BUILDING. 
from the river, the janitors hastily threw 
rope bridges across to adjacent buildings too 
weak to withstand the flames and water and, 
at great peril to their own lives, effected the 
rescue o f every person who floated within 
their reach. The ground floor o f the Beaver 
Building had been gutted by the water, but 
o n each o f the upper floors men were stationed to guard against the combustion o f 
inflammable material. Colored guards were 
appointed to protect the quarters assigned 
to women and children and to keep the 
excited and hungry foreigners in control. 
Fo r three days the refugees were fed on 
bananas, syrup and candies from a factory 
within the building. The fourth day brought 
foo d and rescuing parties from without. 
Strayhorn and Pettiford then began to shovel 
mud from their boilers in the basement. 
Theirs was the first building to hang up the 
sign "Open fo r Business." 
SI " A reward for honesty" is the inscription 
on a diamond-studded signet ring which 
has been presented to August T. Norman, 
a Negro boy, who found a $450 gold mesh 
jeweled bag containing $50, and returned it 
to its owner. 
SI Hamilton A . Williams, a former soldier 
o f the 9th Cavalry, passed the examination 
with an average o f 95 per cent., and has 
been appointed a foreman at the navy yard 
at Charlestown, Mass. 
SI Mrs. Florence Charlton-Young has passed 
the New Yor k City civil-service examination with a high average and has been appointed a stenographer in the department o f 
labor. 
SI Maxwell, a colored boy, is manager and 
plays second base on the Lincoln High School 
team at St. Paul, Minn. 
SI Prof. George M. Lightfoot, o f Howard 
University, is the author of a paper on the 
classics in the Classical Weekly, of New York. 
SI Major Pi. R. Jackson, o f Chicago, has 
won the disputed seat in the lower house o f 
the Illinois legislature. 
SI The superintendent of schools at Cincinnati has sent to all the schools of the city a 
little colored girl's answer to the question, 
"Wha t I can and will do to make Cincinnati 
a better and bigger city." Marian Carr's 
answer was: 
" I love my city as I love my garden, and 
in my chosen occupation in life I shall not 
be content to reach the topmost rung alone, 
but shall try to lift others as I climb, and 
feel that this will help to make Cincinnati a 
bigger and better city." 
SI The monument to Carl Schurz on Morningside Heights, New Yor k City, was dedicated 
on May 10.' 
SI It is reported that Representative Heflin, 
o f Alabama, has accepted an invitation to 68 TH E CRISIS 
make the principal address at the joint halfcentennial celebration o f Federal and Confederate veterans at Gettysburg next month. 
Heflin's contribution to the peace of the 
country is his advocacy o f "Jim Crow" cars 
for Washington. D . C. He won special distinction two years ago by firing at a Negro 
passenger who, he thought, was not quite 
respectful enough to white people in public 
conveyances. A white man was wounded. 
The Negxo was unhurt. 
1 Mr. J. A . Mercier, a millionaire financier 
of New Orleans, died recently. "M . 
Mercier was a Negro, " says L'Ami des Noirs, 
the staunch friend o f colored folk, published by the Canadian missionaries at Palmetto, La., "but the newspapers have been 
very careful to conceal the fact. On the 
other hand, in the same pape r which announced the news o f his death, they did not 
fail to credit this persecuted race with all 
the crimes, real or imaginary, committed in 
the preceding twenty-four hours in Louisiana 
or Mississippi, Florida or Arkansas. This 
is the justice o f "Jim Crow.' " 
<I Dr. W . E. B. Du Bois has been received 
with great ovations everywhere in the West. 
Some o f the Negro newspapers have published "Du Bois Editions." 
CRIME. 
NEGROES have been flogged by a mob in 
Rochelle, Ga., for alleged complicity in 
the intimidation o f a white farmer by Enoch 
McElmore , also white and a friend o f this 
farmer, who had had some difficulty with 
him. 
A t Florence, S. C., two policemen prevented a mob of 200 from lynching a Negro. 
Lynchings are expected at Louisville, Ga., 
and at Hampton, S. C , in each case fo r 
the murder o f white men. 
At New Orleans, La., at Augusta, Ga., and 
in other places Negroes have been shot by 
policemen. 
^ W . G. Baldwin, a white man o f Wilmington, N. C , has been sentenced to three 
years in the State penitentiary for shooting 
a colored woman and necessitating the amputation of one of her legs. 
*I The colored people o f Louisville, Ky. , are 
prosecuting a married white man for the 
abuse of a young colored girl in his employ. 
*J Mullins McDowell, aged 11, and Arni e 
Ruth, aged 13, members o f a gang o f youthful white outlaws, have been indicted fo r 
the murder o f Lindsay Smith, a Negro, o f 
Raleigh, N. C. 
<I Two Negroes saved a white man from 
rough treatment at the hands o f Negroes 
after having assaulted a colored girl at 
Wadesboro, N. C: 
Nellie Busch, a 14-year-old white girl 
o f Kansas City, spent $5 which her 
parents had given her to pa y a gas bill in 
treating a friend to candy. The children 
then rolled in the mud, tore their clothes and 
ran down an alley, screaming that they had 
been attacked by a Negro. The girls later 
confessed that they had lied in order to save 
Nellie from punishment. 
<I A t Bolton, Vt., a Negro youth was 
drowned by a party o f white workmen who 
had accused him o f stealing their lunch. 
Kennison, one o f the men, reported the 
tragedy, saying that they had driven the 
Negro, protesting his innocence, into the 
whirlpool in a spirit o f playfulness. 
COURTS. 
A JUR Y at Louisville, Ky. , have acquitted 
Richard Dancy, a Negro, o f the 
charge o f murder o f Robert B. Fontelroy, a 
white man. 
•I Halbert Grant, a Negro pianist, and his 
white wife, were released from custody after 
having been arrested in Minneapolis on a 
false charge o f violation o f the Mann act. 
They had been married a number o f years 
and had lived respectably in Detroit. 
<J Nine Negroes have been awarded damages 
of $10 each against the Galveston, Harrisburg and San Antonio Railroad Compan y for 
having refused to allow them to board one 
o f its passenger trains. 
*I A t Birmingham, Ala., a criminal court 
dismissed a charge o f vagrancy against Annie 
Williams, a Negro woman, and administered 
a severe rebuke to the white man, McWilliams, who had brought the charge. 
McWilliams had to pay the costs. 
^ A Mississippi court has awarded a judgment for $300 against the Yazo o and Mississippi Valley Railroad to Pop e Swint, a 
Negro, for discomfort on an excursion train. 
•J A jur y at Portland, Ore., awarded 
$20,000 to John Matthews, a Negro, for ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 69 
SI Several colored delegates attended the 
Southern Sociological Congress at Atlanta, 
notably Dr. C. V . Roman, of Nashville. The 
following are some of the addresses bearing 
on the Negro problem: 
"The White Man's Task in the Uplift o f 
the Negro, " Dr. A . J. Barton, Waco , Tex. 
"The Efficiency Test in Negro Progress," 
Miss Julia Lathrop, Washington, D. C. 
"The Demand for Co-operation Between 
the White and Negro Churches in Efforts for 
Social Betterment," Dr. J. E. White, Atlanta, 
Ga. 
"Publicity in Social Work, " H . W . Steele, 
Baltimore, Md. 
"The Wor k of the Southern Commission 
on the Race Problem, " Prof. C. H. Brough, 
University o f Arkansas. 
"The Economic Status of the Negro, " Prof. 
W . M. Hunley, University of Virginia. 
"The Negro Workin g Out His Own Salvation," Prof. E. C. Branson, Athens, Ga. 
"Rural Education and Social Efficiency," 
Jackson Davis, Richmond. 
"The Negro as a Farmer," Dr. J. H . De -
Loach, University o f Georgia. 
"Land Ownership and Efficiency o f Negro Farmers," T. C. Walker, Glocester, 
Va . 
"The Religious Condition of the Negro, " 
C. T. Walker, Augusta, Ga. 
"Open Church Wor k for the Negro, " Rev. 
John Little, Louisville, Ky . 
"Desirable Civic Reforms in the Treatment o f the Negro, " Prof. W . O. Scroggs, 
University of Louisiana. 
"The Jeanes and Slater Funds and Wha t 
They Ar e Accomplishing, " Dr. J. H . Dillard, 
New Orleans, La. 
"The Prevalence of Contagious and Infectious Diseases Amon g Negroes and the 
Necessity o f Preventive Measures," Dr. 
Geo. W . Hubbard, Nashville, Tenn.' 
"Problems o f Race Adjustment," Prof. 
James M. Farr, University of Florida. 
"The Social and Hygienic Conditions o f 
the Negro and Needed Reforms, " Prof. 
Josiah Morse, University o f South Carolina. 
"Ho w to Enlist Welfar e Agencies o f the 
South for the Improvement of Civic Conditions Amon g Negroes," Dr. W . D. Weatherford, Nashville, Tenn. 
"The White Man's Debt to the Negro, " 
Mrs. J. D. Hammond, Augusta, Ga. 
"Racial Self-respect and Racial Antagonism," Dr. C. V . Roman, Nashville, Tenn. 
personal injuries caused by the Oregon 
Independent Paving Company. The company will appeal. 
SI Horac e R. Cayton, a Negro editor o f 
Seattle, has lost a suit for $15,000 against a 
restaurant proprietor who asked him not to 
patronize his place. Superior Judge Ronald 
upheld the contention of the defense that 
Cayton had not been deprived of his civil 
rights. 
SI The following item appears in the Railroad Record o f April 26 : 
"I f the decision o f the Supreme Court of 
Mississippi stands, it behooves railway 
officials to exercise great care as to watchmen 
employed. In a case at Vicksburg, Miss., a 
watchman in the employ of the Y. & M. V. 
shot and killed a Negro. He was tried for 
murder and acquitted. But the Y . & M. V. , 
when sued for damages by the widow, was 
penalized a large sum. 'Not that the watchman was hired to kill men, but he was working for the railroad and acting within the 
scope o f his authority when he fired the shot,' 
said the chief justice in the decision." 
MEETINGS. 
A T Muskogee, Okla., the National Baptist 
Sunday School Congress meets June 4. 
SI Dr. Burt G. Wilde r delivered an address 
on the Massachusetts 55th in the Civil Wa r 
before the teachers of the colored schools of 
Washington at the M Street high school. 
Dr. Wilde r was surgeon of the 55th. 
SI The emancipation proclamation commission o f Pennsylvania announces: 
"There will be, in connection with the 
exposition, a religious congress, an educational congress and a sociological congress, 
each of which is in the hands o f able men. 
"The commission also offers the following 
prizes: 
"Prize fo r the best emancipation ode, $50. 
"Prize fo r the best drama,, three acts or 
more, entitled 'Fifty Years o f Freedom,' $50. 
"Prize for the best emancipation hymn, 
set to music, $50. 
"The committee is making accommodations 
fo r the entertainment of strangers." 
SI The Mississippi valley conference of 
woman's suffrage admitted a Negro delegate, 
Mrs. Victori a Haley, despite the protests of 
the management o f the hotel where the sessions were being held. 70 TH E CRISIS 
<J The 13Sth annual meeting of the Pennsylvania Society for the Abolition of Slavery, 
the Relief o f Free Negroes Unlawfully Held 
in Bondage and the Improvement o f the 
Condition of the African Race was held in 
Philadelphia. 
The society is at present looking after 
the educational and moral development o f 
the colored race in Philadelphia by supporting the Spring Street Settlement. 
1223-1225 Spring Street, a neighborhood 
work under the superintendency of Ellwood 
Heacock, secretary of the society. In an 
appeal the society is asking for $10,000 to 
make some much-needed improvements. 
MUSIC AND ART. 
'T'H E Xegr o melodies sung by Miss 
Eleanor Hazzard Peacock, an American soprano, at a recital at Bechstein Hall 
in London, have elicited much praise from 
the English critics. 
As to the selections fo r the music events 
at Chautauqua. X . Y., this summer, the 
musical director writes: 
"This being both the Wagne r and Verdi 
centennial year, I am anxious to give them 
both prominence on the progTam. I wish 
also to give a work of Coleridge-Taylor's, 
whose untimely sudden death a short time 
ago • robbed the world o f a great genius. 
Other works to be given are: 'Bonbon 
Suite,' Coleridge-Taylor; 'Golden Legend.' 
Sullivan; 'The Messiah,' Handel." 
*I At the closing concert, on April 17. of 
the Cecilia Society, of Boston, Mass. (Dr. 
Arthur M. Mees, conductor), Palestrina's 
"Tenebrae Faetae Sunt" was sung in memory 
o f the late William Apthorp , musician and 
music critic, while the ''Death o f Minnehaha,"' after Longfellow, was given as a 
memorial tribute to its composer, the late 
lamented Afro-American musician. 
Q " A Georgia Lullaby," "Lindy, " "You'll 
Get Dar in de Morning' ' and " A Spirit 
Flower " were the Xegr o songs in a costume 
recital o f characteristic international melodies given in Syracuse, X . Y., by two American artists—Paul Dufault and Mrs. Proctor 
C. Welsh. 
q The Misses Turner, of Georgia, and 
Barbee, of Kentucky, have given an entertainment, consisting of unpublished and littleknown Xegr o melodies and Southern stories, 
at the To y Theatre, Boston. Mass. 
«J Mr. Sidney Woodward , tenor, has established a studio in Atlanta, Ga., and also 
conducts classes in vocal instruction at 
Clark University. 
q Mrs. Maud Cuney Hare, pianist, and Mr. 
William H . Richardson, baritone, o f Boston, 
have returned from an extended southwestern tour, where they were engaged in 
lecture recitals. The program o f the lecture 
recitals b y Mrs. Har e gave a general and 
historical survey o f Xegr o music, from the 
folk music of Afric a and Americ a to the 
achievements of the present-day musicians 
o f color. Burleigh, Charlton, Cook, Johnson and the late Coleridge-Taylor were 
among the composers represented. Mr. 
Richardson was praised for the beauty and 
range o f his voice, the distinctness o f his 
diction and the art of his presentation. 
q "Hiawatha" was rendered by the Mozart 
Society o f Fisk University, by the white 
Choral Society o f Harrisburg, Pa., and by 
other organizations. 
*I A n "all-star" program o f ColeridgeTaylor music was rendered in the Metropolitan A . M. E. Church at Washington, 
D. C. The proceeds o f the concert will be 
forwarded to the widow of the composer. 
q A t Western University, Kansas City, 
Kan., students of Virgil have presented a 
dramatic program based on the JEneid. 
THE GHETTO. 
Mr. MOORFIEL D STORE Y and a 
•*• * majority of the Massachusetts local 
council o f the American Bar Association are 
conducting a campaign fo r the repeal o f 
the resolution looking toward the prohibition o f colored membership which was surreptitiously introduced and unconstitutionally passed at the association's convention in 
Milwaukee last August. Meantime the 
existing colored members are urged not to 
resign. 
q Colored girls employed in the Bureau o f 
Engraving and Printing are protesting 
against an order o f Director Ralph requiring them to sit at separate tables in the 
lunchroom. 
q Richard Cain, "a hard-working, honest 
Xegro , a splendid horseshoer," left his home 
in Allendale, S. C , and found employment 
at Dublin, Ga. The police o f this place say 
they do not know who placed at the door o f ALON G TH E COLO R LIN E 71 
q The Norfolk, Va., police court has to decide whether a drug store owned by white 
people can be opened in a segregated Negro 
district. "I f we are not mistaken," says a local 
colored paper, "a member o f the council, who 
is identified with the Hebrew element of our 
population, was the chief exponent of the 
segregation law when it was in its inception. A s most o f the merchants who would 
be affected, if the law is enforced, are of the 
Hebrew race, this short-sighted politician 
can now see how he has allowed personal 
ambition, commercial greed and petty 
jealousy to inflict a severe hardship upon 
his brethren, who are entirely the unwilling 
and innocent victims o f his political genius." 
q A Jewish student led the affirmative and, 
by a vote of 61 to 41, won a debate as to 
whether a colored man and woman should 
be included in the picture o f the graduating 
class at Loyol a Medical College, Chicago. 
q Mr. Richard J. Cope, a white man, has 
been asked to move out o f a home which he 
recently purchased in the exclusive residence district o f Gresham at Chicago. Mrs. 
Cope is colored. "Dark threats o f a mysterious something that is going to happen if 
the colored people do not move are going 
the rounds o f Gresham. Meanwhile the' 
offending family is sitting quietly by, doing 
and saying nothing." 
*I Negroes of Dallas, Tex., have asked the 
municipal commission to relieve black folk 
from the nuisance o f smoking, which is now 
permitted just in front o f the seats assigned 
to colored people in street cars. 
q The colored people are allowed to use the 
tennis court in Cherokee and Iroquois Parks 
at Louisville, Ky . 
q The North Washington Citizens' Association o f Washington, D. C , at its last meeting 
adopted resolutions that no member should 
sell or rent property to colored persons unless forced to do so by virtue of the fact 
that the adjacent property was already occupied by colored tenants; and, further, that 
they should not deal with any real-estate 
agent who tried to place colored persons in 
their neighborhood. It is especially stated 
that the association is not actuated by race 
prejudice, but solely by economic considerations. 
Cain's workshop a coffin-shaped box inscribed: "Negro, you will be dead in fortyeight hours if you do not vacate this town. 
This is your picture if you stay here.— 
(Signed) Twelve Citizens." 
«1 The Southern Women's Club, of Chicago, 
assembled on a hurry call to amend a line 
in their constitution which read: " A 
woman o f Southern birth." The amended 
constitution makes membership open only 
to " A white woman o f Southern birth." 
<I The Harlem Hospital, an institution maintained by the city o f New York , has been 
charged with gross ill treatment and neglect 
o f colored patients. 
9 The Levy bill, making is a crime to advertise racial discrimination by signs or printed 
matter, has become a law jn New York. 
q Montana prohibits boxing matches between 
white and colored men. 
q Nebraska is the only State to yield to the 
recent wave o f "Jim Crow" legislation by 
declaring its preference fo r concubinage 
instead o f marriage between whites and 
Negroes, Japanese or Chinese. A n amendment to the original bill excludes Indians 
from the provisions o f the law. Illinois is 
perhaps awaiting the result o f the Jack 
Johnson case to decide on the pending 
marriage law. 
q The full-crew bill was passed in Oklahoma, 
but, largely due to the efforts of the Illinois 
Protective League and the Chicago branch 
o f the National Association for the Advance ­
ment of Colored People, it was defeated in 
Illinois. The separate-ear law was also defeated in this State. 
q A t St. John's Church, Washington, D. C , 
two ladies, one a stranger in the city, went 
to attend a service on Good Friday. The 
usher told them to go to the mission maintained by this church for Negroes. The 
rector, Rev. Roland Cotton Smith, writes 
.to Mr. James C. Waters: 
" I regret to say that the incident took 
place. But there is no rule empowering 
such an act, and I shall do everything in 
my powe r to prevent it ever happening 
again." 
q In a case defended by W . Ashbie 
Hawkins, Esq., Judge Elliott, o f Baltimore, 
has declared the segregation law incapable 
o f enforcement. A FIGHTING PREACHER. 
T N the passing o f William B. Derrick a 
creditably and deservingly conspicuous 
figure has been removed from the public life 
of Negro America. 
THE LATE WILLIAM B. DERRICK. 
Bo m at Antigua, West Indies, in 1S43, this 
son o f the tropics early sought room for the 
exercise of his talents in a larger field. 
England was only increased insularity to him. 
however, so he came to the United States, 
enlisted in the navy and served with distinction during the Civil War. Shortly 
after the close o f this conflict he became a 
minister, and in 1806 was elected bishop 
of the A. M. E. Church. 
During all these years, however. Bishop 
Derrick found time to occupy a leading position as a Republican politician, and as such 
he was, perhaps, more influential than as a 
clergyman. H e had the esteem o f Blaine 
and Harrison and MeKinley, and he was regarded by the colored people as one o f their 
chief spokesmen. 
Bishop Derrick's attractive personality and 
oratorical ability won for him much consideration in England, to which country he 
made several visits after his episcopal consecration, and to his efforts are due the growth 
o f the A. M. E. Church in the West Indies 
and South America. 
A CENTENARIAN. 
F the same calling, but o f gentler mold 
and less renown than Bishop Derrick, 
THE LATE WILLIS ALBERT JONES. 
MEN OF THE MONTH ME N OF TH E MONT H 73 
was the late Willis Albert Jones, who had 
rounded out nearly a century when he died 
at Athens, Ga., March 3. He was born at 
Milledgeville, Ga., February 28, 1814. 
m 
A GOOD MIXER. 
"'T'HER E is no reason why a black man or 
a yellow man or a citizen o f any other 
color should be debarred from holding a 
seat on the school board. Nor can it be 
denied that it is only fair that the Negro 
JAMES E. BOURNE. 
should have some representation on the school 
board, since a large number of Negro 
teachers and Negro children are subject to 
the local school system." 
Mr. James F. Bourne is the NegTo 
referred to in the above editorial opinion 
from the Atlantic City Gazette. Mr. Bourne 
is a successful druggist, a taxpayer and a 
useful citizen, but the school board of 
Atlantic City refused to honor his appointment by Mayo r Bacharach last July. They 
appealed, without success, to the State board 
o f education and they exhausted every Latin 
phrase in the legal vocabulary in the effort 
to get the courts to prevent a colored man 
from sitting with them. They have failed. 
The Supreme Court o f the State has given 
Mr. Bourne his seat and the costs. 
AN ENGINEER. 
WHE N a colored man finds 'that his 
jo b is worth his life in the South he 
usually leaves the jo b and takes his life 
northward. As a rule, the farther North he 
gets his life is nominally more secure, but 
as to a job , without which he can have no 
life, he cannot even have a "look in," if his 
job , his life, means working side by side with 
white men in some factory. 
Mr. George W . Brown has managed to take 
the horns of this dilemma without being 
hurt. Born forty-five years ago in North 
Carolina, he became a foreman machinist. 
His undermen told him to leave. H e went 
to Baltimore, where he got a place as 
engineer in charge of a force o f 760 white 
men—from Europe. Finding that he and 
GEORGE W. BROWN. 
his family could not be admitted to the 
amusement parks and summer resorts, open 
alike to his employers and his undermen, he 
entered into partnership with Mr. Walter R. 
Langley for the development o f a cooling 
place for colored people only, profits and 
expenses alike. They started with $300. 
Their property, including a steamboat with 
a capacity of 1,000, is now valued at 
$50,000. OPINION 
ORIENTALS A REPRESENTATIVE from Mississippi was the first and only 
member of Congress to offer, in an address 
before the legislature, to lay down his life 
for the purity of the white race and the 
reservation of the lands of California for 
white men, although a Senator from the 
same State had previously informed newspaper reporters that he found it "very 
gratifying to observe the stand taken by the 
people of California on the question of alien 
land ownership." This brilliant champion 
of the white race, he who rode into a seat in 
the Senate at the tail end of twenty span 
of white oxen and hopes to achieve a place 
among the immortals by restoring his 
country to the pristine glory and whiteness 
of its franchise, presents the following 
example of his oratorical gifts: 
"While I have no feeling of hostility 
toward the Japanese of the Negro, I am 
deeply interested in maintaining the purity 
of the Caucasian race and the preservation of 
Anglo-Saxon civilization. If to prohibit the 
Japanese from leasing and holding land in 
California would lose the friendship and 
interfere with our business intercourse with 
the Japanese people. I should very cheerfully 
make the sacrifice. I should rather cut off 
all business relations with the Japanese 
Empire—yes, I will make it the Orient— 
than to sacrifice the interests of the white 
people of that one small section of the State 
of California. . 
"Race purity is indispensable to Caucasian 
supremacy. An d the only way to maintain 
that supremacy is to prohibit by law the 
co-mingling of the races. It has been well 
said: 'It is idle to talk of education and 
civilization and the like as corrective or 
compensative agencies. Al l are weak and 
beggarly as over against the almightiness of 
heredity, the omnipotence of the transmitted 
germplasm. Let this be amerced of its 
ancient rights, let it be shorn i n some 
measure of its exceeding weight of ancestral 
glory, let it be soiled i n its millennial purity 
and 'integrity, and nothing shall ever restore 
it; neither wealth, nor culture, nor science, 
nor art, nor morality, nor religion—and even 
Christianity itself.' " 
But both these gentlemen seem to have 
had little cause for their fulminations. The 
representative felt that Japan had no right 
to compel the United States to permit landholding by "non-resident aliens." The 
gentleman was misinformed, as gentlemen 
from Mississippi are wont to be i n matters 
concerning inferior races. According to 
President David Starr Jordan, of Leland 
Stanford University, "the bulk of alien 
ownership in California is British, " while 
the few . Japanese who own land i n California are very much on the spot, in their 
little patches of strawberries and potatoes. 
The opinion of this eminent authority is 
strikingly similar to that of a correspondent 
of the forum in the New Yor k World: 
"California's principal objection to the 
Japanese seems to be that they can produce valuable crops out of ground that the 
white man discards. Then, too, they have 
brought to this country no Mafia, no white 
slavery, no arson trust, nor have they 
learned to hold up trains in true Western 
style. In pauperism, insanity and crime 
they have failed to meet the costly test of 
the superior race, and they are bold enough 
to go to school at an age when white people 
frequent the saloon and the moving-picture 
show. Al l of which goes to prove that they 
lower the standard of living wherever they 
go. 
"If I could couple my brown man's sense 
with a white man's skin I should seek to 
emulate the marvelous achievements of the 
yellow man in intensive cultivation. I 
should learn to live where other people OPINION 75 
starved. I should welcome as my neighbors 
a picked lot o f peaceful, industrious, intelligent people in preference to hordes o f good, 
bad and indifferent strangers whose only 
recommendation was their color. But if I 
had a white skin I might have the sense o f 
Blease and Johnson—Hiram, not Jack." 
Apart from the politicians and political 
newspaper writers, the people of the South, 
and o f the country at large, have regarded 
the whole California turmoil as rather much 
o f a tempest in a teapot. The typical attitude o f thinking people is thus expressed by 
the Memphis Commercial Appeal: 
"The tongue o f Congressman Sisson and 
the pen o f John Temple Graves are strong 
for war. 
"O f course Mr. Sisson doesn't find it necessary to be thoroughly acquainted with the 
details o f all the treaties between the United 
States and Japan and the other features o f 
the Japanese question. 
"The Jap is a little off color and Mr. 
Sisson is fo r war at any price. 
"Mor e people are returning from California to Japan every year than come. There 
are not now more than 30,000 Japanese in 
the State o f California. 
"The California people sell land to the 
Japs. Mr. Sisson ought to advocate lynching fo r any California white man who sells 
his land to Japanese. 
"There are problems in Mississippi and 
other States o f the South which may not 
afford as much opportunity for oratory as 
the Japanese question, but if Mr. Sisson and 
other members o f Congress from these parts 
would study those problems and try to bring 
about their solution, they might begin to 
earn the $7,500 a year salary that they get." 
One held for new efforts of 
SUPERIOR _ • j - i l u 
Congressmen is disclosed by 
CIVILIZATION.
 &
 , . ,. 
a recent investigation ot a 
convict camp in Mississippi which was conducted b y a committee appointed by the 
Green County prison board. Miss Ad a L. 
Roussan, a member o f the committee, writes 
editorally in her paper, the Osceola Times, 
o f one feature o f the civilization which 
Vardaman is striving to preserve: 
" A short while ago a man and his wife, 
white people, and strangers, lived on the 
river. The man became sick, they were 
without money, food or medicine. The man 
owned a pistol; the wife brought it to 
Osceola to try to pawn it. She failed, was 
arrested for carrying a pistol, tried, found 
guilty, had no money to pay her fine, and 
was sent to the convict farm to work it 
out. She was a clean, decent-looking young 
woman, about 25 years old. He r husband 
was arrested also and put in jail. He was 
sick and Dr. Dunavant attended him. When 
he was well enough he was given a trial and 
discharged. He went down to the farm and 
helped his wife work out her fine. 
"Whil e at work the woman in some way 
provoked the anger o f the people in charge 
and she was cruelly beaten with a strap. A s 
soon as these unfortunate people could work 
out the woman's fine they came to Osceola. 
A t their request Dr. Dunavant examined the 
woman's body and he testifies that she was 
covered with black stripes two inches wide 
where the lash had been laid across the 
tender flesh o f her body with the brute force 
o f a fiendish nature. 
"Comment is unnecessary. 
"This case will come before the courts, 
but there are other cases where the woman's 
skin was black that will forever remain untold except in muttered groans and curses." 
Part o f the committee's report follows: 
"W e make no attempt to convey to you 
our individual opinion, or elaborate in this 
report, contenting ourselves with the relation 
o f the absolute facts. 
"There were no clothes, shoes or wearing 
apparel o f any kind in the commissary. 
The food supplies on hand consisted of a 
few cans o f baking powder, a few packages 
of soda and a few sacks of salt. This constituted all o f the food supplies that were 
visible or could be located by the committee. 
W e were informed that there was absolutely 
nothing to eat on the place and that a guard 
by the name of Stuffel had gone to town for 
food supplies. 
"Next we proceeded to visit the stockade. 
Upon reaching same Bomar informed us that 
Stuffel had the keys with him and that he 
could not let us in. W e let him know that 
we were content to wait and proceed to inspect unoccupied quarters, and quarters oc ­
cupied by the women and trusties that were 
open. Messrs. Grooms, Spurgin and Adams 
visited the women's quarters first. W e found 
one bed and one cot. The mattress on the 
bed was torn and filthy, and we were warned 
that the handling o f the bed clothes would 76 TH E CRISIS 
get us lousy. In addition to the mattress 
the bed clothing consisted o f two dirty comforts. The bed clothing fo r the cot consisted o f a dirty comfort and some old 
ragged, filthy women's garments. This room 
in which these sleeping outfits are located is 
16x30 feet, with one small window. A t 
present a white woman and a Negro woman 
occupy this room. There was absolutely no 
sanitary provision. 
"W e next visited what we were informed 
was the Negro quarters. It was a room 
16x30 feet, containing nine double bunks, 
three rows high, strung out three in a row. 
The bunks measure 6V2x4 feet. The room has 
three air holes a foot square. The high 
water had recently been in this room, and 
it was so filthy that it was impossible fo r us 
to even guess its natural state. Mr. Wilcockson was seated in an old bateau talking 
to Boma r at the foot of the stairs when we 
completed this partial investigation. Boma r 
was telling Mr. Wilcocksbn about the early 
history o f that section of the country and 
of the Wilson family, and of the days when 
he earned his living as a 'highly esteemed 
bootlegger' of that community. He stated 
he had made lots o f money while he was a 
bootlegger. He would take a barrel o f 
whiskey to a Negro picnic and would always 
clear $100. He stated that he had a 
cousin, who was a magistrate, and he 
would whack up with him and that the sheriff 
would fix it for him any time he got caught. 
He stated he was indicted on a number o f 
times, but always managed to pull through 
all right. 
"W e had waited about two hours for the 
guard to return. Boma r had suggested many 
times that we go over to his house and 
sit down and rest in chairs, but part o f the 
committee remained on the steps o f the 
stockade so as to prevent any lightning 
changes. At last Boma r himself started to 
the house. Arriving at the house Boma r 
suddenly discovered the keys in his pocket, 
which weighed about a pound, and made his 
way back to the prison. He called a dago 
guard, who is also a convict, to bring him 
the pistol. The guard brought the pistol 
and all together we entered the stockade with 
the exception of the dago guard, who stood 
on the outside with the pistol in his hand. 
"Again there was absolutely no sanitary 
provision. The foul smell was something terrible. There were three white men and 
fifteen Negroes lying about on the floor on 
dirty, filthy and lousy mattresses. They had 
fo r cover dirty, filthy lousy comforts, and 
in some cases ducking. They had their 
clothes open, and were very busy killinglice. They were the poorest-clad set o f men 
that we have even seen in our lives. Their 
shoes were all to pieces, no socks, and a 
prisoner that wore a top shirt had no undershirt and vice versa. The breakfast utensils 
were in the room. They had eaten breakfast, as we are told is the custom, over these 
tubs. The utensils consisted o f two onegallon cans, the bottoms o f which were 
covered with coffee grounds, and one ordinary iron cooking pot, the bottom o f which 
was covered with burnt corn meal. There 
were no cups, plates, knives or forks, or 
tinware fo r eating purposes o f any kind in 
evidence. 
"These alone constituted the vessel in 
which these men had been served their corn 
meal and coffee breakfast. There was no 
place to wash and no drinking water provided. W e know o f our own personal observation that Boma r is permitting convicts to 
guard the prisoners, which is a violation of 
the law. 
"The place is so unsanitary and so totally 
unfit for the housing o f humanity that one 
would have to see for himself to appreciate 
the deplorable condition o f the convicts in 
this institution. W e admit our inability to 
describe it adequately. The stockade could 
not be made sanitary. It is absolutely impossible. The ventilation is the worst this 
committee, individually or collectively, have 
ever met with. W e do not believe that 
Bomar, a self-confessed violator o f the law, 
is the prope r person to have charge o f any 
prisoner, no matter what crime he is charged 
with. W e are united in our opinion that the 
contract with this institution should be abrogated and that the law should be applied in 
Bomar's case. 
"This spot is so disgraceful that it is impossible fo r a human being to conceive o f 
its unfitness without a personal visit. After 
meeting Boma r and viewing the condition 
of the men confined in this institution and the 
manner on conducting same, we are of the 
opinion that anyone with the same evidence 
would be justified in believing any tale of 
cruelties or imprope r treatment that concerns 
the methods in vogue on this farm, no matter 
how inhuman the tale apparently seems to OPINIO N 77 
be. Sheriff Grooms, of the committee, was 
so thoroughly disgusted with the farm and 
Boma r that he brought the remaining Greene 
County prisoner back to Paragould with 
him." 
An d yet the Banner of Anglo-Saxon 
civilization whose folds come from a printing press at Athens, the seat o f the University o f Georgia, declares that the abolition o f 
the convict-lease system would overrun 
Southern communities with Negro criminals. 
The same journal cannot refrain from expressing a sigh o f regret at the decrease in 
the number o f lynchings, although not one 
o f the thirteen men murdered by mobs in 
the first quarter of 1913 was charged with 
the unusual crime: 
''Should this crime ever show an increase 
we should look for ah increase in the number o f lynchings, for almost invariably such 
will be the case." 
m 
THE AMERICAN
 Th e i n
 S™ 6 ™ 1 
CBIi£ E
 shown less reserve in its 
thanksgiving on the decrease of the American crime. Most of the 
Southern organs frankly admit that lynching cannot be justified by attacks on women 
or for any cause whatever. The Southern 
Sociological Congress has expressed its 
opinion that this crime only aggravates 
crime, that it fails entirely to have any 
salutary effect on criminal classes of Negroes, and that so long as it is defended and 
condoned by responsible persons Negroes 
will not believe that it is possible to obtain 
justice at the hands o f white men. In 
Pennsylvania, fo r instance, Negro lawyers 
and white sympathizers are making efforts 
to set aside Governor Tener's extradition 
papers in the case o f a Negro who is accused 
o f murder in South Carolina, on the ground 
that recent utterances o f the governor of 
that State indicate that the man would not be 
accorded a fair trial. 
Following close upon this case, the newspapers have described with epic admiration 
and dramatic interest the exploits o f a 
Negro who outwitted hundreds o f white men 
bent on lynching him fo r the murder of 
three "prominent citizens" who had attempted to arrest him without warrant. Commenting thereon, the Cincinnati Commercial 
Tribune says: 
"It was not so long since that Governor 
Blease, he o f South Carolina, emitted some 
mighty harsh statements concerning the 
colored brother within the boundaries o f his 
jurisdiction that caused ire among his confreres at the meeting o f the governors of 
the States at Richmond, Va . 
"S o ill-timed were his remarks on the 
Negro that publicity was nation-wide. 
"N o doubt it sank deepest in the minds 
o f the very people he stung the most—the 
American Negro—and, if so, it hit hardest 
the NegTO o f his own State. 
"From Hampton, that State, comes a news 
dispatch stating that three citizens were 
killed when a posse attempted to run to earth 
a Negro who had been accused o f a fiendish 
crime. 
"This Negro was not tried, but was assumed to be guilty. He knew that it was 
his life or the life o f those who pursued. 
"Murder is a terrible thing. The law of 
self-preservation and self-defense is an old 
law, even to the time o f the holy writ o f 
Moses. 
"The original crime with which the black 
was charged was and is not subsidiary to 
the killing that followed. 
"Whether he knew from reading or from 
repetition that comes by word of mouth o f 
the impossibility o f securing justice in the 
shape o f a trial, the fact remains that Governor Blease said: 'Hunt him down / and the 
criminal forthwith armed himself. 
"But how about the lives of the three white 
citizens? 
"They were doubtless victims o f the intemperate utterances o f the State executive. 
This is where Governor Blease comes within 
the direct line of cause and effect." 
m 
^ Commenting on the action o f the Union 
Pacific Railroad in replacing Japanese and 
other alien laborers in Wyomin g with 
Negroes, the Railway Record says: "Soone r 
or later the financial situation o f America 
will come to such a crisis that all over we 
shall see the need of recognizing those who 
are just as efficient and spend freely at 
home. Hurrah fo r the Union Pacific!" 
m 
SI "One reason the South feels as it does 
toward the Negro is because it is much 
harder for a man to forgive one whom he 
has wronged than for the man who has been 
wronged to forgive."—Moorfield Storey, at 
the conference o f the N. A . A . C. P. EDITORIAL / 
of California 
against them. 
A BATTLESHIP. 
ALL the newspapers to-day 
are filled with the agitation of the Japanes e 
people against certain 
restrictions and discriminations which the people 
are attempting to make 
If California ceases to 
insist on these restrictions it will be because millions of miles away there are a 
few islands with men of power and, 
what is more important, with battleships. 
Now, throughout this country there 
are ten million people who are striving 
to make something of themselves against 
all the prejudices, against all the discriminations, against all the obstacles 
that eighty other millions of Americans 
can place in their path, and what have 
they to oppose to this victorious conquest 
of prejudice? No distant island to 
plead for them, no battleship; only one 
organization of Americans to fight them. 
The distant battleship of the American 
Negro is the National Association for 
the Advancement of Colored People, 
that fights not with bullets and with 
ammunition, but with the conscience of 
a people who will and must have justice. 
J. E. SPINGARN. 
THE OSTRICH. 
SOME folks are mental 
ostriches. We are not 
referring to their intellectual digestions, although there we realize 
is room for a whole 
editorial. We are referring now to the 
method of mind that is able to persuade 
itself that the unseen is non-existent. An 
astounding number of people rushing 
through earth's deserts escape the evil 
that haunts them by sticking their heads 
in a hole in the ground and saying 
insistingly: " I don't believe it, and 
even if it is true I won't regard it." 
Now the world is without doubt full 
of things, incidents, thoughts, men that 
are best disregarded; that are best unheard, unseen, ignored. But make no 
mistake, friend of the unseeing eye, for 
there is evil in the world which may not 
be ignored and that cannot be escaped 
by sticking our heads in the ground and 
closing our eyes. 
The race situation to-day is not beautiful; although the reasons for hope and 
encouragement far outweigh the evil, yet 
he is a fool who ignores that evil or tries 
to forget its threatening aspect. The first 
step toward the righting of wrongs is 
knowledge—illumination. 
Pace the race problem like men, 
frankly and carefully, but none the less 
determinedly. Let your children face 
it. Don't seek to sneak away from the 
evil and forget the poor suffering 
brothers and sisters who cannot escape, 
who must work and writhe and fight. Remember that bad as the truth is. it is a 
little better than the apprehension: and 
devilish as the situation in certain parts 
of the South is. it is just a little better 
than the Negro in the North pictures it 
—particularly in that part of the North 
which wishes to hide its head. 
There is absolutely nothing in the race 
problem to-day which is insoluble by 
peaceful human endeavor. The world EDITORIA L 79 
has cured worse ill than it faces to-day, 
and the Negro race has triumphantly 
survived worse oppression than that 
which it suffers here and now. Why then 
hide our discouraged heads? Why seek 
to escape that which true manhood must 
know, if it will fight intelligently? All 
things are bad? Very well; let's first 
know just how bad they are, and then 
let's make them better. Social reform 
without knowledge is futile. Knowledge 
without attempted betterment is criminal. The complacency of the donkey is 
• annoying, but the cowardice of the 
ostrich is dangerous. 
• THE DEMOCRATS. 
' HE Democratic party has 
been in power thre e 
months and the colored 
population is still free. 
Only one Negro official 
has been summarily, and 
rather rudely, dismissed from office and 
no "Jim Crow" legislation seems in 
immediate sight. 
On the contrary, every single bill for 
the prostitution of colored women introduced into a half dozen different legislatures has so far been either defeated 
or postponed, and this by the help of 
Democrats as well as men of other 
parties. 
Thus the situation is not discouraging. 
Of course, the real trouble is that President Wilson may not realize the danger 
points of the Negr 6 problem and may 
continue to think that the Tariff and 
Corporate control and China are the 
only pressing questions in National 
politics. TH E CRISI S is here to emphasize 
the fact that Lynching, Disfranchisement, Peonage and Discrimination in 
Civil Rights are just as large and in 
many respects larger questions, and that 
no party that ignores these questions 
can long retain control of the government. Does this sound like an overstatement ? 
It is not. 
THE NEXT STEP. 
HE vicious attempts to degrade colored women in 
Washington , Iowa, 
Kansas, Michigan, Wisconsin, Ohio, Pennsylvania, New York and the 
District of Columbia have been killed 
by the defeat of the intermarriage bills. 
But let no Negro be deceived. This 
is but the first step 'and the Negro haters 
may congratulate themselves on the 
good showing made in the North. They 
will hasten to try again. 
For this we must be prepared. Do 
not let the organized effort so well shown 
be lost. Make the organization perma- • 
nent. Make it a branch of the National 
Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People if possible. Then proceed 
to systematic work. 
Get the records of the men who introduced these bills and supported them. 
Find out their future intentions. If 
they propose to persist, go to the party 
leaders. Put the argument strongly before them. If they cannot dissuade the 
men from their purpose, then make every 
effort to defeat them at the primaries. 
Do not wait for elections, but defeat 
them at the primary elections. 
If the vicious, promoters of race 
hatred succeed in being nominated, then 
use every effort to defeat them. No 
matter what parties they belong to, it 
is our duty to vote for the opposite 
party. 
Here then is two years' work for an 
organization. Only in this way can we 
win our battle. Will you do it? 
You will, if you love this land, for 
the greatest menace to the well-being 
of 'the- United States lies in the fact 
that there are ten millions of people in 
this country who can be treated in 
certain unreasonable and uncivilized 
ways without arousing in the minds of 
the mass of the people of the United 
States any thought of protest. THIS MAN is not responsible for THIS MAN 
even if they do belong to the same race. 
AMERICAN LOGIC. 
THIS MAN is responsible for aU that THIS MAN 
does because they belong to the same race. EDITORIA L 81 
To 
tally 
LOGIC. 
HE logical end of hatred 
is murder. Race prejudice is traditiona l 
hatred of human beings. 
Its end is lynching, war 
and extermination, 
say this thus bluntly and bruis to invite strong denial. Race 
prejudice has often been professed 
by men of highest ideal and motive 
who would shrink at violence of any 
kind. But this is because such men 
are deliberately illogical, and their 
followers in the long run are not 
illogical, but carry their leaders' doctrine 
to the bitter end. For instance, it is 
said this group of people are inferior to 
my group. Therefore, they are not entitled to the same, privileges. But suppose they demand rights beyond their 
desert; then refuse them; if they keep 
demanding, silence them by law; if 
legal means do not keep them in their 
place, mob law is justifiable. 
Thus the doctrine of race inferiority 
runs down to murder. Let us trace it 
in this country since the war. Negroes, 
being inferior, ought not to vote, said the 
reconstruction protesters. The nation, 
therefore, consented to their disfranchisement with the distinct understanding that all their other rights and 
privileges were to be preserved. 
But if a man is not fit to vote why 
educate him and make him discontented ? 
Consequently there was a movement 
against education which was so successful that to-day there are 2,000,000 
Negroes not even enrolled, and practically half the Negro children in the land 
are not being decently trained in 
. elementary schooling. 
True, but one will give them good industrial training, make them skilled 
workmen, so that they can save their 
money and buy property. No, answers 
the white workman, they will compete 
with me and lower my wages. No, cries 
the white home owner, I don't want 
Negroes in my block. 
Very well, says the compromiser, 
segregate Negroes in a Ghetto. But, 
answers the Negro, the Ghetto is in the 
worst part of the city, is unhealthy, illcared for, filled with prostitutes whom 
you segregate with us, and we can't 
better our condition because we cannot 
vote. 
What then is the next step ? Are we 
not harking right back to slavery? Is 
there any logical resting place on this 
downward .path between a theory of 
inferiority and a theory of mob violence 
aud extinction? 
No. The man who begins by saying 
' ' This man is not entitled to equal rights 
with me," ends by either himself saying 
or letting others say "Lynch the 
Nigger.'' 
The new step which attacks the 
property of Negroes comes at this time 
because of the advance of the Negro in 
economic lines. Let us note this advance in a single State like Virginia with 
670,000 Negro inhabitants. The Negroes 
cultivate 48,114 farms and the value of 
the farms which they own and rent increased from $24,529,016 in 1900 to 
$54,748,907 in 1910, or 123 per cent. Or 
if we would have figures covering simply 
ownership we find that 
IN 189 1 NEGROES OWNED $12,089,96 5 
IN 190 0 NEGROES OWNED 15,856,57 0 
IN 191 1 NEGROES OWNED 32,944,33 6 
This astounding advance of over 100 
per cent, in property holding in a decade 
is the real reason for the attack on Negro 
property rights in Virginia, where three 
cities have tried to erect Negro Ghettos. 
What lies beyond if the nation allows 
this last attack to succeed ? 
53 
"The ray of hope for justice to 
Negro in the South is like the s
of the dawn. We have caught 
glimpses of it as to indicate to u
the morning of our future has n
appeared."—Harrisburg, Pa., Advoca
Verdict. PLACIDO. 
(From a drawing in possession of Mr. 
Arturo Schomburg.) 
GABRIE L D E L A CONCEP -
CION VALDES , whose 
surname comes from the 
hospital in which he spent 
the earliest days of his unhappy life, was born in 
Havana in March, 1809. 
The son of a Spanish dancer and a barber, a 
free man of color, he was yet too dark to 
escape the blight of Africa's descent. His 
mother's temperament and occupation did not 
permit of her giving much attention to the 
child of her waywardness, and Placido, as 
he later called himself, was cared for by 
his father's mother and given such schooling 
as was available to persons of color. The 
early death, in Mexico, of his father was 
the first severe blow to the checkered career 
of this man o f sorrows, and the boy was 
compelled to begin the struggle of life as 
apprentice to a carpenter, then to a printer. 
He soon abandoned this occupation to 
acquire and practice with creditable skill the 
trade o f a combmaker, reading the while 
every book that touched his hand. But his 
heart was never in this work, fo r at the age 
of 11 years he had felt the call o f the 
genius which made him locally the most 
popular and, abroad, the best known o f 
Cuban poets. 
But it was not so much the native 
excellence of the verse o f this self-trained 
singer, not the pompous majesty o f his 
I PLACIDO' I 
X Poet and Martyr X, <0> f 
A <3T> 
<g> By JOS E CLARAN A <g> 
classic phraseology, not the tropical exuberance o f his less pretentious efforts that have 
immortalized the bard of the Yumuri. 
Placido died a martyr to the cause o f 
humanity, a victim o f the curse o f slavery, 
and his dying was a crowning infamy to 
that most infamous of all institutions, 
Spanish colonial government. 
In 1814, the closing year of half a 
decade, during which, despite the constant 
importation o f slaves, the colored population 
of Cuba was reduced by 30 per cent., the 
agents of slavery created what they called 
a new conspiracy among peaceful and 
thoroughly terrified colored people. Whole ­
sale execution, with or without nominal 
trial, confiscation o f property, degradation 
o f honorable women, torture and exile were 
visited upon the freedmen and the slaves, 
and particularly upon the former. On the 
27th o f June, Placido, after having undergone several months of imprisonment, was, 
with a number o f other prisoners, shot at 
Matanzas. 
Protesting to the last his innocence o f any 
crime save his superiority to his contemporaries, the color of his skin and an oc ­
casional invocation to liberty, this truly 
placid spirit's last message to his wife contained a reflection o f his life in the words: 
" I leave no expressions o f remembrance to 
any. friend, for I know that in this world 
there are no friends." PLACIDO 83 
He had not heard, perhaps, Wordsworth's 
song o f solace to Toussaint L'Ouverture in 
his death dungeon: 
"Live, and take comfort; thon lias great 
allies; 
Thy friends are exultations, agonies, 
An d love, and man's unconquerable 
mind. " 
But Placido, like Toussaint, has always 
lived and given comfort to those who have 
the ceaseless striving after justice and after 
a better humanity. 
Several of' his compositions during his 
imprisonment have been- rendered into 
foreign languages. The "Adieu to My Lyre " 
recalls the touching "Ultimo Adios " o f Jose 
Rizal. who, fifty years after Placido, fell 
a victim o f Spanish misgovernment in the 
Philippines. 
The translation o f the farewell to his 
mother included herewith is in the sonorous 
verse o f William Cullen Bryant. It is quite 
close to the original. Its one defect, however, is that it makes too much of a 
mater dolorosa of a parent whose love was of 
too doubtful a character to arouse much concern about the fate of her abandoned son, 
and whose whereabouts was hardly known 
to him. Plaeido's dignity compels him to 
• begin the sonnet with the word Si—"If my 
sad end shall touch thy heart" is the idea. 
The translations o f a part o f the "Prayer, " 
and o f the "Hymn to Liberty," which was 
written on the very morning o f the execution, are anonymous. 
FAREWELL. 
The appointed lot has come upon me, mother, 
The mournful ending of my years o f 
' strife; 
This changing world I lea"ve and to another 
In blood and terror goes my spirit's life. 
But thou, grief-smitten, cease thy mortal 
weeping 
An d let thy soul her wanted peace regain; 
I fall fo r right, and thoughts o f thee are 
sweeping 
Across my lyre to wake its dying strains. 
A strain of jo y and gladness, free, unfailing, 
All glorious and holy, pure, divine, 
An d innocent, unconscious as the wailing 
I uttered on my birth; and I resign 
Even now, my life ; even now descending 
slowly, 
Faith's mantle folds me to my slumbers holy. 
Mother, farewell; God keep thee^an d for 
ever 1 
PRAYER. 
Almighty God ! whose goodness knows no 
bound, 
To Thee I flee in my severe distress; 
0 let Thy potent arm my wrong* nedress, 
An d rend the odious veil by slander wound 
About my brow. The ba6e world's arm 
confound, 
Wh o on my front would now the seal of 
shame impress. 
Thou knowest my heart, 0 God, supremely 
wise, 
Thine eye, all-seeing, cannot be deceived; 
By Thee my inmost soul is clear perceived, 
A s objects gross are through transparent 
skies 
By mortal ken. Thy mercy exercise, 
Lest slander foul exult o'er innocence 
aggrieved. 
But if 'tis fixed by the decree divine, 
That I must bear the pain of guilt and 
shame, 
An d that my foes this cold and senseless 
frame 
Shall rudely treat with scorn and shouts 
malign; 
Give Thou the word, and I my breath 
resign, 
Obedient to Thy will; blest be Thy holy 
name. 
H YM N TO LIBERTY. 
0 Liberty! I wait for thee 
To break this chain and dungeon bar; 
1 hear thy spirit calling me 
Deep in the frozen north, afar, 
With voice like God's, and visage like a 
star. 
Long-cradled by the mountain wind, 
Thy mates, the eagle and the storm, 
Arise! and from thy brow unbind 
The wreath that gives its starry form 
And smite the strength that would thy 
grace deform. 
Yes, Liberty! thy dawning light, 
Obscured by dungeon bars, shall cast 
Its splendor on the breaking night, 
An d tyrants, fleeing pale and fast, 
Shall tremble at thy gaze and stand 
aghast. OWEN M. WALLER GEORGE W. CRAWFORD. 
T. W. ALLINSON. FLORENCE KELLEY. 
Som e Officers of 
The N . A . A . C. P. 
A t the Philadelphia 
Conferenc e 
MARY WHITE OVINGTON. Photo by Giitekunst. 
MAYOR RUDOLPH BLANKENBURG. 
THE CONFERENCE. 
THE fifth annual conference o f the 
National Association for the Advance ­
ment of Colored People, held in Philadelphia, April 23, 24 and 25, was a complete 
success. The -weather was perfect and the 
city gave to the association a hospitable 
welcome and a respectful hearing. The proceedings were reported correctly and with 
considerable fulness by the press. The 
audiences were larger than the association 
has ever known. A t the opening meeting in 
the Temple Keneseth Israel, which accommodates 2,400 people, the building was 
almost full, and at the last session in 
Witherspoon Hall every seat was taken and 
men were standing. Perhaps next year we 
shall hold overflow meetings in the streets. 
WELCOM E BY TH E MAYOR . 
The Honorable Rudolph Blankenburg, 
mayor o f Philadelphia, welcomed the conference at its opening meeting. Earnest and 
impressive in speech, his personality was 
an inspiration to his audience. He said in 
his address o f welcome : 
"When I was called upon by Mr. Villard 
to take part in the proceedings o f the 
National Association for the Advancement o f 
Colored People this evening I did not hesitate one minute, but said I should be glad 
to be with you. 
" I have come to extend to the fifth annual 
conference of the association a hearty welcome on behalf o f the city o f Philadelphia. 
W e in Philadelphia brag o f a good many 
things and we have reason to do so, but I 
think we are rather backward in other 
matters that ought to appeal to us and to 
which we are not giving the consideration 
that they deserve. It is a fact that we 
overlook some 75,000 colored people in 
the city of Philadelphia and do not 
consider them the equals o f the white people ; 
and they are the equals of the white people 
if they behave themselves. I have never 
believed in distinction o f race, color or 
religion. In a republican form o f government we ought all to unite upon this one 
principle: that all men are born free and 
equal. Don't forget that that includes the 
women also. This does not mean that we 
were born with the same ability, but it means 
that we should be given the privilege, the 
opportunity, of showing what there is in us. 
Wha t I want to say to you, my colored 
friends, what you ought to make the cornerstone o f your lives, is that you ought to show 
the white people, ought to show the people 
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT 
OF COLORED PEOPLE 86 TH E CRISIS 
at large, what there is in you and what you 
can do. Afte r yo u have proved that, the 
battle will be half won. " 
DR . JOSEP H KRAUSKOPF . 
The mayor was followed by the rabbi in 
whose synagogue the meeting was held, H e 
was frequently interrupted by applause and 
an ovation was given him at the close o f his 
speech. 
Dr. Krauskop f spoke at some length of 
the persecution to which the Jew had been 
subjected. 
"Yo u have met in other cities," he said. 
"Yo u have gathered in other halls, but J 
doubt whether your welcome in any hall 
could have been as profound as it is here 
Photo by Gutekunst. 
RABBI JOSEPH KRAUSKOPF. 
within this temple dedicated to the worship 
o f the One God b y the people o f Israel. 
There is no people who can feel as deeply 
the purpose which has moved you to 
organize this body as can the Jew. There 
is no people who can understand its motives 
as well as we can understand them; and there 
is no people who can sympathize as deeply 
with you as we can. There is not a problem 
of yours that has not been our problem, and 
that is not in parts o f the world our problem to-day. There is no wrong that yo u have 
suffered and that you suffer to-day that we 
have not suffered and that we do not suffer 
to-day. There is not a restriction or oppression which you know which we do not know 
and have not known fo r centuries—for two 
thousand years and more, while yours are 
but two centuries and a half. W e know the 
story by heart; we have goo d reason to know 
it; we are given little opportunity to 
forget it." 
TH E SOUTH . 
Mr. Henr y W . Wilbur, o f the Society o f 
Friends, made the last speech o f the evening. 
Mr. Wilbu r had recently returned from the 
South and spoke with deep feeling regarding 
the difficulties confronting the Negro farmer 
and agricultural laborer. 
"The place fo r any growing race," he 
said, "fo r any race 'which is in the process 
of getting its bearings, is the soil. But yo u 
will never keep the Southern colored man on 
the soil because the Southern or the 
Northern white man wants him there. Yo u 
will only keep him on the soil when he believes that it is to his economic advantage 
to stay there; and at the present time it is 
not in the main to his economic advantage 
to stay there, fo r he is crippled from the 
time he begins until he ends. H e has not 
an economic chance on the soil in the South 
to-day; and yet without him the South would 
agriculturally become a desert place. 
"Now, what are we going to do about it ? 
I have given some serious consideration to 
this problem. There are certain facts in 
relation to it which even professional 
agriculturists do not understand. I n the 
first place, you must remember that the only 
available cheap agricultural land in this 
country to-day is in the South. The cheap 
lands o f the Middle West have risen in 
value, have already been overcrowded, and 
are not in the market fo r the homesteader 
or the man o f limited means. But there are 
thousands and thousands o f acres o f land in 
the South that are available at prices from $1 
to $20 an acre, and these lands should be 
bought u p at once in blocks by responsible, 
interested, sympathetic men and held, to be 
sold at cost on reasonable terms to Southern 
colored agriculturists. That is the proposition before the earnest business man with 
philanthropic tendencies to-day. 
" I have said to yo u that the present time 
is not a prosperous one fo r the Negro in 
regard to land. That is true touching the 
masses. It is not true touching the educated 
colored man o f the South. In spite of the 
drain of paying from 15 to 20 per cent, 
interest on borrowed money, in spite o f the 
danger o f the jail staring him in the face 
if he fails to meet his payments, in spite 
o f all that, in every community o f the South TH E N. A. A. C. P. 87 
where I was there are colored men who have 
paid for their farms, paying- these enormous 
rates o f interest, and in spite o f all the 
world, making good. " 
WOR K AND WAGES . 
So the conference began and it continued 
to be interesting and instructive to the end. 
The second day was devoted to a discussion 
o f the struggle for land and property and 
a discussion opened by Mr. Wilbur the previous evening and to the problem o f work 
and wages. 
The afternoon meeting was held in the 
Central Congregational Church, the Rev. 
Sydney Herbert Cox, minister of the church, 
presiding. President John Hope , o f Atlanta 
Baptist College, gave an able talk. H e 
showed how severe is the struggle to acquire 
laud and how it demands overmuch from the 
family and cripples the children. He quoted 
cases in which children were taken early from 
school and deprived of an education in order 
that they might assist their fathers to obtain 
small, sometimes pathetically poor, farms. 
Whil e the struggle fo r land continues to be 
so severe he felt the exodus o f the Negro to 
the city unavoidable. 
Mr. John Mitchell, Jr., president o f the 
Mechanics' Bank o f Richmond, described 
conditions o f struggle and success that his 
important business position brought daily to 
his notice. 
Mr. W . Ashbie Hawkins spoke upon segregation in Baltimore. 
In the evening the Race Street Friends' 
Meeting House was open to the conference, 
Bishop James S. Caldwell presiding. Professor Spingarn welcomed the gathering. 
Dr. Du Bois, who, owing to a lecture trip to 
the Fa r West, was only able to be present 
fo r a few minutes at the opening meeting, 
had prepared a study by charts o f the wages 
paid to colored people in various occupations. The charts were clearly and interestingly explained by Miss Jessie Fauset. 
Dr. Mossell described his difficulty as a 
medical student in the University of Pennsylvania and the discrimination he found when 
he attempted to do hospital work. To quote 
his own words: 
"Thirteen years after I graduated I decided to organize the Douglass Hospital that 
young colored women who desired to become 
nurses might have an opportunity fo r education, that young colored physicians might 
have hospital advantages, and that the 
worthy poor might go to an institution where 
they would feel that they were getting care 
and attention and were not segregated. 
Accordingly we organized an institution, the 
only .one o f its kind in the city, where there 
is no discrimination, where the staff is made 
up o f both races, and where everyone has an 
equal opportunity." 
Mrs. A . W . Hunlon described the hopeless 
struggle that the colored girl or colored 
woman makes who tries to enter any of the 
channels o f industry where women work in 
groups. Unable to enter factory or shop, 
forced, sometimes against her native ability, 
into the one pursuit open to her—domestic 
service—she becomes discontented and disheartened. Much o f the immorality among 
young colored girls can be directly traced to 
their restricted economic opportunity. 
Mrs. Hunt on also described the successful 
professional woman. She told of the able 
colored women stenographers, busy that week 
in Philadelphia in the Y . W . C. A . campaign, 
whose work bore favorable comparison with 
that of the white stenographers. He r beautiful presence and earnest manner, together 
with her able presentation o f facts, marked 
her speech as an important event o f the 
conference. 
The meeting closed with a criticism o f the 
white South by a son of the South and an 
old-time friend of the Northern radical, Mr. 
Joseph Manning, of Alabama. 
TH E NE W SOUTHERN ATTITUDE. 
Three prominent white Southerners took 
part in the conference: Dr. James H . 
Dillard, Dr. Howard Odum and Mrs. L. H. 
Hammond. 
Dr. Dillard needed no introduction to his 
audience. His able service as administrator 
of the Jeanes Fund has made him well 
known to all those interested in the colored 
people's advancement. He spoke on rural 
conditions in the South, laying special stress 
on the unjust system of assessment by which 
the poor man with his small holding is taxed 
sometimes three times as much for the same 
amount of property as is the rich man with 
his large holding. He believed the land 
question to be the heart o f the economic 
question and felt that the South must break 
up its large holdings and secure to the man 
who tills the soil the right to own the soil 
which he tills. Indeed, Dr. Dillard gave an 
able argument for the single tax. 88 TH E CRISIS 
Mr. Odum took as his subject the new 
Southern attitude and pointed out to his 
hearers the recent important meetings in the 
South in which the Negro and his rights have 
been discussed. He noted the conference for 
education in the South held at Richmond, 
and quoted U. S. Commissioner o f Education Claxton, a Southern man, who voiced 
the future Southern platform as one which 
shall give to all alike, rich or poor, white or 
black, North or South, equal opportunity to 
develop the best that is in them. 
"There is now in session in Atlanta," he 
went on, "the Southern Sociological Conference, the scope o f whose program is an 
inspiration for optimism. Last year and this 
these programs devoted more time and more 
sections to the consideration o f the Negro 
problem than to any other topic. Its 
speakers were selected from many States and 
activities. 
"There are also fellowships in the Southern 
white colleges and universities devoted to the 
study of aonditions among the Negroes in the 
South and to the impartial presentation o f 
facts through publication and platform. 
"Anothe r important sign o f the times is 
the growing attitude of the great mass of 
Southern college and university students to 
look upon the question with fairmindedness, 
frankness and even enthusiasm, and a similar 
inclination to belittle the demagogue and the 
politician who attempt to make capital of 
race prejudice. 
"One o f the great difficulties in the way 
o f promoting wholesome public sentiment is 
the factor o f yellow journalism. A hopeful 
sign o f the times is the policy o f certain 
good Southern newspapers which advocate 
and practise fair representation and justice 
to the Negroes. One o f the most eloquent 
appeals fo r the awakening of social consciousness and one o f the most stinging rebukes o f low principles that I have ever read 
was recently printed on the editorial page o f 
a leading Southern newspaper. The subject 
o f the story was a Negro child. 
"The great progress of the Negroes, their 
increased land ownership, will exert a profound influence upon the new attitude of the 
South." 
Mr. Odum concluded with a cordial invitation to the association and to others to join 
with the South in the formation o f its new 
attitude and in the solution of its difficulties. 
The third Southerner to speak at the conference, Mrs. Hammond, is, with her husband, 
at the head o f an important educational work 
for Negro girls, Payne Memorial College, at 
Augusta, Ga. This school is supported 
entirely by white people in the South. 
Mrs. Hammon d told o f the new Southern 
attitude as exemplified in the American Missionary Association, South, which assists in 
the support o f her school. She read from 
resolutions passed at one o f their meetings 
in which they deplored mob violence, protested against lynching, and pledged themselves to help those whose environment leads 
them to commit crime. Mrs. Hammon d urged 
the North not to be impatient with the South 
for its tardiness in understanding its social 
responsibility. "W e are children in this 
respect," she said, "and perhaps you are not 
quite gTown up ; but we will call yo u the big 
brother, and big brothers, you know, are apt 
to be impatient with the younger ones o f the 
household." She told o f the investigation 
into conditions undertaken from Payne 
College and o f the insistence that facts regarding the Negro's housing, education and 
environment be placed side by side with the 
facts regarding the white. "W e are training 
the people to see white and colored side by 
side, and to see the relation o f the one to 
the other. W e have looked at the Negro 
formerly as one looks at a single piece from 
a picture puzzle; viewed this way, out o f his 
setting, he was neither appreciated nor 
understood." 
Mrs. Hammond had the complete sympathy 
of her audience. Everyone felt her kindness 
and her sincerity. 
The last meeting, held in Witherspoon 
Hall, was an impassioned presentation o f 
the new abolition movement. The staunch, 
uncompromising friend o f the Negro, Mr. 
John E. Milholland, presided and Mr. Oswald 
Garrison Villard, Justice Wendell Phillips 
Stafford and Senator Moses E. Clapp, o f 
Minnesota, were the speakers. Each speaker 
stood uncompromisingly fo r the full manhood rights o f the Negro in America. The 
enthusiasm o f the audience was an inspiration 
to each speaker. The Senator from Minnesota declared that we must make the citizenship o f the Negro, which to-day in many 
States is a citizenship only in form, a citizenship in fact. The Negro question, he said, 
must be conceived as a moral question and 
answered accordingly. The Senator here put TH E N. A. A. C. P. 89 
in a word fo r woman's suffrage, remarking 
that the United States failed to get help o f 
the mightiest moral force in the country-— 
American womanhood. 
Mr. Milholland announced to the meeting 
the endorsement o f the members in executive 
session o f the principle o f Federal aid to 
education and assured the audience that 
active work was under way already at 
Washington. 
Mr. Villard's review of the association's 
work was listened to with deep interest by the 
audience. Much that he said is embodied in 
the last annual report. 
A t the association's first annual conference, held in New Yor k four years ago, 
Judge Wendell Phillips Stafford delivered 
a speech at Coope r Union. It set a high 
mark for the association. It was unembittered, but also uncompromising. Those 
who heard Judge Stafford then have never 
forgotten him, and some have been encouraged to work the more faithfully and 
unswervingly because o f his utterance. 
Agai n Judge Stafford spoke before the association, this time on the Fourteenth and 
Fifteenth Amendments and the constitutionality o f the "grandfather' clauses in operation 
in the Southern States. W e end our account 
o f the public meetings of the conference with 
an . excerpt from Judge Stafford's speech: 
WENDEL L PHILLIP S STAFFORD 
"The constitutions and laws of several of 
the Southern States require that their 
citizens, in order to be voters, shall possess 
a certain amount of taxable property or 
certain educational qualifications, but further 
provide that these requirements shall not 
appl y to those who have served in the army 
o f the United States or o f the late Confederacy, nor to the sons or grandsons of any 
such, nor to any who were voters on the 1st 
day o f January, 1867, or who are lineal 
descendants o f such. The question is whether 
such laws violate any provision of the Constitution o f the United States. They make 
no mention o f race, color or previous condition o f servitude, and therefore do not in 
terms violate the prohibition of the Fifteenth 
Amendment. Under their express terms a 
few colored men are entitled to registration 
equally with their white neighbors. In the 
main, however, they operate to exclude the 
colored citizen while admitting the white 
citizen upon no other grounds than those o f 
military service or descent. If the courts 
should take judicial notice of the well-known 
purpose of these laws they must hold them to 
be unconstitutional and void as discriminating against the colored race. If, however, the 
courts should refuse to take such notice, 
must they be held valid? The Supreme Court 
of the United States has shown a disposition 
to hold that the States might prescribe whatever qualifications they chose touching the 
suffrage except the discriminations prohibited 
by the Fifteenth Amendment. There are two 
provisions o f the Federal Constitution, however, which have never been passed upon in 
this connection. The first is that contained 
in article IV. , section 4 : 'The United States 
shall guarantee to every State in this Union 
a republican form o f government.' The 
second is found in article I., section 10 : 'No 
State shall grant any title of nobility.' A 
republican form of government is an expression used to distinguish the object described from a form of government which is 
monarchical or aristocratic; a government in 
which political power is held or exercised by 
the people in distinction from one in which it 
is held or exercised by a monarch or an 
aristocracy. It is a truism among us that 
under our form o f government the only 
sovereigns are the voters, the electors. The 
nominal rulers are made and unmade by the 
voters. The voters are the real lawmakers, 
whether they act directly by means o f the 
initiative and referendum or indirectly 
through their chosen representatives in legislatures. If the number of voters could be 
reduced to one we should have an absolute 
monarchy. If it could be confined to certain 
individuals or families we should have an 
aristocracy, and if it should be made hereditary we should have an hereditary 
aristocracy. 
"Now if one's right to vote can be made 
to depend upon whether his father or his 
grandfather could vote, then the suffrage 
could be made and is, in effect, made hereditary. If a State can say to its citizens 'Yo u 
must own $300 worth of taxable property 
unless you are descended from a soldier,' it 
can say 'Yo u must have a hundred thousand 
dollars' worth or a million dollars' worth.' It 
can go further and say 'No matter how much 
taxable property you own you cannot vote 
unless your grandfather was a soldier.' Fo r 
if it can make the right o f suffrage to depend upon ancestry at all it can make it to 
depend upon ancestry entirely. 90 TH E CRISIS 
" I assert tbat it cannot make the right to 
depend upon ancestry at all. Why ? Because 
there is no rational connection between the 
fact that a man's grandfather was a soldier 
or a voter and the question whether the man 
himself is qualified to vote. The so-called 
qualification is no qualification. It does not 
afford the slightest presumption that the 
descendant is fit for the duty. It is purely 
arbitrary and unreasonable. Yo u might as 
well make the right to depend upon a man's 
height or the color of his eyes. The only 
theory upon which it could be defended 
would be that qualities and political rights 
are inheritable, which is a theory contrary 
to the spirit of our institutions and the very 
stuff of aristocratic and monarchical institutions, which are not to be tolerated under 
our organic law. Whe n a State makes certain 
of its citizens electors it invests them with 
the power and the duty to vote as representatives of the whole body o f their fellow 
citizens. They exercise a public function. 
They perform a public duty. To that extent 
and in that sense they are officers. They 
hold an office—that o f elector. May an office 
be made hereditary in this country? Suppose 
the legislature were to pass a law to that 
effect—that certain offices should descend 
from father to son. Woul d it not violate the 
Constitution of the United States? Could 
the courts hold it to be a valid law and the 
officeholder to have a valid title? Suppose 
Massachusetts should confine the right o f 
suffrage to the descendants of those who 
landed from the 'Mayflower.' Woul d her 
form o f government be any longer republican? Is it anything else when Louisiana or 
North Carolina or Georgia gives the right to 
vote to those who were voters on the 1st of 
January, 1S67, and to those who are descended from them, and refuses it to others 
unless they can comply with various conditions not imposed upon the first. The registration rolls o f the South have been made up 
under such laws. Every man who holds office 
under those States to-day derives his title, 
such as it is, from elections conducted under 
such laws. I do not wonder when 1 read in 
conservative legal journals that the South is 
"uneasy' over the 'grandfather' clauses.'' 
EXECUTIVE SESSION. 
The report o f the chairman of the executive committee, Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard. 
reviewed the work of the year, and noted the 
two very important eases upon which the 
association's legal committee is working—a 
"Jim Crow" case and a case to test the 
"grandfather" clause. 
The secretary o f the association, Miss Ma y 
Childs Nerney, gave some details o f the 
executive work o f the year, and the national 
organizer, Dr. M. C. B. Mason, also spoke. 
The hour was so late when "new business" 
was reached that only one matter came up. 
Mr. John E. Milholland urged that the members endorse the movement, which he is heading, for Federal aid to education. The meeting did so endorse and moved the appointment later o f a Federal Ai d Committee from 
the membership. 
The meeting announced the acceptance o f 
the Spingarn medal, of which an account 
will be given in another issue o f TH E CRISIS. 
TH E ASSOCIATION' S PRESIDENT. 
The conference was most fortunate in 
having its president, Mr. Moorfield Storey, 
at all but one o f its sessions. Mr. Storey 
brings to the association a record o f 
laborious days spent in the championship o f 
oppressed races, and he never lets us forget 
the high ideal o f liberty that is the birthright 
o f every American. 
m 
BRANCHES. 
THE association now has about 1,400 
-*• members and fourteen branches: Baltimore, Md. ; Boston, Mass.; Chicago, 111.; 
Detroit, Mich.; Indianapolis, Ind.; Kansas 
City, Kan.; Lynchburg, Va. ; New York , 
N. Y. ; Northern California; Orange, N. J.; 
Quincy, 111.; Tacoma, Wash.; Topeka . Kan.; 
Washington, D . C. 
It has also a college chapter, recently 
formed at Howar d University, Washington, 
D. O , which was represented at the conference by Mr. A . Leroy Locke . 
Representatives were present from Baltimore, Md. ; Boston, Mass.; New York , N. Y. , 
and Washington, D. C , and all the branches 
sent in reports. The reports were of great 
interest, but as much o f the material is 
already incorporated in the annual report 
of the National Association fo r the Advance ­
ment of Colored Peopl e fo r 1912, only a 
brief outline will be given here. 
MEETINGS . 
Every branch reported propaganda work 
through meeting's. Man y o f these gatherings 
were devoted solely to the association and the TH E N. A. A. C. P. 
9 1 
spreading o f its propaganda, while others 
celebrated the fiftieth anniversary o f emancipation or were meetings o f protest against 
Negro discrimination practised by city or 
State. The association scarcely overestimates 
the value of these meeting's held, as they have 
been, from the Atlantic to the Pacific coast. 
CIVIL RIGHTS . 
Every city branch has its important work 
o f civil rights. In large and small ways discrimination against the Negro creeps into our 
city administration. In Boston it takes 
the form o f removing a colored girl from the 
gTammar school, where she is doing satisfactory work, to a trade school. The branch 
takes u p the matter with the school board, 
the girl is reinstated and graduates with her 
grammar-school class. In Baltimore discrimination was legalized by a segregation 
ordinance. Readers of TH E CRISIS have 
read how magnificently the Baltimore branch, 
aided by the legal department of the association, fought the fight against segregation and 
won on April 24. The Kansas City (Kan.) 
branch has a fight before it on this issue. In 
New Yor k the branch has struggled, with 
success, for the right of colored citizens to 
sit in the orchestras of theatres and is slowly 
winning the battle to secure the right of a 
colored man to purchase a meal in a restaurant. Since its inception this branch has 
taken a vigorous stand against the brutality 
o f the police toward colored citizens. In 
Detroit the branch has been working with 
success along civil-rights lines. Increasingly 
the colored people o f the cities o f the North 
are gaining hope regarding their rights. They 
are coming to believe that it is worth while 
to appeal to the civil-rights bills existing on 
their statute books and to insist on their 
enforcement. The association is doing no 
more important work than in its encouragement of this attitude on the part of Northern 
colored people. 
ANTI-MARRIAG E BILLS . 
A number o f bills against the marriage 
o f whites and Negroes have appeared in 
Northern legislatures. Believing these laws 
to be unjust and to degrade the colored race 
and especially the colored women, the 
branches have taken active part against such 
legislation. The New York , Kansas City 
(Kan.) and Tacoma branches helped defeat 
it in their States, and the Chicago branch is 
opposing it in a vigorous and diplomatic 
campaign. 
FULL-CRE W BILL . 
The Kansas City (Kan.) and Chicago 
branches have worked to defeat the full-crew 
bill, which would deprive numbers of colored 
porters o f their positions on railroad trains. 
FINANCIA L SUPPORT. 
Increasingly the branches are aiding the 
association by raising money for its national 
work. Boston, during the past year, turned 
over all but $6 o f the money it raised 
through contributions and memberships to 
the national body. Washington recently sent 
$100 as a contribution to the association. By 
their constitutions all branches retain 50e. 
o f their membership fees and give the rest to 
the parent body, and all increase of membership aids the association. Indianapolis, 
Quincy, Kansas City (Kan.) and Orange are 
all expressing their appreciation of the importance o f the national work, and are striving to help it financially. 
W e have outlined the main lines o f the 
work o f the branches, and we call the attention of readers of TH E CRISIS to the fact that 
branch news is to be found each month in 
the N. A. A. C. P. notes. 
BALTIMORE SEGREGATION ACT . 
The association had its moment of triumph 
when, on the second day of the conference, 
word appeared in the papers that Judge 
Elliott had declared the Baltimore segregation 
act invalid. It was announced at the executive session, and the members o f the association had the opportunity to congratulate in 
person Mr. W . Ashbie Hawkins, the Baltimore lawyer, who fought so long and so 
successfully against segregation. This decision is of importance not only to the 
colored people of Baltimore, but to all those 
who dwell in cities o f the South. It will 
have its effect in discouraging further 
attempts at legalized segregation. 
SETTLEMENT HOSPITALITY. 
The members o f the conference were delightfully entertained by Miss Frances 
Bartholomew at the Eighth War d Settlement. 
This is one o f the oldest settlements in a 
colored neighborhood in the country, and the 
members were interested to go over the building and to learn of the admirable work accomplished there. They had two delightful 
hours of social intercourse and cordial 
hospitality. An Oath of Afro-American Youth 
By KELLY MILLER 
" T WIL L never bring disgrace upon my race 
by any unworthy deed or dishonorable 
act: I will live a clean, decent, manly life ; and 
ever respect and defend the virtue and honor 
o f womanhood. I will uphold and obey the 
just laws o f my country and o f the community in which I live, and will encourage 
others to do likewise. I will not allow prejudice, injustice, insult or outrage to cower 
my spirit or humiliate my soul, but will 
ever preserve the inner freedom of heart and 
conscience. I will not allow myself to be 
overcome o f evil, but will strive to overcome 
evil with good. I will endeavor to develop 
and exert the best powers within me for my 
own personal improvement, and will strive 
unceasingly to quicken the sense o f racial 
duty and responsibility. I will in all these 
ways aim to uplift my race so that, to everyone bound to it by ties o f blood, it shall become a bond o f ennoblement, and not a byword of reproach. " 
mm WHA T T O REA D Ifflffl 
T N "The Upas Tree" Mr. Robert MeMurdy 
makes a strong plea for the abolition— 
that is, the legal abolition—of capital punishment, for with two executions out o f 141 convicted murderers in New Yor k State it may 
safely be said that the lex talionis has become a thing of the past even in a State that 
is one o f the most exacting in the enforcement of criminal penalties. 
Mr. MeMurdy's argument is based on the 
very well-written story of the conviction and 
sentence to death of a man whose innocence 
o f murder is established only after the death 
cap has been placed over his head by a determined, whiskey-nerved executioner. The 
characters, one o f whom is an humble Negro 
o f admirable qualities, are well drawn, the 
plot skilfully executed and, to a layman, the 
story throws much light on the tricks of the 
lawyer's trade. 
Whether or not the abolition of the death 
penalty would result in a marked change one 
way or other in the number o f murders is 
not conclusively proved, but the strong point 
of Mr. MeMurdy's story is that with all the 
skill and ability of distinguished counsel at 
the command o f the accused, and with every 
precaution for an impartial trial, it is still 
possible for an innocent man to be convicted 
of crime on doubtful circumstantial evidence 
and for the guilty to escape by the aid of 
perjury and jury bribing. Ho w much 
greater, then, is the risk of such miscarriage 
o f justice when the accused is poor, friendless, without the pale o f the very law which 
is supposed to protect him. The paramount 
need o f American justice with regard to 
homicide as well as lesser crime is a reform 
which shall bring about the conviction and 
punishment of the guilty without regard to 
pecuniary condition or other circumstances 
not contemplated in the scheme o f justice. 
It is the practical certainty o f acquittal, and 
the freedom even from prosecution, which 
makes the taking o f human life so frequent 
in this country, particularly in the Southern 
States. Wher e death is the penalty fo r homicide, it ought to be enforced. Whe n it is, 
perhaps we shall be able to replace it with 
life imprisonment, incarceration for five 
years, or whatever punishment may be demanded in the light o f growing civilization. 
F. J. Schulte & Co., Chicago, 111. 
m 
One of the greatest difficulties o f the 
color problem in Americ a is the lack of 
information, on both sides of the line, concerning the elementary facts o f the presence 
o f the Negro in this country. Professor 
Brawley, o f Atlanta Baptist College, has 
made a most important and valuable contribution to the filling o f this void in his 
"Short History o f the American Negro, " 
which "endeavors simply to set forth the 
main facts about' the subject that one might WHA T T O REA D 9 3 
wish to know and to supply in some 
measure the historical background for much 
that one reads to-day in newspapers and 
magazines." In this latter respect, perhaps, the work falls short of its purpose, 
fo r Mr. Brawley gives little attention to 
what one most frequently reads in the press 
concerning Negroes. The special merit o f 
the work is that it cannot fail to stimulate 
the interest and must give to the general 
public at least an intelligently respectful 
attitude toward what does appear in the 
newspapers. It is a summary of the history that has been set down in books. The 
reader must study for himself the history 
that has yet to be written. 
Mr. Brawley possesses in a high degree 
the essential quality o f the true historian 
as an impartial recorder o f facts. So free 
is he from the personal bias so naturally 
and so frequently present in those who 
speak o f and for their own that one is inclined to think that he does not always 
present his case with the emphasis and 
accuracy which it deserves. No history of 
the Negro in America, designed primarily 
for newspaper readers, can be complete without reconciling the statement "the word 
Negro is the Spanish and Portuguese form" 
—it is not, as Mr. Brawley says, the Italian 
also—"of the Latin adjective niger, meaning 
black," with the fact o f the color of Mr. 
Chesnutt, whom Mr. Brawley rightly describes as a Negro novelist, and who is most 
certainly white. In justice to black men 
and for the fuller information of other 
American newspaper readers, it would have 
been well to explain the cause of this change 
in color from the "neager" and "nigre" and 
"neeger" and "nigger " in the uncertain spelling o f the slave trader to the Negro whose 
history is written by himself. But Mr. 
Brawley does not define Negro. He merely 
says that the word from which it comes 
means black, and that such ancestors of 
American Negroes as were brought to this 
country as slaves were nearly all black. He 
leaves us to infer that Negro means progress, light, courage, virtue in its fullest sense 
o f real manhood, patience, increasing 
solidarity o f effort to ten millions o f American people to whose night-bound vision 
"Yo n gray lines 
That fret the clouds are messengers of 
day. " 
The Macmillan Co., New York, $1.25 . 
A n admirable little volume of poetry is 
Henry G. Kost's "Sunlight and Starlight." 
The stanza quoted below begins the stirring 
appeal, "T o the Nation's Conscience," which 
is one o f Mr. Kost's many expressions o f 
justice to the black man: 
"When you struck the shackles from him, 
An d you called your chattel man— 
Who , through gloomy centuries, suffered 
'Neath his color's darkened ban; 
When you gave the rights of freemen 
To the race your sires enslaved, 
Ho w your hearts, with pride ennobled, 
Cheered the saviors and the saved!" 
The Gorham Press, Boston, or the Book 
Department o f TH E CRISIS. $1.58. 
"Dawn in Darkest Africa " is the title 
o f a book by John H. Harris, with an 
introduction by Lord Cromer, which appears 
to have been suppressed by the British 
government. It is reviewed at great length 
in the African Times and Orient Review by 
Dr. MacGregor Reid, who says: 
"Afric a is a dark continent to all but 
its inhabitants. In the heart o f the darkness 
is much light, and the ruins that lie upon 
its surface speak of an enlightened past, a 
time of order and o f good government even 
while Europe lay steeped in ignorance. 
"The hope of Afric a still lives within the 
soul o f its people, and Mr. Harris belongs 
to that small yet ever-growing body o f 
thinkers who see light ahead. To those who 
know Afric a best 'Dawn in Darkest Africa ' 
will be welcomed as a ray of sunshine within 
the domicile o f morbidity, where the gloomy 
thought is ever beating at the hope o f the 
heart, and progress is undermined by the 
suspicions, jealousies and indiscretions of 
the dark view. " gg 
"The Black Bishop, Samuel Adja i 
Crowther," by Jesse Page, P. R, G. S. 
Fleming H. Revell, $2 . A splendid biography of the first and ablest Negro elevated 
to the Anglican Episcopate. 
® 
"Education for Manhood, " by Kelly 
Miller, occupies the first number of the 
Monographic Magazine, which has been 
started by the dean of Howard University. 
Lord Macaulay, J. W . Cromwell, Grimke and 
Du Bois are the names of some o f the authors 
of succeeding issues. 94 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
This Handsome Suit 
FREE to Our Agents 
Write to-day. Be the one In your town 
to get this astounding tailoring offer. An 
offer to give you the swellest suit you 
ever saw FREE! But you must hurry, 
We want a representative In your town 
right away. We will start you in a big 
money-making business of your own— 
FREE! Plenty of money and plenty of 
nifty clothes—for YOU—if you write AT 
ONCE! No money nor experience 
necessary. 
We Pay All Express Charges 
Yes, we pay everything. You take no 
risk. Just take orders for our fine clothes— 
made of the most beautiful fabrics and 
in the latest, classiest styles.' Keep your 
present position ami make 
$50.00 to $100.00 A WEE K 
en the side, or go Into the business 
right and make $3,000 to 15.000 a 
year. PARAGON clothes sell like wildfire Agents swamped with orders on 
.NEW plan. Nothing like It anywhere. 
Write to-day for our swell samples and complete outfit for 
going right out to take orders. Get our "WONDERFUL NEW 
OFFER right now. WE PAT ALL CHARGES. Send a postcard NOW—while this great offer Is still open. Don't delay— 
WRITE TO-DAY. 
PARAGO N TAILORIN G CO . 
Dept. 551 Chicago, III. 
TYPEWRITER S 
Remingtons, Densmores, 
J e w e t t s, $11.60 each; 
Franklins, Postals, Hammonds, $9 each. Bargains in 
Underwoods, Smiths and all 
others. All guaranteed. 
Supplies. 
Standard Typewrite r 
Exchange 
23B Park Bow, New York 
UNDERTAKER S 
Telephone Columbus 3935 Open All Night 
RODNE Y DAD E & BROS. 
Undertakers and Emb aimers 
Notary Public 
Funeral Parlor and Chapel Free. 
Licensed Lady Embalmer Prompt Service 
266 Welt 53d Street New York, N. TT. 
Between Broadway and 8th Arenue 
A PLAC E T O STOP 
HOTE L WASHINGTO N 
First-class Service for First-class People 
3252 Wabash Avenue, 
Chicago, 111. 
Short Talks on 
Advertising and 
Ou r Advertisers 
The many enthusiastic letters we receive from 
our readers testify to the popularity of TH E 
CRISIS and its recognized value as a medium 
of reliable information. And it is most gratifying to us gradually to build up our advertising columns until they are a source of convenience and service to our 30,000 readers. 
For the vacationist and sightseer traveling 
between eastern and southern points we present 
Hotel Dale at Cape May, N. J., with its elegant appointments, and the Southern Railway, 
with its efficient service and luxurious trains. 
For the student we offer the Enterprise Institute at Chicago, Wilberforce and the A. & M. 
College of Greensboro, N. C , where summer 
schools will be in session. 
Thousands of people come to New York 
each year with no knowledge of places to stop, 
and often find themselves in very undesirable 
surroundings. Many of our readers, when 
coming to New York, write us in advance for 
the names and addresses of first-class hostelries. This we cheerfully give at all times. 
With this issue of TH E CRISIS we are 
pleased to advise our readers who plan to 
visit New York to communicate with the 
Housing Bureau of the National League on 
Urban Conditions Among Negroes, which will 
help you secure comfortable boarding and 
lodging places with respectable private families. Their advertisement appears on page 102. 
It is this diversified service which makes 
TH E CRISIS so distinctly worth while to its 
host of readers. 
ALBO N L. HOLSE Y 
Advertising Manage r 
Publishers Chat 
Th e July CRISI S will be the annual Educational Number, with pictures 
of the leading colored students. 
Other features will be Robert Gould Shaw and Fort Wagner, Carl Schurz 
and the Spingarn medal. 
In August appears the Vacation Number. 
Our edition this month is 30,000. 
Mention TH E 'CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 9 5 
THE NATIONA L ASSOCIATION FOR THE 
ADVANCEMENT.O F COLORE D PEOPL E 
OFFICES: 2 6 Ve»ey Street, New York. Incorporated May 25 , 191 I 
OFFICERS 
National President—Mr. Moorfleld Storey, Boston, 
Mass. 
Vice-Presidents— 
Rev. John Haynes Holmes, New York. 
Mr. John E. Milholland, New York. 
Bishop Alexander Walters, New York. 
Rev. Garnet R. Waller, Baltimore, Md. 
Miss Mary White Ovington, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Chairman of the Board of Directors— 
Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard, New York. 
Treasurer—Mr. Walter E. Sachs, New York. 
Director of Publicity and Research— 
Dr. W. E. B. Du Bois, New York. 
National Organizer—Dr. M. C. B. Mason, Cincinnati. 
Secretary—Miss May Childs Nerney, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
This is the Association which seeks to put into 
practice the principles which THE CRISIS puts 
into words. If you believe what we SAY, join this 
Association and help us to put our words into 
DEEDS. 
MEMBERSHI P BLAN K 
I hereby accept membership in the NATIONA L ASSOCIATIO N FO R TH E 
ADVANCEMEN T OF COLORE D PEOPLE. 
Please find enclosed dollars and enter my name as a member in Class 
paying $ a year, and send me TH E CRISIS. 
Name 
Address 
Class 1. Donors, paying $100 to $500 per Class 3. Contributing Members, paying 
year. $2 to $10 per year. 
Class 2. Sustaining Members, paying Class 4. Associate Members, paying $1 
$25 per year. per year. 
The subscription to TH E CRISIS is $1 extra, except to members paying $2 or more, 
who signify their wish that $1 of their dues be considered a CRISIS subscription. 
All members in good standing have the privilege of attending and voting at the 
Annual Conference of the Association. 
PLEASE mak e check s payabl e t o nationa l associatio n fo r th e advancemen t o f 
COLORED PEOPLE, 26 VESEY STREET, NEW YORK CITY. 
Mention THE CRISIS. 9 6 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
safely secured f
AN D 
first Mortgage bonds 
Capita l Demand s Highe r Wage s 
Capital that used to work for 3% to 4^4% is now demanding higher wages to meet 
the increased cost of living. We offer capital employment at S%°fo to 6% secured 
by first mortgage on newly improved Chicago income Real Estate, in the form of 
bonds, in amounts of $100, $300 and $500 and individual mortgages in amounts from 
$1,000 to $25,000, in periods from one to six years. All titles guaranteed by Chicago 
Title and Trust Company, Capital and Surplus over Six Million Dollars. 
H. David Murray and Co. 
MORTGAG E BROKERS ((KMJS))) REA L ESTAT E 
LOAN S ViflmzJ INSURANC E 
B AN K F LOO R S E CO R STATE & 31ST S T S 
CHICAG O 
^TELLIN G A STORY 
II To friends who know you, may be easy, but "putting one over" to 
". ^ strangers is quite different. 
Telling a busy, business man about your services or your merchandise is still less 
a "cinch," for he hears the same story every day a dozen or more times. 
A clever speaker, before a sleepy or hostile audience, puts a good, stiff punch 
into his very first remark. This "knocks 'em off their feet" and they listen. 
Your business letters may be good, but if they lack the "punch" they won't "pull." 
Correct business stationery is the "punch" that hits the busy man "right in the eye" 
and makes him read your letter. 
We'll show you the sort of stationery we create, if you write us. 
We print for Mr. Conde Nast, of Vogue; we print TH E CRISIS. 
ROBERT N. WOOD , Printing and Engraving 
202 EAS T 99th STREE T NE W YOR K 
'Phone 6667 Lenox 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 97 
The very Business Opportunity for which YOU 
have heen looking may possibly he here on this page. 
SELL S LIK E HO T CAKE S 
Agents wante d 
everywhere to Bell 
this ironing wax in 
pad form. It perfumes tho clothes 
with a lasting violet 
perfume. 
WAX-IN-PAD MANTJFAOTUEERS 
Lynbrook New York 
EARN WHILE YO l LEARN 
A splendid opportunity for 
ambitious young men and 
women. 
We teach Shorthand, Typewriting, Bookkeeping 
and Business Arithmetic, according to the latest 
methods of modern business science. Earnest, 
efficient instructors. 
We also maintain an EMPLOYMENT BUREAU to 
assist our students and graduates in securing positions. Many of them now hold steady positions 
with some of New York's largest business houses. 
The service of the Bureau is FREE. Correspondence 
invited. Address 
Harle m Commercia l Schoo l 
F. WALTER MOTTLEY, Principal 
47 West 139th Street New York 
$
10 00 A DA Y AN D MOR E 
• = T O LIV E AGENT S 
100 per cent, profit; sells to every colored man 
and woman on earth. This is the quickest kind of 
easy money. Send 15 cents in stamps or coin for 
50-cent sample and terms; money back if not satisfied at firs'-, glance 
INTE E NATIONAL SPECIALTIES CO. 
Republic Building Chicago, 111. 
SPAR E TIM E WOR K 
Colored agents, male or female, are wanted everywhere to take orders for our high-grade calling 
cards, invitations, etc. We are furnishing highgrade calling cards in correct styles and sizes for 
ladies or gentlemen at 50 cents for 100 or 25 cents 
for 50; no extra charge for address. Big demand 
everywhere. Liberal commissions allowed. Outfit 
free. Exclusive territory given. Write now for 
terms. 
THE HOUSE OF CHOWNING 
Indianapolis .. . - Indiana 
$50T0*I00AM0NT H 
T 
LU 
EXPERIENCI 
NOT 
NEEDED- H 
JUST Mm 
SPARE * m 
TIME 
WANT ACTIVE MAN EACH LOCALITY 
16 to 60 years. Introduce us to friends. 
Grand world-wide Society. Pays largest 
|Asick , injury, death benefits for smalles t cost. Helpful, inspiring, PROFITIJkABLE! Made thousands happy and 
•\prosperous. Why not YOU? Write 
•\quic k for big Cash-Bonus offer. 
S*I .L, U 238, COVINGTON, KY. 
VENTRILOQUISM 
TauKht Almoxt Anyone at Home. Small cost. Send today 2c stamp 
for particulars and proof. 0. A. SMITH, Boom fi , 823 BlgtlmSt.. PEORIA. ILL 
LEAR N PIAN O B Y EA R 
I N A WEE K Write P. 
192 4'nh Street, 
W. LITTE 
Pittsburgh, Pa. 
BOKARA DIAMONDS. Agents, everyone, to wear 
and sell our famous Bokara diamonds. Write for 
sample offer and catalogue free. 
NORTHWESTERN JEWELRY COMPANY 
Dept. 24 
2141 Summerdale Ave. Chicago, 111. 
LET US START YOU IN BUSINESS ANYWHERE. Don't be a wage slave; get out of the 
rut; get grit and develop backbone and go in 
business for yourBelf. If you are capable of earning from $5 to $10 a day you are the person we 
are looking for. By uniting with us you are on 
a beeline to large income and independence. WRITE 
NOW FOR OUR PROPOSITION! 
The NELSON SUPPLY COMPAN Y 
Silverware Specialties Harrisburg, Pa 
JUS T THIN K O F I T 
Gordon Safety Razors made to retail for 25c. Shaves 
as smoothly as some of the hight-priced razors 
Splendid seller. Will last a lifetime. Sample, 10c. 
GORDON COMPANY 
Northwestern Building Chicago, 111. 
RELIABLE , LIVE , 
RESPONSIBLE MEN 
who can sell real estate can MAK E MOR E 
than $200 PE R MONT H acting as 
AGENT S for the sale of our properties in 
MUSKOGE E and TAFT , OKLAHOMA . 
The real coming country where there are 
opportunities and openings for all. Writ e 
us to-day, giving your age and experience, 
and we will offer you a FIN E PROPOSI ­
TIO N WHIC H WIL L MAK E YO U 
MONEY . Address 
REEVE S REALT Y CO . 
Department C 
217 Flynn-Ames Bldg. Muskogee, Okla. 
$25.00 PE R WEE K 
may be made in commissions by parties handling 
' 'History of Negro Soldiers in Spanish-American 
War " combined with "History of the Negro Race." 
400 pages, 50 illustrations. Price $1.25 net. 
Address: 
E. A. JOHNSON 
154 Nassau Street New York 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 98 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
BEACON LIGHTS* 
Agents, Look! $60.00 w
Selling our Beacon Lights, W . E. Burghardt D u Bois, Booker T. Washington, 
Little Shepherd and 12 other Negro 
pictures. Exclusive territory given. Portraits, 16 x 2 0 frames, 14 cents. Pillow tops 
Address BERLIN AR T ASSOCIATIO N 
Department C 
(Established 1898) 
233 North Fifth Ave., Chicago, 111. 
PEOPLES BAN K & TRUST COMPAN Y 
Muskogee, Oklahoma 
A live and enterprising Negro bank, with all 
deposits guaranteed by the State Guaranty Fund. 
We handle accounts by correspondence. Good 
interest paid on time deposits. 
When Buying Hair Goods 
ask your dealer for Green's Creole hair. It 
not only keeps the crimp, but is the best on 
the market. If your dealer cannot furnish 
you with our goods, send your order direct 
to us and we will be pleased to fill it. 
Switches, puffs, pompadours, transformations 
and anything pertaining to hair goods. 
18-inch 1-stem Switches $ .50 
18-inch 3-stem Switches 75 
3/4-ounce 3-stem Switches 1.00 
22-inch Switches 1.50 
24-inch Switches 2.00 
26-inch Switches 2.50 
28-inch Switches 3.00 
These prices not including gray hair. 
Our workmanship is the best, and we feel 
sure that after using our grade of goods, we 
will have you as our regular customer. 
Send in your samples. Perfect match 
guaranteed. If not satisfactory we will 
refund your money. 
GREEN' S HAI R GOOD S CO . 
Room 58 
6 West Randolph Street Chicago, III. 
TH E EQUITABL E ASSURANC E 
SOCIET Y O F OKLAHOM A 
Incorporated and licensed by the Insurance 
Department of the State of Oklahoma to write life, 
health and accident insurance on the level premium 
basis. No assessments. Address Home Office 
Peoples Bank & Trust Company Bldg. 
Muskogee ------ - Oklahoma 
Atlanta University 
Studies of the 
Negro Problems 
16 Monographs. Sol d Separately . 
Address: 
A . G . DILL 
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Ga . 
Th e Curs e of Rac e Prejudic e 
By James F. Morton, Jr., A. M . 
An aggressive exposure by an Anglo-Saxon 
champion of equal rights. Startling facts and crushing arguments. Fascinating reading. A necessity 
for clear understanding and up-to-date propaganda. 
Belongs in the library of every friend of social 
justice. Price 25 cents. Send orders to 
JAMES F. MORTON , JR. 
244 West 14Sd Street New York, N. Y. 
J . E . ORME S 
ACCOUNTAN T 
Audits Systems 
Business information by mail. Open for 
engagements July and August. 
Box 25, Wllberforce University 
Wilberforce, O. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
MUTUAL TEACHERS' 
AGENCY 
Recommends teachers for schools; secures 
employment for teachers. Blanks and 
information furnished free on application. 
1335 T Street, N . W . Washington , D . C 
REGALI A 
A Rac e Enterprise 
Manufacturin g Badges, 
Banners and Supplies 
for all Fraterna l and 
Churc h Societies. Cata ­
logu e upon request. 
CENTRAL REGALIA CO. 
Jos. L. Jones, Pres. 
N. E. Cor. 8th and Plum Sti. 
Cincinnati, Ohio 
WANTED—ONE MAN OE WOMAN IN EVEEY 
locality to start a Candy Kitchen. Best paying 
small business on earth 1 Few dollars starts you. 
Get away from wage slavery. Write for particulars. Native Herbarium Co., Ambler, Pa. 
Folding BATHTU B 
Costa little, no plambing, require* little water. 
Weight 15 poQDds, sod fold s ioto small roll. 
Fall length buhl, fir better thin tin tubs. LirU for 
Writ* far spealil effect* offer lad description. ROBINSON 
11 1 Vanc e St. ,
 T<M °do , 0. Ufrs. Turkish Beth Cabinets. 
Ti M I M y toile t articles will add the 
madam nna ' 'ouc h of refinement and 
1
 goo d taste to you r dressing table 
Earle's Skin and Complexion Food $ .25 
Princess Hair Oil 50 
La Quinine Hair Tonic .50 
Antiseptic Toilet Water 25 
Earle's French Bay Rum 25 
Earle's Violet Extract ,35 
Earle's Violet Water .50 
Earle's Lilac Water 50 
Agents wanted everywhere. Write for terms. 
JAMES T. EARL E 
Manufacturing Perfumer 
5 Collins Street Newport, R. I. 
REA L ESTATE 
Ow n Hom e i n th e Nort h 
If not, why not 1 We have an increasing demand 
for ambitious, progressive colored people who are 
seeking homes in the North. We are the medium 
through which these demands can be supplied. 
Only such as can satisfy us that they are desirable 
will be considered. Get our Property Bulletin. 
It is free for the asking. 
P. H. SYKES, Real Estate 
Cor. 19th and EUsworth Sts. Philadelphia, Pa. 
$
5 
Brings Oliver 
Typewriter 
Send $5 for The Oliver Typewriter—the 
machine will come a-flying. The newest 
Model—No. 5—the regular $100 machine— 
with no extra charge for Printype. 
For the price of a good fountain pen you 
secure the World's Greatest Typewriter. You 
can pay the balance at the rate of 17 cents a 
day. 
This irresistible "$5 offer" is sweeping everything before it. The era of universal typewriting is coming. The triumph of the typewriter over primitive pen-and-ink has been 
brought about by the same machine that 
introduced visible writing. 
OLIVE R 
TypeuvrH&r 
The Standard Visible Write
This is the typewriter whose high efficiency hat 
made it the choice of the greatest firms and corporations. It is the simplest of all standard typewriters, yet the swiftest and by far the most 
versatile. The moving parts work freely in a solid 
metal framework, making the machine so strong 
that the hardest usage has no effect upon it. 
No Extra Charge for 
"Printype" 
Most people prefer to have the machine equipped 
to write in Printype. This beautiful type is obtainable only on The Oliver Typewriter. 
It is the greatest style improvement ever evolved 
for typewriters—the most easily read type in existence—the type which conforms to that in universal 
use on the world's printing presses! 
Wi n Success wit h th e Oliver ! 
The Oliver Typewriter aids success-seekers in . a 
multitude of ways. The real-life stories of achievement that center around it would fill volumes. 
No matter what your work may be—in office, 
store, shop or home-—The Oliver Typewriter will 
prove itself a great convenience and an actual 
money-maker. 
It stands for order and system and success. It is 
the visible evidence of the progressiveness of its 
owner. Young people with brains, ambition and 
Oliver Typewriters are succeeding everywhere. Can 
you afford to let $5 stand between you and success? 
Sen d lo r Specia l Circula r an d Art Catalo g 
Full details regarding the 
Oliver Easy-Purchase-Plan, 
beautiful catalog and a 
specimen letter written in 
Printype will be sent you* 
on request. 
Let this $5 offer awaken 
you to your need of The 
Oliver Typewriter and the 
ease with which you may 
own it. 
Remember—$5 only and on 
comes The Oliver Typewritert Sales Department 
(206) 
Th e Olive r Typewrite r Compan y 
310 Broadwa y NE W YORK , N. Y . 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 100 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
LEGA L DIRECTOR Y 
This is a ready reference of some of the 
best lawyers in the country. 
"If you are a lawyer and your name is 
not listed here you should write us at once. 
Residence 2546 Michigan 
Bell Phone E-2161 
Office Phone 
Home 58 Main 
C. H. CALLOWA Y 
Attorney and Counselor at-Law 
Notary Public 
117 W. 6th Street Kansas City, Mo. 
FRANKLI N W . WILLIAM S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
Real Estate Conveyancer 
206 Parrish Street Durham, N. C. 
Office L. D. Telephone 3297 Market 
Residence L. D. Telephone, 5277-M Market 
GEORG E A. DOUGLA S 
Counselor-at-Law 
Rooms 613-614, Metropolitan Building 
113 Market St., Cor. Washington, Newark, N. J. 
General Practice Notary Public 
WILLIA M R. MORRI S 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
1020 Metropolitan Life Building 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
BROW N S. SMIT H 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Offices: Suite 610, Sykes Block. 
Minneapolis, Minn. 
GEORG E W . MITCHEL L 
Attorney-at-Law 
908 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, Pa. 
Tel. 2026 Port Hill Cable Address, Epben 
EDGA R P. BENJAMI N 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
34 SCHOOL STREET Boston, Mass. 
Telephone Connection 
W. Ashbie Hawkins George W. F. McMechen 
HAWKIN S & McMECHE N 
Attorneys-at-Law 
21 East Saratoga Street Baltimore, Md. 
Phones: Office, Bell 4059; New 420-M. 
Residence, New 733-A. 
THOS . E. GREENE, JR. . 
Attorney and Counselor-at-Law 
Notary Public 
Maloney Block Youngstown, Ohio 
Mention 
LEGA L DIRECTORY—Continue d 
Telephones: 
Central 104W 
Main 61 
HARR Y E. DAVI S 
Attorrjey-at-Law Notary Public 
1607 Williamson Bldg. Cleveland, O. 
ELIJA H J . GRAHAM , Jr. 
Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public 
1026 Market Street Wheeling, W. Va. 
ARCHITECTS 
TAND Y & FOSTE R 
Architects 
1931 Broadway New York 
Telephone 5368 Columbus 
WIGINGTO N & BEL L 
Architects 
Karbach Block Omaha, Neb. 
H. HENR Y HARRI S 
Architect 
Cor. 8th and Princess Streets 
Wilmington, N. C. 
MOVIN G 
Telephone 4214 Greeley 
BRANIC'S EXPRES S 
PACKING AND SHIPPING 
ANDREW J. BRANIC 
459 SEVENTH AVENUE New York City 
Orders by mail or 'phone receive prompt attention 
TRUNKS STORED 25c. PER MONTH 
Official Expressman for the C. V. B. A. 
PERSONA L CARD S 
Telephone 5277 Morningside 
DR. GERTRUD E E. CURTI S 
Surgeon Dentist 
188 West 135th Street, New York City 
Telephone 4885 Morningside 
DR. D. W . ONLE Y 
SurgeoD Dentist 
S. W. Cor. ISSd St. and Lenox Ave., New York 
Office Hours: 9 to 12 a. m., 1 to 9 p. m. 
Sundays by Appointment 
Telephone 4048 Prospect 
JOH N B. MOSELE Y 
REAL ESTATE and INSURANCE 
640 Fulton Street Brooklyn, N. Y. 
HE CRISIS. TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R ' 101 
LEAR N A TRAD E 
Teachers in public schools should spend their vacation in Enterprise 
Institute, studying dressmaking, millinery, ladies' tailoring, merchant tailoring, 
hair dressing, manicuring, scalp treatment, facial massage, chiropody, the manufacture of hair goods, or in our cooking school, in order to be able to respond to 
the growing demand for vocational training. 
Thfc heavy or distinctively mechanical trades may also be helpfully pursued. 
W e secure positions for our graduates. Terms unusually easy. Address 
TH E ENTERPRIS E INSTITUTE , Inc. 
3711 STAT E STREET ------ - CHICAGO, ILL. 
EIGHT TEACHERS EMPLOYED AN D WE OPERATE A T SIX LOCATIONS 
Mrs . DAIS Y TAPLE Y 
Teacher of voice and piano, will take a limited 
number of pupils during the summer mouths. 
Choruses trained, soloists coached. Engagements 
for concerts solicited. For terms and appointments 
address the studio: 
172 West 133d Street NEW YORK 
Telephone Connection 
£ „ "DEACON " JOHNSO N 
•J * (That Cheerful Entertainer) 
wf Leader. Mandolin and Second Tenor with 
• THE •'DEACON" JOHNSON QUAETET 
Montreal New York Philadelphia 
Permanent Address: 
Times Sq. Sta., Box 317, New York City 
MME . FANNI E BELL E D E KNIGH T 
Dramatic and Dialect Reader. Engagements solicited. Students given special training in the 
Delsarte Method. Instruction also given in Dialect, 
English Grammar and Rhetoric. 
Terms Reasonable. 
Telephone Morningside 9045 
Studio: 231 W. 134th St. New York City 
HARRIET GIBBS-MARSHALL, President 
HARRY A. WILLIAMS, Vice-President 
ELLE N FOR D BROOK S 
(Member N. Y. S. M. T. A.) 
Teacher of singing, breathing, voice-placing, interpretation, diction, piano. Special care and patience 
with young piano pupils. Coaching. Pupils all 
summer. 
294 Clifton Place - - - Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Telephone Bedford 5439 
Mme . MARIE JACKSO N STUART'S 
School of Expression, Music and Dramatic Art 
A thorough, well-defined course of instruction, 
designed to give the student a comprehensive grasp 
of each subject in the shortest time. Terms 
reasonable. 
Dramas staged. Amateurs trained. Plays revised. 
ADDRESS 
33 West 131st Street New York 
Miss MINNI E BROW N 
SOPRANO 
May be engaged for commencements, concerts and 
recitals For terms address: 
172 West 133d Street NEW YORK 
Care of Tapley Studio 
LOUIS G. GREGORY, Financial Secretary 
GREGORIA A. FRASER, Recording Secretary 
The Washington Conservatory of Music 
and School of Expression 
Piano, Violin, Wind Instruments, Piano Tuning, Vocal Expression, History of 
Music Theory and Modern Languages 
The first and only Mission Music School founded and controlled by Negroes 
in America. 
Many scholarships awarded. Talented students never turned away unaided. 
902 T Street, N. W . WASHINGTON , D. C. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 102 TH E CRISIS ADVERTISE R 
If You Plan to Visit 
New York This Summer 
For study, sightseeing or pleasure 
and desire quiet, respectable accommodations with the bes t 
privat e families, write the 
Housing Bureau of the National 
League on Urban Conditions 
Among Negroes, at 127 W. 135th 
Street, New York. 
Our Service Is Absolutely FREE 
Ike 
Perfect Washing Machine 
The rapid vacuum washer 
Saves your time, 
labor and hands 
from rubbing on 
the washboard. 
Washes your 
clothes by compressed air and 
suction, the water 
and soap being 
forced through the 
clothes. Works 
on the principle 
of the vacuum 
carpet cleaner. 
Your clothes 
are not subject to 
the wear that is 
caused by the 
beating and batting process used 
by other makes. 
With this washer 
it is soap and 
Pric e $1.50 Zol". tha t do th e 
Lace curtains and the most delicate 
fabrics can be cleaned without the 
slightest damage. Will wash a tub of 
clothes in 5 to 10 minutes. 
Any woman, or even a child, can operate this washer. 
Sent prepaid on receipt of retail price, 
$1.50. Anybody can afford to buy it; 
nobody can afford to be without it. 
AGARD NOVELTY CO., Distributors 
38 West 136th Street New York 
Good proposition for agents. 
TRADE MARK 
REGISTERED 
TH E PERFEC T WAS H 
FO R TH E HAI R 
Contains no soap; compose d of 
materials better suited for the purpose . Insures you r hair the cleanest, 
fluffiest, most delightful and satisfying wash it has ever enjoyed. 
Send 2-cent stamp for trial package. Agents wanted. 
132 Nassau Street 
American 
Manufacturers 
New York 
MILES M. WEB B 
Chicago's Expert Photographe r 
I specialize In every phase of artistic picture making. 
Send me your photos for enlargement. Prices reasonable. 
Satisfaction guaranteed. 
WEB B 
3519 State Street 
STUDI O 
Chicago, III. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. No. 4 Special Buggy only $65.00 
HIGHEST GRADE 
A Value Unequaled. Sold on $1.00 Profit Margin. 
FROM FACTORY TO USER 
Write for prices and other styles. Send for Catalogue. 
C . R . PATTERSO N & SONS , 
GREENFIELD, OHIO. 
LARGEST NEGRO CARRIAGE CONCERN IN THE UNITED STATES. 
SCHOO L O F BEAUT Y CULTUR E AN D HAI R DRESSIN G 
KELSEY'S 
Telephone, Morningside 8162 
143 West 131st St. 
NEW YOKE 
Manicuring, Shampooing, Hair Dressing, Marcel Waving, Facial and Body Massage, Hair Malting, Chiropody, 
etc., scientifically taught. Unlimited practice in parlor 
day and night. Pupils taught at home, if desired. 
Diplomas. Special Summer Course, $7.50 up. Send for 
booklet. Mme. A. Carter Kelsey, Gen'l Intr.; Dr. Samuel 
A. Kelsey, Chiropodist, President and Gen'l Manager. 
Somethin g Ne w 
Kell y Miller's 
Monographic Magazine 
Issued monthly. Complete treatment of some phase of the race 
problem in each issue. 
"Education for Manhood " in the 
April number. 
Price, 10 cents a single copy ; 25 
cents for three months' subscription; 
$1 per year. 
Rates to agents: 7;^ cents a cop y 
on orders under ten; S cents a cop y 
on Pi'ders over fifteen. 
Agents wanted everywhere. On 
account of liberal rates, remittance 
must accompany order. Address 
HOWAR D UNIVERSIT Y 
Washington ----- - D. C. 
U-ZI T 
Yes, use it, because you owe it to 
yourself and to others to assist in 
promoting good health. 
W e are assisting with the best that 
science thus far has been able to produce in offering U-ZIT, our new 
odorless disinfectant. 
Six times again as strong as 
carbolic antiseptic. 
Put up in powdered form, safe for 
general use. 
Destroys all germs and odors at 
less than one-quarter cent a gallon. 
Guaranteed to be as represented or 
money refunded. 
Sample test free. Can we be of 
service to you? Used by leading colleges, hotels, restaurants and merchants everywhere. References. Put 
up in cans and retailed for the small 
sum of $1.00 per pound. Special 5-
pound can, $3.75. Terms, thirty days. 
Address 
U-ZIT SPECIALTIES CO. 
3726 S. Dearborn St., Chicago, 111. 
Mention TH E CRISIS. CAP E MAY , N. J. 
This magnificent hotel, located in the heart of the most beautiful seashore resort in the world; 
replete with every modern improvement, superlative in construction, appointments, service, and refined 
patronage. Orchestra dailv. Garage, bath houses, tennis, etc., on premises. Special attention given to 
ladies and children. Send for booklet. E. W. DALE, Owner. 
S
OUTHERN 
RAILWA Y 
Premie r Carrie r of the South 
Th e Nation's Highwa y of Trave l from 
the North, Eas t and Wes t to the cities 
of the Southland—Ashevilie , "Th e Land 
of the Sky, " Columbia, Aiken, Augusta, 
Charleston, Summerville, Savannah , 
Brunswick . Jacksonville, St. Augustine, 
Pal m Beach , Atlanta, Birmingham , 
Mobile, New Orleans. Chattanooga, 
Memphis. Th e most direct route from 
Ne w Yor k to Texas , Mexico, California, Panam a and Cuba. 
Quickest Time Finest Service Luxurious Trains 
Fo r literature, rates and complet e information apply to 
ALE X S. THWEAT T 
Eastern Passenger Agent 
264 Fifth Avenue New York City 
Cor. 29th Street Telephone 2214 Madison Square 
Mention TH E CRISIS. 